Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of
Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
KHOIROM Digitally signed by
KHOIROM IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
BIPINCHAND BIPINCHANDRA SINGH
RA SINGH
Date: 2024.06.14
15:37:22 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
CRIMINAL JAIL APPEAL NO. 1 OF 2018
1. Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh, aged about
61 years, Son of P. Shyamnagor Singh, resident of
Sagolband Meino Leirak, Post Office and Police Station:
Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur.
2. Khangjrakpam Basanta Singh, aged about 61 years, Son of
Late Kh. Ahanjao Singh, resident of Sagolband Meino
Leirak, Post Office and Police Station: Imphal, Imphal West
District, Manipur.
3. Pangeijam Ramanda Singh, aged about 63 years, Son of
Late P. Ibotombi Singh, resident of Sagolband Salam
Leikai, Post Office and Police Station: Imphal, Imphal West
District, Manipur.
..........(now in Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa)
.... Accused/Appellants
- Versus -
The State of Manipur represented by the Public Prosecutor, High
Court of Manipur.
.... Respondent
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU
For the petitioner : Mr. M. Gunedhor, Advocate
For the respondents : Mr. Samarjit Hawaibam, Public Prosecutor
Date of hearing : 27.02.2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 1
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Date of Judgment &
Order : 14.06.2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 1
JUDGMENT & ORDER
(CAV)
(Golmei Gaiphulshillu, J)
[1] Heard Mr. M. Gunedhor, learned counsel appearing
for the appellants and Mr. Samarjit Hawaibam, learned PP
appearing for the respondent.
[2] The present appeal has been instituted praying for
setting aside the judgment and order of the Ld. Additional Sessions
Judge (Fast Tract Court), Manipur dated 12.01.2018 passed in
Session Trial No. 4/99/10/05/17 convicting the accused/appellants
and the subsequent order of sentence passed by the same Court
on 18.01.2018 convicting the accused/appellants for committing
offences punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code
read with Section 149 of the same code.
[3] The factual position which forms the background of
the present appellants' plea are that on 23.06.1989 at around
04:30 p.m., one Polem Indrajit Singh filed a report with the Officer-
in-Charge, Imphal Police Station, on being narrated by
Nongmaithem Megha Singh (P.W. No. 4) who accompanied his son
namely, Polem Satyajit Singh, stating that while he was returning
home from his Khola near Khoyathong Tank at around 02:30 a.m.
along with his friend (P.W. No. 4), some unknown persons
numbering 8 to 12 assaulted him by using iron rods, sharp
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 2
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 2
weapons, clubs etc. causing serious bodily injuries to his son and
he was evacuated to RIMS hospital (the then RMC hospital) with
his local people at about 02:50 a.m., however succumbed to injury
at about 03:30 a.m.
On the basis of the report filed, an FIR case No.
384(6) 89 Imphal Police Station was registered under Section 302
read with 34 IPC. However, no explanation was offered by the P.W.
No. 4 for a long delay of about 14 (fourteen) hours to anyone, least
of all the concerned Court.
[4] Some weapons of the crime were recovered under
Section 27 of the Evidence Act, at the instance of
accused/appellant No. 1 and another accused namely, P.
Dhananjoy Singh (now deceased) on 24.06.1989 and 29.06.1989
respectively. In connection with the incident, after arresting 8
(eight) accused persons, as remanded by the concerned Court;
while they were in jail, a Test Identification Parade was conducted
on 11.07.1989 by an Executive Magistrate (P.W. No. 15) during
which one, Moba @ SanatombaSingh (now deceased) was
identified by Nongmaithem Megha Singh (P.W. No. 4).
[5] After due investigation, a charge sheet was submitted
to the Court of the then Ld. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal and
on receiving the same on 31.07.1998, the Ld. Magistrate
committed the case to the Ld. Sessions Judge, Manipur East on
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 3
05.04.1999. However, surprisingly names of two accused persons
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 3
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
namely, Rajen Singh and I. Nabachandra Singh who were arrested
and detained in judicial custody, were found missing in the charge
sheet without mentioning reason for their omission and they were
also released on bail.
[6] The Ld. Sessions Judge, Manipur East framed charges
against the 6 (six) accused persons under Section 302 IPC read
with Section 149 of the same Code on 14.06.1999. The prosecution
examined 36 (thirty six) witnesses. The specific defence case was
that of false implication by pleading their innocence and of total
denial of the allegation levelled against them.
During the course of trial, 3 (three) accused persons
namely, S. Bodo@Somorendro, R.K. Sanatomba Singh & P.
Dhananjoy Singh, died and accordingly they were dropped from the
trial.
[7] Upon conclusion of the trial and after examining the
accused/appellants under Section 313 of the CrPC, the trial was
subsequently transferred to the Ld. Additional Session Judge (Fast
Tract Court), Manipur East by the Ld. Sessions Judge, Imphal West.
The Ld. Additional Session Judge (Fast Tract Court), Manipur East
passed the judgment and order dated 12.01.2018 convicting the
accused/appellants for committing the offences punishable under
Section 302 of the IPC read with Section 149 of the same Code.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 4
Subsequently, on 18.01.2018 an order was passed sentencing the 3
(three) accused/appellants to undergo imprisonment for life and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 4
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
also with a fine of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand) only.
[8] Being aggrieved by the judgment & order dated
12.01.2018 and sentence order dated 18.01.2018 of the Ld.
Additional Session Judge (Fast Tract Court), Manipur East passed in
Session Trial No. 4/99/10/05/17; the present appeal has been filed
on the following grounds:
(i) The evidences, on which, the Ld. Judge had relied upon in
convicting the accused/appellants are not at all sufficient,
adequate, convincing and reliable and therefore, the order of
conviction passed by the Ld. Judge is without basis.
(ii) The Ld. Trial Court has erred in law in relying upon police
report made during the investigation and also in the so called
statements given to the police by the accused/appellants
during investigation which are inadmissible in evidence.
(iii) In all criminal trial commencement of investigation on the
registration of First Information Report assumed considerable
importance. Doubt of any degree in the manner of registration
of the F.I.R. has an adverse impact on the initial presentation
of allegations by the prosecution. In the instant case, the
F.I.R. was lodged and registered at 4:30 p.m. of 23/06/1989
according to the document (F.I.R. Form Exbt. P/70) and the
statement given by the maker of the F.I.R. (P.W. No. 1) who
explained before the Court that he received the details of the
incident from P.W. No. 4 only at about 4 p.m. of 23/06/1989
and thereafter, only he made a report with the Officer-in-
Charge of Imphal P.S. He also stated that he did not go to the
police station and he was not examined by any police officer in
connection with the case.Thus, there is a delay of more than
14(fourteen) hours in the reporting the matter to the police
which remains unexplained.
(iv) The P.W. No. 4, who was the solitarily eye witness of the
incident, did not inform ornarrate about the incident till 3:00
p.m. to anybody while he was all along present in the hospital,
at the place of occurrence and during the funereal of the
deceased in the midst of the family members, relatives and
friends of the deceased and the local people, in a most
unnatural and surprising manner. There could not be any
reason for withholding such vital information with himself for
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 5
so long and as such, he was not only a non-trustworthy
witness but also an unreliable person who acted in a strangely
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 5
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
un natural manners.
(v) The P.W. No. 35 and 36, who are the police officers gave a
different version about the time of registration of the F.I.R. as
4:00 a.m. or 4:30 a.m. of 23/06/1989 while the same was
clearly contradicted by Ext. P/70 as well as by the statements
of P.W. No. 1 (maker of the F.I.R) and P.W. No. 4 (the alleged
solitary eye witnesses). Thus, there is a clear contradiction
about the initiation of launching the prosecution and the said
contradiction was never explained by the prosecution which
relied on both the theories.
(vi) The Ld. Judge has completely ignored to consider the aspect
of the fabrication or manipulation of the F.I.R., which is the
basis of the case as disclosed by both oral and documentary
evidences on records (P.W. No. 1, 4, 35, 36 and the document
Ext. P/70).
(vii) The investigation of the case was doubtful and suspicious, as
2 the (two) accused persons namely, Shri Rajen Singh and
Shri I. Nabachandra Singh, were found mysteriously missing
from the case though they were arrested, detained in both
police and judicial custody and subsequently, released on bail.
(viii) According to P.W. No. 4, the night was dark, because of
which, he had to escort the deceased with his half lamp which
was slipped from his hand on the alleged attack of unknown
persons.
(ix) The same witness,however, stated that he was at the gate of
one R.K Bikomsana Singh while the unknown persons
assaulted the deceased at a distance of about 55 ft. from him
and that he could see the incident with the help of an electric
bulb of 60/100W lighted on a nearby electric post. His said
version is unbelievable as it would be humanly impossible to
observe or identify the happenings from that kind of quality of
light and distance.
(x) Nobody supported the version of the P.W. No. 4 whose
statements are inconsistent at different parts and as such, no
reliance can be made upon his statement.
(xi) No explanation was given by the prosecution as to why the
P.W. No. 1, the father of the deceased, made no attempt to
inform the police even after knowing about the death of his
son in the early hour of the day, which is again quite unnatural
and beyond human conduct.
(xii) As per the record of the case, no F.I.R. was registered till 4:30
p.m. on the day of the incident.However, the registration No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 6
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 6
of the F.I.R. is found to have been mentioned in the
documents like Seizure Memo, Inquest Report which was
conducted in the morning of the day of the incident much
prior to the registration of the F.I.R. As per the deposition of
P.W. No. 36, a written report was received by the night duty
officer of the Imphal Police Station being made by the father
of the deceased. However, the F.I.R. as narrated by P.W. No.
4 was lodged only at about 4:30 p.m. after being narrated
about the incident by the P.W. No. 4 to him at about 3:00
p.m. Such unexplained and confusing mystery vitiates the
prosecution and as such, the impugned Judgement isliable to
be set aside and quashed.
(xiii) The Test Identification Parade conducted by the Executive
Magistrate (P.W. No. 15) suffers from inherent illegalities and
cannot be acted upon. Moreover, the P.W. No. 4 did not
identify any of the accused/appellants during the course of the
parade and the name of the person whom he allegedly
identified was also wrong.
(xiv) The Test Identification Parade also cannot be relied upon as
P.W. No. 4 had categorically stated before the Court that he
will not be able to identify the person, whom he had identified
in the Test Identification Parade if asked again to identify in
the Court room.
(xv) The only suspicion of connecting the accused/appellant No. 1,
P. Joykumar Singh with the alleged crime is that the P.W. No.
16 stated that the said appellant came to him on 22/6/1989
for settling peacefully and amicably with the deceased about
the incident of slapping by the deceased on him. The only
reason for suspecting the accused/appellant No. 1 was that he
was slapped on the face by the deceased on Thangal Bazar
Road on the previous day. In the absence of any other
clinching evidence as to the Commission of the offence, no
inference can be made from the mere fact that the
accused/appellant No. 1 came to P.W. No. 16 for settling the
matter of slapping him by the deceased peacefully and
amicably.
(xvi) From the statement of P.W. No. 16, it only shows the peaceful
intention and motive of Accused/Appellant No. 1 for a peaceful
solution and there was no mention about any violent or
revengeful motive or intention of the Accused/Appellant No. 1.
The Ld. Judge has failed to consider the absence of criminal
motive or intention on the part of accused/appellant and
instead readily jumped on his mere surmise and imagination.
(xvii) It is in evidence that the deceased had quarreled with many
other people on the previous days as he blocked the Thangal
Bazar road for his black topping contract works and as such
the possibility of committing the crime by any other of those
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 7
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
persons quarreled with him was not ruled out.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 7
(xviii) The P.W. No. 16 stated before the Court that the
accused/appellant No. 1 is of modest and humble nature and
that he came in place. Therefore, the accused/appellant No. 1
could not be suspected as the author of the crime.
(xix) The alleged statement of the accused/appellant No. 1 (Ext.
P/13) recorded in presence of P.W. No. 9 and 13 cannot be
made admissible as the same was given in police custody and
as such no reliance can be placed on such inadmissible
statements.
(xx) The trial Judge has failed to see that the I.O. of the case
purposefully hunted or searched for interested witnesses for
witnessing the recording of the so called statement of the
Accused/ Appellant No. 1 under section 27 Evidence Act. The
I.O. fetched P.W. No. 9 who is a close relative of the deceased
from YAC ground and subsequently his friend P.W. No. 13
from Yaiskul for the purpose instead of looking for neutral
person.
(xxi) The alleged recovery of weapons at the instance of
accused/appellant No. 1 was not supported by a set of
witnesses and the prosecution also did not declare such
witnesses as hostile. Thus, there are 2(two) different version
as regards the alleged recovery of weapons which cannot
stand together.
(xxii) The so called recovery weapons at the instance of
accused/appellant No. 1 cannot be acted upon as the place
from where the alleged recovery was made was already
known to the police before the alleged recovery.
(xxiii) The place from where alleged recovery was made is an open
space assessable to the public as the same lies just to the
adjacent or nearby public thoroughfare lane. Therefore alleged
recovery cannot be held as having made Under Section 27 of
the Evidence Act.
(xxiv) The weapon of crime allegedly recovered at the instance of
the accused persons were not sealed as mandated by Law and
as such the same cannot be used against any of the Accused
Persons.
(xxv) Expert Opinion, as regards the alleged seized articles did not
support the prosecution case in any manner and instead it
negated the prosecution theory about the articles connecting
with the alleged crime. The seized material objects cannot be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 8
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
linked to the alleged crime.
(xxvi) The Ld. Judge erred in Law in observing that the Court can
form its own opinion even by ignoring the Expert Opinion.
Judgment based on such observation shall not be allowed to
stand as it would entirely disturb the settled principle of Law.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 8
(xxvii) The prosecution has miserably failed to prove the presence of
any of these 3(three) Accused/ Appellants in the so called
unlawful assembly and as such the Ld. Judge has erred in Law
in holding about their being a member of unlawful assembly
without any piece of evidence.
(xxviii) The prosecution has also failed even to mention about any
overt act committed by any of the Accused/Appellants in the
alleged crime.
(xxix) The Ld. Judge passed his Judgment on his own surmises and
imaginary illusions by relying upon hypothecated versions of
the prosecution which is not supported by any acceptable
evidences.
(xxx) On the basis of the evidence on records,the charged framed
against the accused/appellants having not been proved, the
impugned order of Conviction and Sentence against the
accused/appellants are unwarranted and liable to be set aside.
xxxi) There was no chain of circumstances created by the evidences
on record and sequences of circumstances cannot form a
complete chain. Therefore, the prosecution evidence should
not be relied upon.
(xxxii) The prosecution has failed to examine important witness who
would have thrown light about the incident and failure of the
prosecution to examine such relevant and material witnesses
indicates prosecution had withhold important facts.
(xxxiii) The Ld. Judge has wrongly observed the act of surrendering
the Accused/Appellants to the police as their admission of guilt
and forget that the Accused/Appellants only made themselves
available to the police to clarify their innocence.
(xxxiv)The manner of Investigation was malafide and it was
conducted with the objective of framing the
accused/appellants with a charge of murder and for not
unearthing the truth. Conviction based on such malafide
investigation is unwarranted in the eyes of law.
(xxxv) The Ld. Judge in para No. 26 of his Judgment had wrongly
observed that the prosecution could establish 11 (eleven)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 9
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
specific facts without reasonable basis and such findings are
negated by the facts that:
a) The deceased was last accompanied by P.W. No. 4 from
his khola and the said witness withhold the information
about the incident with himself for more than 14
(fourteen) hours in a most unnatural manner.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 9
b) The deceased is quarrelsome and therefore there was a
high chance of probability that the deceased could
develop enmity with many other people.
c) The P.W. No. 4 stated that he himself and the deceased
shouted and raised alarms during the assault. However,
P.W. No. 17 who was taken bath nearby and any of the
local residents did not support such version.
d) The P.W. No. 16 stated that accused/appellant No. 1
came to him for a peaceful settlement with the deceased
on 22/06/1989 and on being told by the said witnesses a
police team along with himself went to the house of
accused/appellant No. 1. Inspite of this fact, the police
examined P.W. No. 16 only on 06/07/1989 i.e. a delay of
14 (fourteen) days.
e) The materials, like blood sample, clothes worn by the
accused persons could not be related with the alleged
incident as per the FSL report.
f) The T.I. Parade is not admissible in the eyes of law as
submitted in the ground No. XIV above.
xxxvi) It is evident from the Judgment of the Ld. Judge that Court
below had relied upon inadmissible evidences to the utter
prejudice of the accused/appellants. The Court below had
ignored the Principle that a criminal trial gets seriously tainted
and becomes unfair in the event of the judgment of the Court
is founded on inadmissible evidences.
(xxxvii) Upon a proper appreciation of evidence on record and correct
assessment of the provisions of law, the Ld. Judge ought to
have held that the prosecution has failed to bring home the
allegations levelled against the accused/appellants and the
prosecution case is an admixture of lies and improbabilities.
xxxviii) The prosecution evidence is unworthy of son of reasonable
any credit and acceptance by a person prudence, but the Ld.
Judge discussed the evidence in a very casual manner
whereby, he left the material facts aside and included his own
imagination leading to an awful judgement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 10
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
xxxix) The Ld. Judge has failed to see that the prosecution as set out
in the Charge Sheet/Final report differs from the one disclosed
by it during the trial. Thus, the prosecution story itself is not
acceptable as there cannot be 2(two) stories about a single
incident.
xl) The Ld. Judge passed the impugned Judgment of Conviction
and Order of Sentence not on consideration of materials on
record but on the basis on conjunctures and summarises. The
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 10
Judge simply forget that in a criminal case where the life and
liberty of a person is involved courts should approach with the
materials on record with the highest degree of caution.
xli) The Court below has also failed to see that the prosecution
was unable to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt and it
ignored or overlooked the required degree of proof in a
criminal case and accepted principles of Rule of Proof beyond
reasonable doubt.
xlii) The Ld. Judge has completely misinterpreted the meaning and
purpose of examination of the accused under Section 313 of
Criminal Procedure Code thereby leading to a grave error of
law.
xliii) The Ld. Judge has failed to provide the Accused/Appellants
their opportunities to enter into their defence as provided
mandatorily by Section 233 of Code of Criminal Procedure
thereby causing a grave injustice to the Accused/Appellants.
xliv) The Ld. Judge has committed a gross error in making adverse
finding against deceased Accused Persons who have already
been dropped from the case. It was also ignored that the said
deceased person went undefended in the remaining course of
the trial after their death.
xlv) The impugned Judgment of Conviction and Order of Sentence
are otherwise bad in law and the same deserves to be set
aside.
xlvi) The sentence was not called for under the facts and
circumstances of the case.
In the course of trial, the prosecution in support of
their cases produced as many as 36 (thirty six) P.Ws. as the second
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 11
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I.O. Shri Sarojkumar died before the trial of the case,the P.W. No.
36 who was the O.C. of the P.S. and who handed over the case for
investigation to the said I.O. after taking out the case from the first
I.O. Shri Heli Mao who conducted the investigation of the case
briefly, produced as many as 72 (seventy two) documents and
articles and produced 10 (ten) material objects (M.O.).
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 11
[9] On perusal of the judgment and order of the Ld. Trial
Court, it emerges that the Ld. Trial Court in the first part of its
judgment starting from paragraph No. 11 to 24 discussed the case
by narrating the fact about the solitary eyewitness of the instant
case i.e. the P.W. No. 4 Shri N. Megha Singh and its concerned
witnesses and the portions of paragraph 11 to 24 of the judgment
are reproduced herein below for reference and analysis:
"11. On perusal of the testimonies of all the P.Ws., it is crystal
clear that P.W. No. 4 is the person who accompanied with the
deceased and also eye-witness to the said incident of assaulting and
murder. Thus, first of all let me examine the testimonies of P.W. No.4.
P.W. No.4, Nongmaithem Megha Singh has deposed that "about 10
years ago one day in the evening at about dusk while he was at his
workshop his friend deceased Polem Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh
of Polem Leikai came to his workshop and asked him to lend their half
lamp and to help in his work of road repairing in front of Sani Thakur of
Khoyathong Road. Accordingly, he along with Polem Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh went to his work-site with half-lamp which was
already lighted up and he remained there up to late night of the same
night. It is also in the oral testimony that after finishing the work the
deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh, one S.O. of PWD
Department, himself, one Roller Driver and other labourers of Satyajit
alias Satyajit Kumar Singh left the work-site and came to the KHOLLA
of the labourers which was situated at the north-eastern corner of
Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal. They have had a meal at the
Kholla and then after having the meal the said S.O. of PWD Manipur
and the Roller Driver left the Kholla at first and after that he and
deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh left the Kholla. The
deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh asked him to drop him up
to his house and accordingly, he along with Satyajit alias Satyajit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 12
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Kumar Singh proceeded towards the house of Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar with his half lamp on Thangmeiband Polem Leikai road towards
Lamphel on foot. When they reached near the south-western corner of
the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal on Thangmelband Polem
Leikai road he saw 2/3 persons came out from near the gate of R.K.
BekomSana Singh. The said persons started to assault him and then
another 2/3 persons were also came out from the north-western corner
of the Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal. Then all the persons
approaching towards Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and
surrounded the deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and they
started to assault Satyajit Singh by iron rod, hard sticks etc. held by
them. They caught hold of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 12
assaulted him. When those persons assaulted Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar Singh, he was near the gate of Bekomsanahal at the distance of
about 10 ft. from the place where the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
was assaulted. Before rushing towards the gate of Bekomsana the
burning half lamp slipped away from his hand and fell on the ground
when the said persons attacked him for the first time. And then the
half lamp light went off as a result of falling and as a result of heating
on the said half lantern its Chimney glass was broken, and the tank
portion of the half-lantern was also landed. He did not leave the place
of the occurrence and he also did not raise any alarm as he was asked
not to leave from the place as well as not to raise any alarm by 2 of the
persons who were guarding him. P.W. No.4 also deposes that while he
was standing near the said gate the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh fought with 5 or 6 persons and the said fighting continued for
some minutes and he saw the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh
falling on the ground and while the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh was fighting with the said 5 or 6 persons. Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar Singh raised alarm to the effect that he was being killed
(HATLE, HATLE). While the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was
lying on the ground one of the said 5/6 persons hit him on his face
with an iron rod (YOTCHEI). He saw the said Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar Singh lying unconscious. Then he saw a Jeep coming there from
Nagamapal road and then driven away after picking up those
assailants/attackers from the said place along Thangmeiband Polem
Leirak whhich leads to Goverdhan Achouba Road. As it was dark he
could not see registration No. of the said Jeep. There was an electric
post at the distance of only about 2/3 feet from the place of the said
occurrence. At the relevant time there was a lighted electric bulb at
that electric post and from the light coming from the said lighted bulb
he could see the said occurrence. As soon as the said
assailants/attackers left the place in the said Jeep he rushed to the
place where the Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was lying and
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was found lying on his back and he
also raised alarm saying "MEE HATLE, MEE HATLE". Then he picked up
the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and he saw that his face
was injured and found with profuse bleeding and within a short time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 13
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
some persons of the locality gathered there. First of all he saw his
mother/Smt. Nongmaithem Ongbi Tombi Devi coming there and some
labourers also came there and after sometime Yambem Jadumani
Singh also came there. The injured was taken to RMC (now RIMS)
Hospital in a truck belonging to Polem Kumar Singh and he also
accompanied with the injured to the Hospital. After about half an hour
of their reaching the Hospital, the injured Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh succumbed to his injuries at the Casualty department of the
hospital. The dead body was brought back on the next day after the
completion of post mortem examination and other necessary
formalities, and funeral ceremony was performed on the said next day.
On the said next day at about 9 or 10 am police seized the said half
lantern on his production. A seizure list was prepared by the police in
connection with the seizure or the said half lantern and he put his
signature on the seizure list. On the day of post mortem examination a
police officer of Imphal P.S. seized one polyester full shirt having blood
stain, 2) sample of blood on a paper, 3) sample of scalp hair under a
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 13
seizure memo prepared by the said police officer at RMC Forensic
Science and Medical Department, Lamphel in his presence. P.W. No.4
has further stated that after about half a month from the date of the
occurrence he was asked by the police to attend at the Jail Compound
Imphal at about 9:30 A.M. for Identification of the accused persons.
Accordingly he went to the Imphal Jail compound and he identified one
person among the culprits as one who took part in assaulting the said
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh on the day of occurrence. The
person who was identified is called R.K Sanayaima and the said person
was identified by him in the third parade of test identification held in
the Imphal Jail".
P.W. No.4 was well cross-examined by the Ld. counsel of the
accused persons. I reproduced herewith the relevant portions of the
statements of the PW No.4 made in his cross-examination:
"It is true that there is no mark of having been hit by a hard
object or any mark of damage on the tanky of the half lamp which is
produced and shown to me today. I was hit on my right arm by an
object like stick resulting to falling down of the half lamp. I did not
receive any notable injury as a result of the said blow though I felt pain
on my right arm, Just before the attack myself and Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar were walking at the parallel along the Polem Leikal road
facing towards West. I was on the right side of Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar that is on the side of the pond e.i. Pukhri Achouba).
Immediately on being hit on my arm I ran towards the gate of R.K.
Sanahal Becom after dropping the half lamp. 2 of the assailants ran
after me I intended to take shelter in the house of Sanahal Becom but I
could not do so as the entrance gate of Becomsana was found locked.
Being helpless I stood just near the gate while the two persons ran
after me came near me. They threatened me not to raise alarm or
leave the place. Therefore, I stood near the gate all alone facing
towards the north. The said 2 persons were standing at the distance of
about 6/7 ft. from me. They were facing towards me and both of them
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 14
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
were holding sticks. I do not see their face as there was no light on the
place where I was standing. However, I could recognize their physical
structures. One of them was of thin structure and another one is little
healthy. I did not come across those 2 persons in the T.I. Parade held
at the Jail after the occurrence. I did not aware of any possibility of
being attacked by those 2 persons who were threatening me by
holding sticks instead I kept on watching the fighting that took place
on the road.
I cannot say whether the distance between the place where the
fighting took place and that of the gate of Beconsana Singh is 55 ft.
However it could be of that distance though I cannot say exactly as I
had not measured the distance. The household of R.K. Becomsana
Singh lies on the south of Khoyathong Polem Leikal road. The gate of
the household was not erected just near the road. The gate existed by
entering some distance from the road. There was barbed wire fencing
all around Khuyathong Pukhri Achouba. I cannot say even
approximately the area of the said pond. The said electric post was
outside the said barbed wire fencing. It stood just near the fencing. I
deny the suggestion that the said post was inside barbed wire fencing
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 14
and not outside. The bulb in the said electric post was a small one
either of 100 or 60 watts.
The fighting between deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh and those assailants took place in front of the said electric post.
The post was behind the fighting area. The light was not sufficient
enough to recognize the physical structures of the other assailants
except the one whom I identified later on. The other reasons were also
that the deceased was attacked by a number of persons and among
them I could recognize the one whom I identified later on. The light
was not sufficient enough to recognize the colour of the wearing
apparels of the assailants and the weapons held by them. I cannot say
whether the distance between electric post and the place of fighting
would be more than 10 ft. as I had not measured the distance with any
instrument of measurement.
I cannot either admit or deny the suggestion that I did not state
to the police while I gave my statement as regards the raising of
alarm" Mee Hatle, Mee Hatle"
I met the father of late Setyajit Singh in the morning of the
following day. I cannot now remember whether he comes to the
hospital or not. I also cannot now remember whether any family
member of late Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh came to the hospital
or not. However, I saw some of his relatives coming to the hospital. I
did not accompany father of alias Satyajit Kumar Singh to the Police
Station on the day. I narrated about the incident to the father of
Satyajit Kumar Singh when I met him near the Khuyathong Pukhri
Achouba on the following morning. When I was at the hospital some
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 15
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
police personnel came to the hospital and pick me up. They took me to
my house and made the seizure of the half lamp on my production."
.....................................
.....................................
The testimonies of the P.W. No.4 regarding the assaulting of himself and the deceased. P. Satyajit
alias Satyajit Kumar Singh in the early morning at about 2.30 a.m. of 23-6-1989 while they were
returning home by some unknown persons and causing of death of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh due to said assault, could not be shaken in the cross examination, rather more strengthen in
the cross examination of P.W. No.4. The oral testimony of the P.W. No.4 has shown a clear picture
for believing such incident to exist and considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought,
under the circumstances of this particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
12. Now the question is whether the accused persons were involved m the said assaulting and
murdering of the said P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh or not. The first person who gave some
hints to the police about the link of the present accused persons was P.W. No. 16. Let us examine his
testimonies.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 15 P.W. No. 16 Nongmaithem Sidham Singh has deposed that
about 11/12 years ago one day at about 2:30 pm. while he was remained at his home Shri Sahajan
Singh along with one unknown person came to his house by a scooter and told him that he was
assaulted by the deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh who was doing a contract work of
black topping between Khuyathong to Thangal Bazar, Gandhi Avenue Road and they also enquired
the whereabouts of the Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh then he told them that Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh is the resident of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai. Then he along with Sahajan
and his friend come out from his house for making an amicable settlement between Satyaji alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh and Sahajan Singh at their work site but he could not bring an amicable
settlement between them as he did not find the deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh at his
work site. Then the accused Sahajan Singh went along with his friend from there and he also left the
said place for his home. On the next day in the morning he learnt that Polem Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar Singh was assaulted by some unknown persons in the night and succumbed to his injuries at
the RIMS, Lamphel and the dead body was lying in the RIMS Morgue. On the said next day he went
to the house of the deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and at that time he found one police
officer namely, Sarojkumar Sharma of Imphal P.S and he narrated to the said police officer
Sarojkumar Sharma about the facts of coming of accused Pukrambam Sahajan (Joykumar Singh)
on, the previous day seeking his help for settlement of dispute in between the said Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh and the said accused. Thereafter, the said police officer asked him to point out
the house of the said accused. Then he along with the police officer went to Sagolband Meino Leirak
and pointed the house of the said accused to the said police officer. When he and the said police
officer entered into the ingkhol of the said accused they learnt that the said accused had not come
back and that not available at his house. The said police officer and his companion police personnel
looked around the said ingkhol of the accused and they found a jeep parking inside the garage. He
also saw the said jeep parking inside a garage situated at the north eastern portion of the said
ingkhol of the accused. He also saw blood stained marks on the side of the hood of the said jeep. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 16
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
police officer also examined the said blood stained mark and then he seized the said jeep. At the
time of the seizure of the said jeep some inmates of the house of the said accused including his
father were present. Thereafter, he and the said police officer and his companion left the place with
the seized vehicle (jeep).
13. The prosecution story in order to link the present accused persons are that the deceased P.
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was doing a contract work of black topping of the road from
Khuyathong to Dharmasala, Thangal Bazar and while the work of black topping was going on, the
deceased blocked the road one at Khoyathong and one at or near the Jalal Provision Store by using a
rope in order to prevent the disturbance from the passersby and in order to do the work smoothly,
and as a result of this, several problems were created by the passersby and on that very day the
deceased slapped the accused No. 1, Joykumar Singh while he tried to enter to his shop through the
blocked area. These facts are well supported by Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 16 P.W. No.8, 16,
17 and 18. Thereafter, as per version of P.W. No. 16, the accused No.1, P. Joykumar Singh came to
his house along with one of his friends and enquired about the whereabouts of deceased by telling
him that the deceased assaulted him and then. P.W. 16 informed them that the deceased is aresident
of Thangmeiband Polem Leikal P.W No. 16 is also the person to show the house of the accused No. 1,
Joykumar Singh to the I.O. of the case and P.W. No. 16 clearly stated that on investigation by the
police at the house of the accused, Joykumar Singh, where he was not available in his house on that
day, found a JEEP in the Garage with blood stain in its hood. The said JEEP and the battery of the
said JEEP were seized in presence of P.W. No.16 on production by the father of the accused, P.W.
No.22 and other witnesses including photographers by preparing seizure memo [Ext. P- 42]. P.W.
No 4 who was the eye witness of the said incident has clearly stated that the assailants were
evacuated in a JEEP and thus, the recovery of the said JEEP from the house of the accused, P.
Joykumar Singh with blood stain in its hood is very much relevant with the involvement of the
accused persons.
14. Further, P.W. No.36, the then Officer-in-Charge of the Imphal Police Station has deposed that on
24.6.89 at about 9.30 p.m. he received a reliable information over telephone from S. Lakhikanta
Singh, advocate brother-in-law of accused P. Joykumar Singh stating that the accused persons,
namely. P. Sahajahan Joykumar, K. Basanta, L. Nabachandra, P. Ramananda and Salam Bodo were
ready to surrender to the Police and that he kept the said accused persons to the house of Salam
Bodo Singh but the other two accused persons, namely, Moba Singh and Dhananjoy Singh did not
want to surrender. Thereafter. I.O. of the case, Sajojkumar Sharma and the P.W. No.36 himself
proceeded to the house of S. Bodo Singh and they found the said accused persons and accordingly,
the accused persons were arrested.
15. Ld. counsel of the accused has contended regarding the surrender of the accused persons that the
surrender of a citizen cannot be taken asadmission of guilt because it is fact that the Police were
looking for the persons basing on the incident of slapping the accused P. Joykumar on his face by
the deceased on the previous day and immediately knowing about the visit of the Police the accused
persons straight away went to the Police Stationenquired about the reason for the Police to have
suspicion on them being a law abiding citizen.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 17
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
16. The suspicion for the involvement of the accused P. Joykumar Singh came to light only when
P.W. No. 16 narrated the story of asking the whereabouts of the deceased by the said Joykumar
Singh and then the I.O. ofthe case rushed to the house of the accused P. Joykumar Singh and in his
house found a JEEP with blood stain in its hood but the investigating officer, at that relevant time,
had no opportunity to know the other accused persons. However, all the accused persons were
surrendered to the Police in connection with the present case and thus, it shows the relevance of the
other accused persons to the crime.
17. P.W. No.36 has also stated that at the time of arrest of the said accused persons there was one
bruise mark at the lower forehead of the right eyelid of the accused Ramananda Singh which was
found Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 17 injured during the fighting with the deceased and as per
his instruction the I.O. of the case had taken the said accused for treatment at the casualty
department of RIMS. This fact is well supported by P.W. No. 33, Dr. Athokpam Rajendra Singh by
stating that he examined one injured person namely, Pangoijam Ramananda Singh S/O P. Ibotombi
Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai as referred by the Police of Imphal P.S. when he was attached at
casualty department of RIMS and he found the following injuries:
1. Lacerated wound- over the molar eminent right face. The size of the injury is 1/3"
in length skin only.
2. Lacerated wound V shape over the right lateral side of the nose just above the
vestibule of the nose. Size is 1/3" X 1/4" in V shape.
3. Abrasion over the bridge of the nose. The size of the wound is 1/4"X1/4" in area.
P.W. No.33 has given his opinion that the nature of the wounds mentioned above are simple and the
kind of weapon which inflicted the injury was blunt object. P.W. No.4 has deposed that the deceased
fight with the assailants when they started to attack him. So, the injuries caused to the accused
Ramananda Singh shows its relevancy for his involvement to the suld commission of crime.
18. Moreover, the accused No. 1. P. Joykumar Singh was examined and recorded his statement by
the I.O. of the case under section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act during the course of investigation in
presence of P. Ws.No. 9 and 13 and the accused, P. Joykumar Singh has admitted that he alongwith
his friends assaulted the deceased with deadly weapons such as cane stick on handle of jeep and
knife nearThangmeiband Pukhri AchoubaMapal and they immediately left the place of occurrence
by a Jeep and that the weapons of crime used by them were kept concealed inside the clump of
bamboo which was lying on the eastern side of his garage and he would be able to hand over the
aforesaid weapons to the police. The said statement of accused, P. Joykumar Singh was recorded by
the I.O. of the case in presence of P.Ws.No.9 and 13 and the same has been exhibited as Ext.P-13. On
the basis of the statement of the deceased, P. Joykumar Singh, the Police personnel along with P.Ws.
No. 9 and 13 proceeded to the house of the accused P. Joykumar Singh and on 24-3-1989 at about
3.10 p.m.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 18
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(i) one iron handle of the Jeep. (ii) one cane stick and (iii) one knife were recovered at the instances
of the accused P. Joykumar Singh under the north-western corner of the small bamboo groves about
3 feet from north western side of the garage, by preparing seizure memo by the I.O. of the case in
presence of P.W. Nos. 9 and 13 and the said seizure memo is exhibited as Ext.P-14. At the time of
producing the said crime weapons and seizure of the same were token photographs by the Police
photographer, P.W. No. 12 has well corroborated to the statements of seizure of JEEP and the
weapons of crime at the instance of an accused by stating that he had taken photographs from
different directions and the said photographs and its negatives were seized by the I.O. of the case
from him by preparing seizure memo (Ext.P-21).
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 18 Exts. P-22, P-23, P-24, P-25 and 26 are the photographs of the
garage and Jeep. Ext. P-32 is the photograph showing the place from where crime weapons were
recovered and Ext.P.33 is the photograph showing the weapons of crime.
For better appreciation, I reproduced herewith the 'disclosure statements of accused P. Joykumar
Singh.
"Confessional Statement of the accused Shri, Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh
@Sahajahan Singh, 32 years, S/o P. Shyamnagar Singh of Sagolband Meino Letrak,
Imphal recorded in connection with FIR Case No. 384/6/89 IPS U/Ss 326/302/34
IPC recorded U/S 27 Evi. Act.
I was born and brought up at Sagolband Meino Leirak. Imphal. Yesterday, i.e.
23/6/89 at @ 9.30 p.m. I along with my friendsnamely P. Ramanda Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikal I. Nabachandra Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikal and Kh.
BasantaSingh of Sagolband Meino Leirak were arrested by O/C IPS accompanied
with S.I. H. Surajkumar Sharma of Imphal P.S.,I.O. of the case, FIR No. referred
above. Also confessed you that in connection with the above mentioned case, the said
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was murdered by me along with my friends so as
to revenge the previous assault by him to me on 22/6/89 at about 11.30 a.m. at
Khoyathong in front of Star auto works. On that day, the said Satyajit alias Satyajit
Kumar Singh have assaulted me by slapping on my face on 22/6/89 at 11.30 in front
of general public at Khoyathong in front of Star auto works. While I request him to
allow me to enter on paddle upto my shop, when he was working as a contractor for
repairing the road. Since that felt very much ashamed and plot to revenge to the
alleged accused person. Thus I have contacted:
(1) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh, S/o Kh. Ahanjao Singh of Sagolband Meino
Leirak, Imphal, (2) Pangeijam Ramananda Singh (34). S/o Ibotombi Singh of Salam
Leikai.
(3) Irom Nabachandra Singh (29) S/o Tombi Singh of Sagolband
Salam Leikai,
(4) One Kh. Rajen Singh of Naransena,
(5) R.K. Moba Singh. S/o R.K. Budhisana of Uripok Ningthou jam
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 19
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Leikai, Imphal,
(6) Salam Bodro Singh. S/o S. Achou Singh of Salam Leikui. Imphal,
(7) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh, S/o (2) Ibochouba Singh of
Uripok Huidrom Leikai.
and requested them to accompany with me and thus they were hired and brought in
my jeep without regd. No. which was taken out from our garage. Then we have waited
the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai
(contractor) running a contract work for metalling road (Kollas Thaba) of
Khoyathong Road, Thangal Bazar, (who had assaulted me) from 8 p.m. of dt.
22/6/89 upto about of dt. 23/6/89 and when the said person and one of his friend
was returning his home along with half lamp holding by his friend, we laid Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 19 an ambush at South Western corner of Khoyathong
Pukhri Achouba Mapal and assaulted him by using sticks, jeep handle and a knife.
The knife is held by me, the jeep handle is held by R.K. Moba Singh one Lichei (cane
stick) was hold by one Ramanda Singh which is left at the spot). And another stick is
held by Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai. During the
assault, Ramananda Singh assaulted him first with his stick but the person escaped
the blow and hold Ramananda and gave a hand blow on his right eye causing
bleeding injury on lower portion. Then Bodro use his stick and hit him so hard and
the Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar release Ramananda and fell down on the floor. Then
we all gathered and hit/beat him without weapons. Then I stab him on both his thigh
2/3 times. The said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar cried very loudly with agony. Then
we all jump to our jeep and sped away from there towards west and then passing
through Lalambung I drop R.K. Mobi and his friend P. Dhananjoy at the junction of
Uripok Bachaspati Leirak. Then we four arrived at Meino Leirak at about 3 am of
23/6/89. Basanta, Naba and Bodro went to their respective houses. Rajen and myself
remain at my residence. I wash my hands and the knife used in commission of the
crime at my pond by using a place of cloth from my jeep. Then in the early morning I
along with Rajen went out from our house, sent Rajen upto Moirang bus parking.
Before I went out from my residence. I wash the jeep which is used in the commission
of such crime and all the incriminating weapon of the offence i.e., (1) the handle used
by R.K. Moba, (2) Stick (carne stick) used by Bodroba Singh, (3) the knife used by me
were found in the jeep. I wash them all and kept in the eastern side of the garage
concealing near the bamboo plants there.
I can produce the same from where I kept concealed these incriminating articles,if I was allowed to
go there."
The statements of the accused P. Dhananjoy Singh were also recorded under section 27 of the
Evidence Act. I reproduced herewith the disclosure statements of accused P. Dhananjoy Singh:
"Confessional Statement of the accused Shri. Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh@Bobi
Singh (19) S/o (L) P. Ibotombi Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai recorded U/S
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 20
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
27 Evi. Act.
My name is Pukhrambam Dhanajoy Singh@Bobi Singh. I was born and brought up at
Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai, Imphal. On 22/6/89 at about 8/9 p.m. as I was being
called by R.K. Moba Singh of Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai for some work along
with Pukhrambam Sajahajan@Joykumar Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak along
with other 5 persons in a jeep belongs to Sahajahan without any No. Thus, I have
accompanied them and along with them I reached Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba
Mapal and then they disclosed me that we are coming to beat one person and then
Sahajahan point us the person who wore a Sport pant blue/black. I couldn't classified
in the night who was working on the Khoyathong road along with other publics
(Koilas Thaba Kangbuga) from the corner of Khoyathong Police (Traffic) Police point.
Thus preparing ourselves by holding sticks etc., I pick up a wooden block (rounded
club) and about 31/2 ft. in length about Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 20
2/11/2inch dia, which was found lying near the BOROI plant on the South Western
corner of the Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and waited the person along with
R.K Moba Singh who held one Iron Handle of the Jeep till the 2 am of dt. 23/6/89.
Then the person who identified by Sahajan along with another person holding a half
lamp came on the road situated on the Southern side of the Pukhri Achouba. Then as
plan previously one of our colleague assaulted him and the other person who came
along with the said person ran towards the southern gate, and the person whom we
have assaulted hold one of our colleague. Then I assaulted him with my club which I
hold. Then the others also hit him with their weapons. Then the person fell down flat
on the ground. Then, I throw my club (wooden club) towards the roadside. I jumped
up on the jeep which came towards us on the road which was driven by Sahajahan
Singh. Then we fled away from the spot.
I could have point out the spot (where I throw the club on the said night after the
commission of the crime) if I was allowed to go there at the spot where we have
committed the crime."
19. In order to find out whether the disclosure statements of accused P. Joykumar Singh and
accused P. Dhananjoy Singh are admissible or not under section 27 of the Evidence Act, we also
need to discuss section 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act. Sections 25, 26 and 27 are, therefore,
reproduced hereinbelow:
"25. Confession to police officer not to be proved. No confession, made to a police
officer, shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.
26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him. No
confession made by any person, whilst he is in the custody of a police officer, unless it
be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such
person.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 21
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
27. How much information received from accused may be proved. Provided that,
when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received
from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much of
such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to
the fact thereby discovered, may be proved."
A bare reading of Section 25 makes it clear that this Section (Section 25) mandates that no
confession, made to a police officer, shall be proved as against a person accused of an offence.
Similarly, Section 26 provides that the confession, made by an accused person, while in the custody
of a police officer, cannot be proved against him unless, of course, the confession is made in the
immediate presence of a magistrate. Thus, while Section 25 completely bars confession of an
accused person, made to a police officer, from being proved against the accused. Section 26 bars
from being proved a confession made by Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 21 an accused person, to
anyone whomsoever if the accused person was, at the time of making the confession, in the custody
of the police, unless the confession has been made in the immediate presence of a magistrate.
However, to the bar, so imposed by Sections 25 and 26, on the use of confession made by an accused
person, Section 27 carves out an exception inasmuch as it provides that when, any fact is deposed to
as discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, while
the accused person is in the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it
amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.
Thus, Section 27 acts as proviso to Sections 25 and 26. A statement, which falls under Section 27
and is generally termed as 'disclosure statement is allowed to be used on the basis of the view that
when a fact is actually discovered in consequence of information given by an accused person, some
guarantee is afforded that the disclosure statement was true. Thus, Section 27 permits limited use of
the information, which an accused may have disclosed to the police, while he was in the custody of
the police.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Amitsingh Bhikamsing Vs. State of Maharastra reported in AIR 2007
SC 676 has summarized the various requirements of section 27 of Evidence Act in para no.29 as
follows:
"29. The various requirements of the section can be summed up as follows:
(1) The fact of which evidence is sought to be given must be relevant to the issue. It
must be borne in mind that the provision has nothing to do with question of
relevancy.
The relevancy of the fact discovered must be established according to the prescriptions relating to
relevancy of other evidence connecting t with the crime in order to make the fact discovered
admissible.
(2) The fact must have been discovered.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 22
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(3) The discovery must have been in consequence of some information received from the accused
and not by accused's own act.
(4) The persons gluing the information must be accused of any offence.
(5) He must be in the custody of a police officer. (6) The discovery of a fact in consequence of
information received from an accused in custody must be deposed to.
(7) Thereupon only that portion of the information which relates distinctly or strictly to the fact
discovered can be proved. The rest is inadmissible."
Ld. counsel of the accused persons has contended about the recording of disclosure statements of
the accused Joykumar Singh under section 27 of the Evidence Act that the said disclosure
statements are very doubtful because the said two witnesses are from Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018
Page 22 Moirangkhom and Yaiskul where the place of occurrence lie at Khoyathong and residence of
the accused Joykumar Singh is at Sagolband Meino Leirak and that the wife of the deceased is from
Moirangkhom area who is also related with the wife of the deceased. It is also stated by the Ld.
Counsel that the said seized articles were sent to the Director, Central Forensic Science Laboratory,
Calcutta but the report has stated that it was not possible to opine whether the injuries were
inflicted by the said seized articles. Ld.counsel also cited the case law reported in 2003 AIR SCW
2049 and (2003)5 SCC 499, reproduced above.
However, it is crystal clear from the oral evidences as well as documentary evidences that the
weapons of crime mentioned in Ext.P- 14 and Ext.P-15 were recovered from the instances of the
accused P. Joykumar Singh and P. Dhananjoy Singh on the basis of their statements given under
section 27 of the Evidence Act. Further there is catena of decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court that
statements of relative witnesses cannot be discarded at all. Further, the report of the experts clearly
states that they were not in a position to give specific opinion since the sent seized articles were not
sufficient for conducting test. Moreover, the opinion of expert is only a piece of evidence in arriving
a conclusion which may take into account or reject it by the court. Therefore, upon relying to the
observations made by the Hon'bleApex Court and on persusal of the disclosure statements of
accused personsnamely, P. Joykumar Singh and P. Dhananjoy Singh reproduced above, the
following portions of disclosure statements which also led to the recovery of that weapons of crime
on the basis of the said disclosure statements in presence of independent witnesses, are admissible
evidences.
For accused P. Joukumar Singh:
"Before I went out from my residence, I wash the Jeep which is used in the
commission of such crime and all the incriminating weapon of the offence i.e., (1) the
handle used by R.K. Moba. (2) Stick (cane stick) used by Bodroba Singh, (3) the knife
used by me were found in the jeep. I wash them all and kept in the eastern side of the
garage concealing near the bamboo plants there.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 23
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I can produce the same from where I kept concealed these incriminating articles, if I
was allowed to go there."
For accused Dhananjoy Singh/now deceased):
"I could have point out the spot (where I throw the club on the said night after the
commission of the crime) if I was allowed to go there at the spot where we have
committed the crime."
The case laws cited by the Ld. counsel is not related with the present case.
20. Furthermore, a Test Identification parade was also conducted during the course of investigation
and in that T.I. Parade the P.W. No.4, N. Megha Singh who was the eye witness to the said
occurrence identifled the accused. R.K. Sanatomba Singh who is no more now. The Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 23 said T.I. parade is vehemently challenged by the Ld. counsel of the accused.
Ld. counsel of the accused persons has contended that the accused have stated that he was shown to
the witness on 26-06-1999 at around 11.30 a.m. while he was at Imphal Police Station, the I.O. of
the case was very much present inside the Jail premises all throughout the period of the parade, the
Magistrate was not identified to the witness, the identified accused was different from the rest of the
persons assembled in the parade, the particulars of the persons mixed up with the accused persons
are not disclosed to the Magistrate who also failed to confirm whether they are of actually inmates of
the Jalil, the doors and windows of the room where the parade was held was found open earlier, the
parade was held after 19 (nineteen) days and the delay of which was not explained and the more
importantly the witness did not state about any specific act the identified accused in office act
committed by the identified accused in the incident as well as reason for his remembering the
particular accused while he failed to do so in respect of other accused person. Ld. counsel of the
accused persons has cited the case law reported in 2011(3) GLT 755 which is reproduced above.
21. The Executive Magistrate who conducted T.I. Parade was examined as P.W. No.15 and he
deposed that during his posting at Imphal West as Executive Magistrate he conducted T.I. Parade of
accused persons in connection with F.I.R. Case No. 364/6/89 1.P.S. u/s 302/326/34 I.P.C. on
11-07-1989 vide Memo of SDO/SDM/I-W-I dated 10-07-1989. Accordingly he informed the
concerned P.S. to direct witness, Shri Nongmaithem Megha Singh to present at the Central jail,
Imphal on 11-07-1989. P.W. No.15 has further goes to say that he held T.I. Parade of the accused (1)
Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh@Shahajahan Singh s/o Shyamnagar Singh of Sagolband Meino
Leirak, Imphal, (2) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh@Lulubi Singh s/o Ahanjan Singh of do. (3)
Pangoljam Ramananda Singh s/o Ibotombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, Imphal, (4) Salam
Bodro Singh & Somorendro Singh s/o Achou Singh of do. (5) R.K. Moba Singh Sanatomba Singh s/o
Budhisana Singh of Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai, Imphal (6) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy
Singh@Bobi Singh s/o late Ibotombi Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai and Khwairakpam
Rajen Singh s/o Budhi Singh of Naranseina, P.S. Moirang. The above accused persons were in the
Jail at the relevant time, and he also informed the Jail authority to produce the above mentioned
under trial accused persons from their rooms/cell inside the Central jail premises. Shri
Nongmaithem Megha Singh was also present on 11-07-1989 at Central jail compound. Imphal. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 24
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
parade was conducted in three groups of U.Ts. At the beginning 4 (four) accused persons were
mixed up with the first two groups with 20 U.Ts. and the remaining 3 accused persons were mixed
among third group of 30 U.Ts. The accused Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh @ Shahajahan Singh and
Khangirakpam Basanta Singh Lulibi Singh were mixed up with 20 U.T.Ps. The accused Pangoijam
Ramananda Singh and Salam Budro Singh @ Somerendro Singh were mixed up with 20 U.T.Ps in
the 2nd parade. The 1stand 2nd parades consist of 22 Persons including two accused persons each.
They (UT.Ps.) were almost the same size, physics, age and not distinct body marks. Before holding
the T.I. parade the dress of the accused Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 24 persons were changed
in a separate room inside the premises of the Central Jail, Imphal. The dress of the U.T.Ps werealso
changed in another room at the premises of the central Jail Imphal. He did not allow to see the said
accused persons witness as well as the UT.Ps before conducting the T.I. Parade. Amongst the 7
accused persons, accused Postsangbam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh has got two marks, one near
the right side of the forehead and another below the right side of the in mouth, Pangiojam
Ramananda Singh has got 4 visible marks, one below the right eye, another near the right nose and
other 2 marks on the forehead. R.K. Moba Sanatomba Singh has got 2 marks one near right elbow
and another on the forehead. So the above U.T.Ps of their group were covered by a piece of small
paper on the face of the mark along with accused persons having visible marks at the relevant time
of the T.I. Parade. He prepared the list of UT.Ps in three separate sheets with the assistance of the
Jall Staff. At the TI Parade the accused Moba Singh@Sanatomba Singh was identified by the
witness, namely Nongmaithem Megha Singh. The remaining 6 accused persons were not identified
by the witness, Nongmatthem Megha Singh.
P.W. No.15 was well cross examined and in his cross examination, he stated that he had given an
opportunity to the identified accused for explaining about the reason of his identification by the
witness and the accused replied that he was shown to the witness at the Imphal Police station on
26-6-89. P.W. No. 4 is the witness who identified accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh. Regarding the T.I.
Parade, P.W. No. 4 has deposed that after about half a month from the date of the occurrence he was
asked by the police to attend at the Jail Compound Imphal at about 9:30 A.M. for identification of
the accused persons. Accordingly, he went to the Imphal Jail compound and he identified one
person among the culprits as one who took part in assaulting the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh on the day of occurrence. The person who was identified is called R.K. Sanayaima and the said
person was identified by him in the third parade of test identification Held in the Imphal Jail. In the
cross examination P.W. No.4 denied the suggestions that he was taken to the Imphal P.S. on
26-6-89 by a Police Officer and one person was shown to him on that day and that the said Police
Officer asked him to identify that person during the T.I. Parade. The assertion of the accused
Sanatomba Singh of his being shown to the witness on 26-6-89 to the Imphal P.S. while he was in
the police custody is hard to believe there are 6 other co- accused persons with him and why only
him be shown to the P. W. No.4. Regarding the presence of the I.O. of the case on the day of
conducting T.I. Parade. PW. No.4 has stated that he went to the Central Jail along with the I.O. of
the case but the I.O. remained in open space of the Jail campus and thus, it shows that the I.O. was
not present at the time of conducting the T.I. Parade. Furthermore, the presence of the Jailor who
may be from Thangmeiband area or otherwise known to the witness is very much required for
assisting the T.I. parade as part of his duty being a Jailor. Moreover, it is evident from the records
that the T.I. Parade was conducted on 11-7-1989 that is after 17 days from the date of occurrence i.e.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 25
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
23-6-1989 and the prosecution did not explain the delay. The evidence of T.I Parade is, Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 25 however, only another supporting piece of evidence. The observation
made by the Hon'ble Gauhati High Court relied by the Ld. counsel of the accused persons is that
conviction based on solitary evidence of T.I. Parade is not safe.
In the cross examination of P.W.No.4, the Ld.defence counsel has asked a particular plea as "I also
deny the suggestion that the person whom identified in the TI parade was another person who
happened to be in jail at the relevant time in another case". The suggestion made by the Ld. defence
counsel to the P.W.No.4 clearly shows that the onus to prove that the accused identified at the TI
parade was in the fall in another case. The accused persons have not led any oral defence witnesses
which onus to prove lies on them. The non-production of defence witness strengthened the case of
the prosecution.
22. During the course of investigation some clothes were also recovered from the house of the
accused, Bodro Singh which was worn by him during the commission of crime, by preparing seizure
memo and P.W. No.24 is one of the seizure witnesses. P.W. No.24 has deposed that he is the Editor
of local News Paper "Kangleipaki Meira and he was a seizure witness at the time of seizing some
clothes produced by accused Bodo Singh and his brother Debajit Singh by preparing seizure memo,
Exts. P-45 and P-46. Ext. P-45 is the seizure memo for seizure of clothes produced by accused Bodo
Singh and Ext.- 46 is the seizure memo prepared for seizure of clothes of accused P. Joykumar Singh
produced by Salam Devendrajit Singh as the same were left by accused P. Joykumar Singh. P.W.
No.25 was the Assistant Editor of local daily News Paper 'Kangleipaki Meira' and he was another
witness to Ext. P 45. The witness admitted the seizure and his signature appearing at Ext. P-45 but,
he was declared as hostile witness since the witness states that hecannot say whether Bodo Singh or
Joykumar Singh were present at the time of seizure. P.W. No.26 is a seizure witness at the time of
seizing of some clothes on production by the accused R.K. Moba @ Sanatomba Singh by the I.O. of
the case in his presence and he put his signature to the seizure memo prepared by the I.O.,Ext.P-47.
Thus, because of that seizure of clothes of the accused Bodro Singh worn by him at the time of
committing crime on production by himself is relevant to the involvement of the accused to the
commission of crime. Further, seizure of the clothes won by accused Joykumar at the time of
commission on production by the brother of accused Bodro Singh as left by accused Joykumar Singh
is also very much relevant to the involvement of the accused P. Joykumar Singh to the commission
of crime.
23. Now, let us discuss the first point raised by the Ld. counsel of the accused persons that the FIR
was lodged after 14 hours and the prosecution did not explain such delay and renders the entire
prosecution story more unsafe to rely upon. In this regard Ld. counsel has also cited the case laws
reported in 2012 (2) GLT(SC) 5. Regarding Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 26 the object of
lodging of FIR, the Hon'ble Supreme in Jai Prakash Singh Vs. State of Bihar [2012 (3) Scale 484]
observed as follows in para 12:
"12. The FIR in criminal case is a vital and valuable piece of evidence though may not
be substantive piece of evidence. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 26
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
FIR in respect of the commission of an offence is to obtain early information
regarding the circumstances in which the crime was committed, the names of actual
culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of eyewitnesses present at
the scene of occurrence. If there is a delay in lodging the FIR, it looses the advantage
of spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of coloured version, exaggerated
account or concocted story as a result of large number of consultations/deliberations.
Undoubtedly, the promptness in lodging the FIR is an assurance regarding truth of
the informant's version. A promptly lodged FIR reflects the first hand account of
what has actually happened, and who was responsible for the offence in question."
Thus, if there is a delay in lodging the FIR, it looses the of spontaneity; danger creeps in of the
introduction of coloured advantage version, exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of
large number of consultations/deliberations. However, in the present case the father of the
deceased, P.W. No. 1 has stated in his report that his son was assaulted by 8 to 12 unknown persons
on the night of 23-6-1989 at about 2 am. to 2.30 am and as a result of the said assault his son was
declared dead at the Hospital. He did not name any person for assaulting to his son in his report and
thus, the question of colouring the report/version for making involvement of any of the accused
does not arise at all and thus, the question of doubt to the prosecution story for involving the
accused persons will also not arise at all. In the case law cited by the Id. counsel, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed only to the extent that unexplained delay in lodging of FIR and
circumstances under which ejahar was lodged cast doubt about prosecution story.
24. As per the post mortem report of the deceased it is evident that there were 20 external injuries to
the body of the deceased and the Doctor who conducted the post mortem has opined that the cause
of death in his opinion is due to head injuries fractures of skull bones and laceration of the brain.
Injury No. (viii) and (ix) were produced by sharp weapon; injury No. (x) and(xi) were produced by
pointed weapon and the rest of the injuries were produced by blunt weapon. The injuries are
homicidal in nature and ante mortem in nature. Therefore, the seized iron handle of JEEP, cane
stick, knife and wooden sticks/clubs are very much relevant with the said injuries which caused to
the death of P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh.
[10] But, the Ld. Trial Court without giving any specific observation/decision on solitary eyewitness
(direct evidence) jumped to the point of circumstantial evidence from Para No. 25 Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 27 onwards of the judgment and order, the Ld. Trial Court started to take focus
towards circumstantial evidence on the ground that the learned counsel for the accused person
contended that the prosecution based their case on circumstantial evidence. The portion of the Ld.
Trial Court's observation and narration are reproduced herein below:
"Thus, if there is a delay in lodging the FIR, it looses the advantage of spontaneity;
danger creeps in of the introduction of coloured exaggerated account or concocted
story as a result of large number of /deliberations. However, in consultations the
present case the father of the deceased, P.W. No. 1 has stated in his report that his
son was assaulted by 12 unknown persons on the night of 23-6-1989 at about 2 am to
2.30 am unit as a result of the said assault his son was declared dead at the Hospital.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 27
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
He did not name any person for assaulting to his son in his report and thus The
question of colouring the report/version for making involvement of any of the
accused does not arise at all and thus, the question of doubt to the prosecution story
for involving the accused persons will also not arise at all in the case law cited by the
Ld. counsel, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has deserved only to the extent that
unexplained delay in lodging of FIR and circumstances under which ejahar was
lodged cast doubt about prosecution story.
24. As per the post mortem report of the deceased it is evident that here were 20
external injuries to the body of the deceased and the Doctor who conducted the post
mortem has opined that the cause of death in his opinion is due to head injuries-
fractures of skull bones and laceration of the brain. Injury No. (viii) and (ix) were
produced by sharp weapon, injury No. (ix) and (x) were produced by pointed weapon
and the rest of the injuries were produced by blunt weapon. The injuries are
homicidal in nature and ante mortem in nature. Therefore, the seized iron handle of
JEEP, cane stick, knife and wooden sticks/clubs are very much relevant with the said
injuries which caused to the death of P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh.
25. Learned of the accused persons, Shri Ch. Biomol Singh Advocate has contended
that the prosecution based their case on circumstantial evidences and thus, the chain
of circumstance must be complete but the prosecution has failed to link the chain of
circumstance for involving the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 28 accused persons
in the present case. Ld. counsel has relied to The case laws reported in (i) 2008(3)
GLT 58,
(ii) 2007 (4) GLT 905 and (iii) 2007 (3) GLT 384(supra).
26. It is settled principle of law that in the circumstantial evidence the chain of
circumstance must be complete. In the light of the above appreciation of evidences, I
am of the opinion that the prosecution has able to establish the following facts:
(i) The deceased. P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was doing a contract work of
black topping of road on the Thangal Bazar from Khuyathong crossing to crossing
point of Jallan Provision Store and while doing the said work the deceased blocked all
kinds of vehicular traffics for executing his work properly and while doing so there
were instances of quarrel between the deceased and users of the road.
(ii) There was a quarrel between the deceased and accused, P. Joykumar Singh on
22-06-1989 while the accused Joykumar was prevented by the deceased to enter to
his Tyre Retreading shop and in that quarrel the deceased slapped to the accused P.
Joykumar Singh.
(iii) On 22-06-1989 the accused. P. Joykumar Singh along with one of his friends
came to the house of P.W. No. 16. N. Sidham Singh and enquired about the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 28
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
whereabouts of the deceased by narrating the story that he was slapped by the
deceased and P.W. No. 16 informed to the accused Joykumar Singh that the deceased
belonged to Thangmeiband Polem Leikai.
(iv) On 23-06-1989 at about 2.00 to 2.30 a.m. the deceased returned to his home
from his work shed along with P.W No.4 who hold a half lamp and on their way some
unknown persons attacked both of them by holding deadly weapons and left the place
of occurrence in a JEEP and P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh succumbed to his
injuries.
(v) On 23-06-1989, P.W. No. 16. N. Sidham Singh narrated the story of making
enquiry by accused no. 1, Joykumar Singh whereabouts of the deceased. P. Satyajit
alias Saryajit Kumar Singh, to the I.O. of the case and immediately the I.O.
of the case along with P.W. No. 16 proceeded to Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 29 the house of
accused No. 1 at Sagolband Salam Leikai.
(vi) The accused, Joykumar was not found in his house arid on enquiry a Jeep with blood stain in its
hood was found and the same was seized.
(vii) The accused persons were arrested by the Police on the night of 24-06-1989 on surrender.
(viii) During the course of investigation the statements of the accused persons, namely, (i) P.
Joykumar Singh and (ii) P. Dhananjoy Singh were recorded in presence of witnesses in which they
disclosed about commission of the crime along with other accused persons and the weapons of
crime used by them and for production of the same from the hiding place.
(ix) The weapons of crime were recovered from the hiding places at the instances of the accused
Joykumar Singh and Dhananjoy Singh.
(x) The clothes worn by the accused persons, namely S. Bodo Singh and P. Joykumar Singh at the
time of commission of crime were seized in presence of witnesses from the house of accused Bodo
Singh on production by the said accused Bodo Singh and his brother, Debendrajit Singh.
(xi) In the T.I. Parade the P.W. No.4 who was the eye witness to the scene of assaulting himself and
the decensed identified one of the accused persons, namely, R.K Sanatomba Singh who is no more
now.
27. On the basis of the above discussions and arrived at decisions am not agreeable with the defence
plea that the accused persons are innocent and not involved in the commission of crime and also not
agreeable that the prosecution has totally failed to prove the present case of murder by the accused
persons in prosecution of their common object which is attracted der section 149 IPC. The citations
submitted by the Lat. Counsel of the accused person cannot help the defence plea and the facts
contained therein are also distinguishable. I am satisfied that the Prosecution has able to prove the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 29
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
prosecution case.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 30
28. Thus, I am of the opinion that the prosecution has establishedthe complete chain of
circumstances for involvement of the accused persons in assaulting the deceased P. Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh by deadly weapons on 23-06-1989 at about 2.30 am. in prosecution of their
common obreer in order to revenge for slapping the accused no. 1, P. Joykumar Singh by the
deceased on 22.6.1989, thereby resulting the dead of the said Satyajitalias Satyajit Kumar Singh and
there is no missing link to the chain of circumstantial evidences.
It is a fact that the statements recorded under section 313 Cr.P.C. is not admissible under the law
but it can be seen the nature of the accused persons. The accused Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh has
admitted that he and his father were running a tyre retreat shop at Khuyathong Read Thangal Bazar
about 21/22 years ago from today. The accused was examined on 9/2/2012 by the court under
section 313 Cr.P.C. He also admitted that in front of his retreat shop one Nongmaithem Sidham
Singh of Nagamapal Phougeisangbam, Imphal (witness No. 10) was running a firewood shop/stall
along with his mother. But the accused Joykumar Singh has denied that he had well acquainted with
the said Sidham Singh. The accused has stated that he does not know the said Sidham Singh. The
accused has admitted that on or about 23.6.1989 a work of black topping between Khuyathong and
Thangal Bazar was done.
On careful perusal of the statement recorded under section 313 Cr.P.C. there is reason to believe that
he has not stated true facts regarding the acquaintance with P.W.No. 10 N.Sidham Singh but his
statement strengthened about the work of black topping from Khuyathong to Thangal Bazar where
he and his father were then running a tyre retreat shop in front of a firewood stall run by P.W. No.
10 N. Sidham Singh and his mother.
In the light of the foregoing observations, I am of the view that the prosecution has proved beyond
reasonable doubt that on 23-06-1989 about.2 am to 2.30 am. the accused persons namely (i)
Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh, (ii) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh, (iii) Pangajam Ramananda
Singh, (iv) Salam Bodro Singh/now deceased
(v) R.K. Saratomba Singh now deceased) and (vi) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh (now deceased) an
unlawful assembly in prosecution of their common object for revenging of slapping the accused. P.
Joykumar Singh by the deceased. P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh on 22-06-1989 assaultedthe
said P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh near the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba by using deadly
weapons such as, iron handle of Jeep, Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 31 wooden sticks, wooden
clubs and knife, thereby murdered the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh.
Situated thus, the present surviving accused persons, namely, (i) Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh of
Sagolband Meino Leirak (ii) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak and (iii)
Pongaijam Ramananda Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai are hereby nuncted under section 302 of
the Indian Penal Code read with section 149 of the same Code. The accused P. Joykumar is absent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 30
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
but his Counsel filed an application praying for dispense on the ground of illness by mclosing a
phopto copy of the OPD registration card of RIMS hospital. In the absence of the said P. Joykumar
Singh I have announced this order. The prayer for dispense cannot be treated as special
circumstances for his known appearance. Last occasion also absent on the ground of illness and
hence the prayer for dispensing with the personal appearance of the accused P. Joykumar Singh is
hereby turned down. Issue non-bailable warrant against the accused P. Joykumar Singh. His
personal bonds and surety bond are also hereby cancelled. The prosecution is to take step
immediately through the S.P. Imphal West.
The two convicts are taken into the custody of the court and hence they are to hand over to the
Superintendent, Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa to serve sentence. At the same time, their personal
bonds and surety bonds are also hereby cancelled from today. A police team of Imphal Police Station
is requisitioned and handed over them to escort upto the Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa. The
Superintendent of Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa is directed to produce the three convicts on
18.1.2018 at 11.00 a.m. for Sentence hearing. A copy of this order be sent to the S.P. Imphal West
along with warrant of arrest of the accused P. Joykumar Singh to execute the same and produce on
18.01-2018 or before without fail.
Furnish a copy of this order to the two convicts and also to the Superintendent of Manipur Central
Jail, Sajiwa for information and compliance of the order.
Announced in the Open court.
Signed and sealed of this Court on this 12th day of January 2018."
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 32 It has emerged that the Ld. Trial Court on appraisal of
evidence came to the finding that -
"The prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt that on 23.06.1989 at about 2
a.m. to 2.30 a.m. the accused persons namely, (i) Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh, (ii)
Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh, (iii) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh (iv) Salam Bodro
Singh (now deceased) (v) R.K. Sanatomba Singh (now deceased) and
(vi) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh (now deceased) an unlawful assembly in
prosecution of their common object for revenging of slapping the accused, P.
Joykumar Singh by the decased P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh on 22.06.1989
assaulted the said P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh near the Thangmeiband
Pukhri Achouba by using deadly weapons such as, iron handle of jeep, wooden sticks,
wooden clubs and knife, thereby murdered the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh."
Accordingly, the Ld. Trial Court convicted the surviving three accused persons i.e. (i) Pukhram
Joykumar Singh, (ii) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh and (iii) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh under
Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 149 of the same Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 31
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
[11] The learned Counsel for the State respondent submits that the prosecution relied its case on
both solitary eyewitness (direct evidence) as well as circumstantial evidence. The learned counsel for
the appellant submits that he relied on the submissions made in the Trial Court as well as the
grounds taken hereunder in the present jail appeal.
Both the learned counsel for the parties submit short written arguments in support of their cases
and same are reproduced herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 33
Written argument (Defence Cas)
"1. 23/6/1989 2:30 am - Date of occurrence
2. 23/6/1989-4.30 pm - FIR lodged by PW. 1
The maker himself says that
he lodged the FIR at 4.30 pm.
3. 24/6/1989 - Accused surrendered
(allegation)
Nothing on record goes to
show that the accused
surrendered on 24/6/1989.
PW 36 categorically stated
that at about 9.30 pm on
24/6/1989 S. Lakhikanta gave
the phone call. Thereafter
accused surrendered.
PW 36 stated that, Joykumar,
Ramananda, Basanta and
Nabachandra were arrested
from Uripok on surrender on
24/6/1989.
Page No.
If the surrender theory is to be
believed then there cannot be
discovery at the instance of
the accused at 3.15 pm on
24/6/1989 u/s 27 IE Act.
Seizure memo page 331 =
page 331
And if the seizure is to be
believed then there is no
surrender.
The I.O. (O/C) is not very sure
when actually the accused
were arrested. As such the
I.O. (O/C) in fact has given
wrong version in order to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 32
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
falsely implicate the appellants
herein.
4. 29/6/1989 - Discovery made at the
instance of Dhananjoy -
Dhananjoy expiredduring
TRIAL.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 34
5. 14/06/1999 - Charge were framed under
one head clubbing both the
sections together 302/149.
The place of alleged assembly
not mentioned and inflicting/
causing bodily injury by deadly
weapons not mentioned in the
charge. The place of
occurrence is also not
mentioned.
Charge was framed for killing
Th. Seityajit not P.
Seityajit @ Satyajit
(Charge is defective and
suffers from inherent defects)
6. Confession of the main accused -
Hit by section 25 and 26 of IE
Act
Ext. P-13 page 328-330
PW 33 - A Bebe is an
interested witness not even a
chance witness.
Confessional statement being
given in the police custody is
not admissible under section
25 of the IE Act.
7. Injury of Megha -
He himself said that there was
no notable injury it needs to
be established that the injury
of Megha was caused by the
member of unlawful assembly
where the appellants were
member.
8. The evidence of PW 4 does not inspire confidence for the reason that in many instance he changes
his version.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 33
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
9. TEST IDENTIFICATION PERIOD:
Only one person namely, R.K. Sanatomba identified but PW 4 failed to identify him
on 29/7/2000 in the Court (on 29/7/2000 R.K. Sanatomba was present before the
court) R.K. Sanatomba expired during the Trial.
10. Assuming that weapons discovered is admissible under section 27 of IE Act - the weapons so
seized should be connected with the crime.
i. The Serological report is in favour of the accused.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 35 ii. Where the materials were seized there was no blood stained
on the weapons.
iii. Weapons were not sealed and packed at the time of seizure.
11. The PW.... has categorically stated that the weapons were handed over to the police by their
family members in his presence. (the PW... was not declared hostile on his re- examination he again
affirm his statementleading questions during re-examination by the prosecution not permitted and
the same is inadmissible)
12. PW 17 - L. Jadumani - the prosecution is relying on the statement of Judumani as regard to the
incident on 22/6/1989 coming across some three young persons in angry mood who were assaulted
by Seityajit and one of them was assaulted by Seityajit but the three persons were not the persons
present in the Court. Jadumani did not hear any alarm eventhough he was awake. He did not see
PW4 in the spot and did not accompany the deceased in the hospital.
13. PW 18 - On cross the witness has stated that he heard it from somebody that Sahajan was
assaulted by Seityajit. It is just hearsay.(As such no reliance can be given to both the witnesses so far
the assault of Sahajahan or Seityajit is concerned).
The case of the prosecution-
On 23/6/1989 at around 2.30 am when PW 4 and deceased Seityajit while returning home they
were assaulted by a group of 8/9 people using lethal weapons like heavy iron rods, sharp draggers
clubs etc. causing serious multiple injuries after the assault they fled in a jeep which did not have
any number marking both in front and behind (PW 4 however,stated he did not see the registration
number as it was dark however, he again stated that there was light an electric bulb) On 23/6/1989
the jeep was seized at 11.50 am there was blood stain in the hood - jeep did not have registration no.
The accused surrendered on 24/06/1989 at around 9.30 pm. There was an injury mark a bruise on
the face Ramananda. He was medically examined. On 24/6/1989 at3.15 pm weapons were recovered
at the instance of Joykumar u/s 27 of the IE Act and hence the case is established.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 34
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
The prosecution is suspecting the accused as he was slapped by deceased on 22/6/1989 and further
trying to prove the case only on the ground that the accused surrendered before the police. And as
Joykumar was slapped he might have committed the crime. However, there is no clinching evidence.
The prosecution is also trying to prove that as the accused came for amicable settlement on
22/6/1989 with Sidham PW 16 the accused might have assaulted the deceased. And there is one eye
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 36 witness in the case namely, PW 4 who saw the occurrence and
he himself was assaulted.
The prosecution is also suspecting the accused because a jeep was seized and there was small blood
stains in thehood of jeep.
On these grounds the prosecution claimed that the case is established beyond all reasonable doubts.
A criminal case cannot be founded on mere surmises and conjectures assuming that the accused
Joykumar was slapped by Seityajit on 22/6/1989 which is still denied by the appellant. However,
taking into account of the deposition of PW 16 Sidham the appellant came for amicable settlement
as such the ingredients of 'Mens Rea' is missing and as such no motive is established in the said
case.
On the other hand the deceased is very quarrelsome and as such there are chances that somebody
might have assaulted him.
As per the version of PW 4 some 8/9 persons attacked/assaulted Seityajit in the dark night even he
was assaulted PW 4 is the only eye witness in the incident - this sole witness cannot be relied upon
for the reason following reasons:
He withhold the information till 3 pm. Only thereafter FIR was filed at 4.30 pm on
23/6/1989 which is substantiated by PW 1 the maker of FIR as well as by SI Helio
Mao PW 34 who had admitted that when the FIR was registered it was written as
4.30 pm and subsequently it was over written as 4.30 am.
If the FIR is to be treated having filed at 4.30 am then the FIR is ante dated because
the same has been filed after seizure of the jeep and inquest. In that case no reliance
can be put to the FIR having been registered and ante dated the same can be treated
as false and fabricated.
As the I.O. Helio Mao has specifically mentioned that maker of the FIR was examined
by him and he was accompanied by another person and on the other hand he had
stated that subsequently the time 4.30 pm is subsequently changed to 4.30 am.
However, the maker of FIR PW 1 had categorically stated that it was filed only after
he was informed by N. Megha PW- 4 at 3 pm on 23/6/1989.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 35
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
And if the FIR is filed at 4.30 pm the delay is deliberate and the same is after thought
and the same cannot be the basis of investigation.
A jeep was seized from the campus of Sri Joykumar. The jeep belongs to Akasini - it is
alleged that there were 3 small blood stain in the jeep - the blood stain were sent for
serological test-blood was found to be disintegrated. The investigation also made no
attempt to Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 37 connect the jeep with the crime. It is
also not proved that the said jeep was involved in the commission of said crime.
After seizure of the jeep FIR was filed at 4.30 pm mentioning that there was no
registration number in the jeep: (However, PW 4 stated he could not see the
registration number as it was dark). It only goes to show that FIR was filed after
seizure of the jeep with fabricated story.
PW 36 had stated that u/s 27 of IE Act, the alleged crime weapons were recovered
from the residence of appellant. However, the prosecution is not very clear when
actually the accused were arrested. When the crime weapons were seized u/s 27 IE
Act on 24/6/1989 at 3.15 the accused were not actually arrested. The I.O. OC (IPS)
have categorically stated that they surrendered on 24/6/1989 after a phone call from
S. Lakhikanta at 9.30 pm. In the event if seizure u/s 27 IE Act is to be believed then
there is no surrender and if there were surrender the seizure u/s 27 IE Act is wrong
and the same has to be discarded and not admissible. The prosecution story is with
lots of major discrepancies and the same cannot be relied upon.
So far the injury of Ramanada (the bruise mark of Ramananda) is concerned the prosecution first
need to establish the unlawful assembly of the appellants in the place of occurrence. The unlawful
assembly is not established. No prosecution witnesses have led any evidence so far the unlawful
assembly is concerned. The Unlawful assembly having not been proved the injury even if proved
cannot be connected with the crime. The participation of all the appellants needs to be proved by
cogent and clear evidence.
All the materials seized were sent for FSL but cannot be connected with the crime.
The circumstances placed by the prosecution is not established and proved.
1. Motive is not established.
2. Unlawful assembly not established.
3. Seized jeep not connected with the incident.
4. Seized weapons not connected with the crime.
5. TIP not substantive piece of evidence as the PW 4 failed to identify in the court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 36
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
6. Surrender (surrender does not amount to admission of guilt) even cannot be relied as the same is
said to be done by the I.O. on 24/6/1989 after the arrest of the accused.
7. Seizure u/s 27 also cannot be relied if they have not been arrested on 24/6/1989 till 9.30 pm as
the seizure is shown at 3.15 pm before the surrender.
Moreover, as per the version of PW 22 has stated that the items alleged to have been seized u/s 27 of
the evidence Act were produced by his wife and daughter and alleged iron handle of the jeep Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 38 was collected from his workshop. As such, the seized materials u/s 27
is all not admissible and as such the prosecution version is not reliable.
So far the FSL report is concerned the result does not support the prosecution case. The weapons
and other materials seized cannot be connected with the crime. And as such the prosecution has
failed to establish the case beyond all reasonable doubts.
No incriminating questions and circumstances were put to the accused to explain the incriminating
events the questions put under s. 313 does not even suggest that accused committed the crime. No
PW/evidence collected/ placed had even remotely connected the appellants in the instant crime. As
the chains are broken, the prosecution has miserably failed. So the accused are liable to be acquitted.
The question was not put to Ramananda giving him an opportunity to explain if the injury inflicted
or caused in the particular crime.
No evidence witness had categorically proved that the said injury is caused in the commission of the
crime.
No evidence had categorically proved that or led to prove that there was an unlawful assembly
wherein the appellants were the members of the unlawful assembly.
Having not proved the unlawful assembly with the membership of the appellants the appellants
cannot be linked with the crime. As such the prosecution has failed to establish the case.
Written argument on behalf of the Appellants:
1. That, the case of the prosecution is that on 23-06-1989 at around 2:30 a.m. the
incident took place. The prosecution examined 36 witness as prosecution witnesses
and two witness deposed as court witness.
2. That, by impugned Judgment and order dated 12-01-2018, all the appellantshave
been convicted and punished to undergo sentence for life.
3. PW No. 4 namely N. Megha Singh is the one who accompanied the deceased on the
ill-fated night. Apart from the PW No. 4 there were no other eye witness who witness
the alleged incident. (Page No.103-114)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 37
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
4. PW. No. 4 have not reported the incident to anyone except the father of the
deceased who is PW No. 1. And PW No. 1 is the informant (Page No. 99-100) Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 39
5. The FIR was lodged by the PW No. 1 on being informed by PW No. 4 at around
3:00 p.m. on 23-06-1989 and the said FIR was registered at 4:30 p.m. on 23-06-
1989. (Page No. 99-100)
6. In the FIR the time of registration is 4:30 p.m. However, the same has been altered
by over-writing as 4:30 a.m. PW No. 35 who was the 1st IO had categorically stated
about the alteration in his cross examination. (Page No: 190.)
7. TIP was done on 11-07-1989 and on the 3rd round of the TIP.
PW No. 4 identified one person but during his deposition he said that the said person is not present
in the court room. The real and substantive evidence of the identity of the accused comes when
witnesses give statement in the court, identifying the accused. But in the instant case identification
has failed.
8. That, it has come on evidence that PW No. 4 spent considerable amount of time with the police
after he witnessed the commission of crime, however, he narrated the commission of crime only to
PW No. 1 at around 3 PM on 23/06/89. Such information was not given to anyone including the
police while he was in the hospital accompanying the deceased.
9. It is also in the evidence that PW No. 4, that he met two police officers at the Hospital, however,
he didn't inform about the incident nor was asked by the police officers even though he was wearing
blood stained shirts and pants. His blood stain shirt and pants were never seized by the police.
10. While PW No. 4 was in the Hospital he was picked up by the police personnel and took him to
his house where the police seized the half lantern from his production but not the blood stain cloths
he was wearing nor any question was asked in this regard by the police.
11. PW. 4's failure to make a report to the family members and to the police even though he was with
the company of the police during the inquest, during the production of the half lantern, and during
the examination of his injury allegedly caused when he tried to intervened during the commission of
the crime tend to show that PW. 4 is not a reliable witness.
12. That, PW No. 17 Y. Jadumani Singh who had dinner together along with PW No. 4 and the
deceased on the night at khola has stated that after having meal at khola he came back home and
while he was about to take bath 2(two) labourer from the contract work informed him, that Seityajit
have been assaulted by some unknown person.
13. PW 17 stays on the other side of the pond (northern side)and he did not hear any alarm, he also
stated he did not see PW No. 4 Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 40 amongst the crowd where
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 38
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Seityajit was lying not even a single person from the crowd have been examined by the prosecution.
He also stated that 3(three) young person were assaulted by the deceased the previous day when
they were engaged in the contract work and they were in angry mood but during his deposition
before the court he stated he cannot now remember the persons.
14. That, in the instant case there were 2(two) IOs, the 1st I.O. was PW No. 35 Heli Mao who was
entrusted to investigate the matter on 23-06-1989. He has affirmed that the timing of the FIR was
changed from 4:30 p.m. to 4:30 a.m. and even in the seizure alteration of timing was there.
15. As per the version of PW No. 16 he visited the house of appellant along with SI Sarojkumar on
the morning on 23-06-1989 and seized the jeep from the residence of the appellant No. 1. But the
jeep does not belong to the appellant No. 1 and on the other hand the jeep surfaced for the first time
in the FIR filed at 4:30 p.m. on 23-06-1989. It is also in the record that PW No. 1 have categorically
stated that he was informed about the incident by PW No. 4 at around 3:00 p.m. on 23-06-1989, the
filing of the FIR at 4:30 p.m. It is also evident from the fact that the FIR was not forwarded to the
magistrate U/s 157 Cr.P.C on 23-06-1989. Had the FIR been filed at 4:30 am.the same ought to have
been dispatch on the same day and moreover there is nothing to show when the FIR was actually
dispatch from the police station. (Page No.1).
16. Till the filing of FIR at 4:30 p.m. nobody was aware of the events stated in the FIR. Not even a
single person who were present at the place of incident before the deceased was evacuated to the
hospital were examined by the prosecution or made witness by the investigating agency as such it
can be presumed that the FIR was filed after PW No. 16 and the 2nd I.O. visited the residence of the
appellant No. 1 and as such the OE is after thought.
17. There is also no explanation as to why SI Sarojkumar visited the house of deceased before he was
entrusted to be the I.O. of the case and under what authority and direction he visited the house of
the deceased and after his visit he was made the I.O. of the case on the same before noon on
23-06-1989.
18. The alleged weapons collected during the investigation as well on the disclosure made by the
appellant No. 1 cannot be connected with crime as per the FSL report.
19. If the FIR had been filed at 4:30 p.m. then the seizure of the jeep is ante FIR including the other
seizures made on 23-06- 1989.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 41
20. On the basis of the evidence produced by the prosecution there are major discrepancies and the
chain of events of the crime is not complete and the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the
case beyond all reasonable doubts as such the appellants are liable to be acquitted and set at liberty
forthwith. Written Submission on behalf of the State:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 39
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
1. The brief fact of the case is that on 23.6.1989 the complainant P. Indrajit Singh,
S/O (Late) P. Ibohal Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai, Imphal West lodged a
written report to the Imphal Police Station stating that on 23.06.1989 at about 2.30
a.m. while his son Polem Satyajitkumar @ Satyajit Singh was returning home with
his friend Nongmaithem Megha Singh from their "Kholla" (work shed) about 8 to 12
unknown young men who came out of the dark just near the south western corner of
Khuyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal assaulted his son by using deadly weapons like
iron rod, sharp weapons and clubs etc. causing profuse bleeding injuries on the face,
forehead, nose and skull etc. The culprits escaped in a numberless jeep. His son was
hospitalized at the RMC hospital where he succumbed to his injuries and was
declared dead at 3.30 am. The case was registered as FIR No. 384 (6)89 IPS, U/s 302
r/w 34 IPC and investigated by the Imphal Police Station.
2. Upon investigation it was found that the accused persons had committed the crime
in prosecution of the common object to beat the said Satyajit (deceased victim) in
revenge to a previous assault by the deceased to the main accused Sahajahan. The
fatal blow was made by the accused R.K. Sanatomba @ Moba who held the iron
handle thereby causing fracture on the skull, forehead and nasal bones which caused
the death of the victim.
The accused Sahajahan admitted that he had stabbed on both legs of the victim. Accused S. Bodro
Singh admitted that he had assaulted the victim with a bold headed cane stick. Accused Dhananjoy
Singh used a wooden club and admitted he assaulted the victim. Accused Basanta admitted to have
threatened the eyewitness Megha Singh not to struggle or shout. Accused Ramananda made his first
assault to the victim by holding him down and gave hard blows on his face. (Paper Book page 209-
210)
3. The weapons of offence were found to be as follows as noted in page 337 to 339 and 384 of the
Paper Book:
(i) One electroplated solid iron rod (commonly known as handle) having two bents at
right angle its one end; the other being a hollow device with an average diameter of
1.95 cm. This type of rod is commonly used for starting the engine of a vehicle.
(ii) One cane stick measuring 78.5 cm in length. It is club shaped at one end.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 42
(iii) One sharp knife the pointed blade measuring 13.7 cm in
length.
(iv) A long piece of wood measuring 87.5 cm in length.
The said weapons of offence were recovered u/s 27 of the Indian Evidence Act at the instance of the
accused Sahajahan.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 40
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
4. After completion of the investigation the following 6 (six) accused were sent up for trial:
(i) P. Joykumar Singh
(ii) Th. Basanta Singh
(iii) P.Ramananda Singh
(iv) S. Bidro Singh
(v) R.K, Sanatomba
(vi) A.Dhananjoy Singh
The accused persons at Sl. No. (i) to (iii) have been convicted to undergo sentence for life. The
accused persons at Sl. No. (iv) to (vi) died during the Course of the trial.
5. The following dates and events may please be taken note of (1) 23.06.1989 Date of incident.
at 2.30 a.m. Thereafter at 3.30 am. Seityajit (the victim) was declared dead at RMC Hospital (2)
24.06.1989 Accused persons surrendered and crime at 3.15. pm weapons were recovered at the
instance of accused persons in presence of witnesses U/s 27 Evidence Act (3) 31.07.1998 Charge
sheet received by the CJM Imphal (4) 05.04.1999 Case committed by the CJM to the Ld. Sessions
Judge, Imphal West (5) 14.06.1999 Charge framed u/s 302 read with S.149 IPC against 6 accused
persons (6) 12.01.2018 Judgment announced convicting 3 accused persons
(i) P.Joykumar @ Sahajahan
(ii) Kh.Basanta Singh
(iii) P. Ramananda Singh (7) 18.01.2018 Sentence order passed. The three accused sentenced to life
and fine of Rs. 10,000/-
each (8) 26.02.2018 Cril. Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 filed by the accused.
6. The victim was a Regular football player of NISA (Paper Book p.
147) and was a National Football Gaolkeeper (Paper Book P.92). Although a professional Footballer,
he had no regular job and at the relevant time the victim was carrying out work of Black topping of
the Road between Khoyathong and Thangal Bazar as a contractor. The road was blocked to carry out
the black topping Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 43 and there was an incident of argument
between the deceased and the accused Sahajan arguing about the way and the deceased had slapped
the accused in the heat of the moment. It is in the evidence that the said accused had approached
one Sidham Singh (PW 16) for an amicable settlement between the deceased and the said accused.
The deceased was the lone son of his family and the fateful incident happened only a few meters
from his residence.
7. That after appreciating all the evidence on record the Ld. Addl.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 41
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Sessions Judge came to the conclusion that the chain of circumstances has been fully proved by the
prosecution to establish the following facts: (Paper Book page 276, part of the Judgment)
(i) That the deceased P.Satyajit @ Satyajit Kumar Singh was doing a contract work of black topping
of road on the Thangal Bazar from Khuyathong crossing to crossing point of Jallan Provision Store
and while doing the said work the deceased blocked all kinds of vehicular traffic for for executing his
work properly and while doing so there were instances of quarrel between the deceased and users of
the road.
(ii) There was a quarrel between the deceased and accused P. Joykumar Singh on 22.06.1989 while
the accused Joykumar was prevented by the deceased to enter into his tyre retreading shop and in
that quarrel the deceased slapped the accused P. Joykumar Singh.
(iii) On 22.06.1989 the accused Joykumar Singh along with one of his friend came to the house of
PW No. 16 N.Sidham Singh and enquired about the whereabouts of deceased by narrating the story
that he was slapped by the deceased and PW 16 informed the accused Joykumar Singh that the
deceased belong to Thangmeiband Polem Leikai.
(iv) On 23.06.1989 at about 2 a.m. to 2.30 a.m. the deceased returned home from his work shed
along with PW No.4 who was holding a Half lamp and on their way some unknown persons attacked
both of them by holding deadly weapons and the said assailants left the place of occurrence in a Jeep
and P. Satyajit @ Satyajit Kumar Singh succumbed to his injuries.
(v) On 23.06.1989 PW No. 16 N. Sidham Singh narrated the story of making enquiry by accused
No.1 Joykumar Singh whereabouts of the deceased P. Satyajit Singh to the 1.0. of the case and
immediately the I.O. of the along with PW No. 16 proceeded to the house of the accused. The
accused Joykumar was not found at his house and on enquiry a Jeep with blood stains in its hood
was found and the same was seized.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 44
(vi) The accused persons were arrested by the Police in the night
of 24.06.1989 on surrender.
(vii) During the course of investigation the statements of the
accused persons, namely, (i) P. Joykumar Singh and (ii) P. Dhananjoy Singh were recorded in
presence of witnesses in which they disclosed about the commission of the crime along with other
accused persons and the weapons of crime used by them and for production of the same from the
hiding place.
(viii) The weapons of crime were recovered from the hiding places at the instances of accused
Joykumar Singh and Dhananjoy Singh.
(ix) The clothes worn by the accused persons, namely, S. Bodo Singh and P. Joykumar Singh at the
time of the commission of the crime were seized in presence of witnesses from the house of the
accused Bodo Singh on production by the said accused Bodo Singh and his brother Debendrajit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 42
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Singh.
(x) In the T.I parade PW No. 4 who was the eye witness to the scene of assault identified one of the
accused persons, namely R.K. Sanatomba Singh.
8. For coming to the conclusion that the prosecution has proved the guilt of the accused persons
beyond reasonable doubt the Ld. Trial court took note of testimonies, documentary and material
evidence as follows:
(i) (page 255 to 260 of Paper Book, part of the judgment) "The testimonies of PW No. 4 regarding
the assaulting of himself and the deceased P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh in the early
morning at about 2.30 a.m. of 23.06.1989 while they were returning home by some unknown
persons and causing of death of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh due to the said assault could not
be shaken in the cross examination rather more strengthen the cross examination of PW No.4. The
oral testimony of PW No.4 has shown a clear picture for believing such incident to exist and
considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of this
particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists." (page 260 Paper Book).
(ii) The deposition of PW No. 16 Nongmaithem Sidham Singh that he was approached by the
accused P. Joykumar Singh for amicable settlement of the quarrel between him and the deceased.
(Paper Book Page 260 to 262) Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 45
(iii) The deposition of PW 36, the then Officer-in-
Charge of Imphal P.S. at the time of arrest of the said accused persons there was a bruise mark at
the lower forehead of the right eyelid of the accused Ramananda Singh which was found injured
during the fight with the deceased. (Paper Book page 263)
(iv) The statement of the accused P. Joykumar Singh during investigation wherein he admitted that
he along with his friends assaulted the deceased with deadly weapons such as cane stick, iron handle
of Jeep and knife and that they immediately left the place of occurrence in a Jeep. (Paper Book page
263-264)
(v) The Statement of the accused P. Joykumar during investigation wherein he stated that he held
the knife, R.K. Moba Singh held the Jeep handle, one cane stick was held by Ramananda and
another stick by Pukhrambam Dhananjoy, that Ramananda Singh assaulted the deceased first with
his stick but the person escaped the blow and Ramananda gave a hand blow on his right eye causing
bleeding injury on lower portion. Then Bodo used his stick and hit him so hard that the deceased fell
down.
That Joykumar stabbed the deceased on both his thigh 2/3 times. (Paper Book page 265)
(vi) In the Test Identification parade PW No. 4 N. Megha Singh who was the eyewitness identified
the accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh. (Paper Book Page 270)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 43
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(vii) Regarding the FIR it has been noted that the father of the deceased stated in his report that his
son was assaulted by some 8 to 12 unknown persons in the night of 23.6.1989 at about 2 a.m. to 2.30
a.m. and as a result of the said assault his son was declared dead at the Hospital. He did not name
any person for assaulting his son in his report and thus the question of colouring the report/version
for involving any of the accused does not arise. (Paper Book page 275)
(viii) As per the Post Mortem Examination report the deceased suffered 20 external injuries. The
Doctor who conducted the Post Mortem Examination opined that the injuries are homicidal in
nature. The cause of death has been due to head injuries, fracture of the skull bones and laceration
of the brain. (Page 275 Paper Book) Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 46
9. The Ld. Trial Court also took note of the following decisions:
Yogesh Singh vs Mahabeer Singh (Criminal Appeal No. 1482 of 2013) wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court at Para 29 held that minor discrepancies are not to be given
undue emphasis and evidence is to be considered from the point of view of
trustworthiness. Another case being Shankar vs State of Karnataka AIR 2011SC2302
at para 17 wherein it was held that in criminal case, normal discrepancies are bound
to occur in depositions of witnesses due to normal errors of observation namely
errors of memory due to lapse of time or due to mental disposition such as shock and
horror at the time of occurrence. (Page 222 of Paper Book)
10. The Ld. Trial Court has rightly convicted the accused persons and the judgment and sentence
deserves to be upheld in the interest of Justice.
Perused the rival contentions made in the written arguments of the parties. As the Ld. Trial Court
heard both the learned counsels presenting their respective arguments and thereafter, the Ld. Trial
Court passed the impugned order, we would not go and discuss in details of the rival contentions
but, we will decide the case giving due emphasis to the judgment of the Ld. Trial Court by relying on
our analysis, assessment and reasoning arrived at after discussing the materials placed before us
and the statements of the P.Ws. of which, which will be placed herein below.
In the light of these materials, we shall now have to examine the statements/depositions of the
witnesses produced before the Court as to whether the State respondent proved their case beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused committed the crime resulting to the death of the deceased
Seityajit Singh and whether the appellants claimed of their innocence in the present Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 47 case and whether there is ground for setting aside the judgment and order
dated 12.01.2018 of the Ld. Trial Court and for just decision as to find out the above mentioned
proposition of law. We will now go into the depositions of the witnesses. We will do our analysis of
the depositions and give our reasonings on the depositions of the statements of the witnesses and we
will rely upon it while deciding the case.
The Ld. Trial Courtdid discuss the solitary eyewitness as well as circumstantial evidencesthough the
Ld. Trial Court finally disposed of the case by convicting the accused on circumstantial evidences
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 44
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
and the Ld. PP also in his submission submitted that the prosecution relied on both solitary
eyewitness (direct evidence) as well as on circumstantial evidences.
[12] In the circumstances for just decisions, this Court, as a first appellate Court, need to re-examine
the entire evidences on the facts as well as the law points giving due consideration to the findings
arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, as this Court needs to re-
appreciate, re-analyse, re-assess and re-reasoning of the evidences placed before us, as it is intrinsic
in (2007) 4 SCC 415 [Chandrappa V. State of Karnataka], the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed -
"(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 48
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation,
restriction or condition on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the
evidence before it may reach its own conclusion, both on questions of facts and of
law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling reasons", "good and
sufficient grounds", "very strong circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring
mistakes", etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate Court in
an appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes
of language" to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with
acquittal than to curtal the power of the court to reviews the evidence and to come to
its own conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused.
Firstly, the presumption of innocence is available to him under the fundamental principle of
criminal of jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved
guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the
presumption of his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate
court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."
[13] For easy reference, we extracted the complaint petition (original ejahar) made by the
complainantthe father of the deceased to the OC, Imphal Police Station (Ext.P-1)herein below:
"To The Officer-in-charge, Imphal Police Station - Imphal Subject: Report of assault
and murder.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 45
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Sir, With due respect and honour I beg to state the following few lines for favour of
your kind and necessary stringent action.
That on the night of 23.06.89 at about 2.30 am about 8 to 12 (eight to twelf)
unknown persons suddenly came out of the dark on the road near the South western
side of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba of Polem Leikai, Thangmeiband Imphal and had
physically assaulted my son P. Satyajit Kumar Singh alias Satyajit aged about 36 yrs
with lethal Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 49 weapons like heavy iron rods, sharp
daggers, clubs etc. causing serious multiple injuries to the face, nose, forehead, skull,
both legs etc. all with profuse bleeding while he was returning home from his so
called Khollah which stands on the Eastern side of the said Pukhri achouba along
with one nongmaithem Megha Singh aged about 37 yrs S/o N. Birsing of Khoyathong
Pukhri achouba Mapal. During the said attack and assault, Megha was also beaten
and threatened with life if shouted or struggled.
After the attack, the culprits and murderers escaped in a jeep which did not have any
number marking both in front and behind or rear.
My son was then rushed to the RMC Hospital with the help of local people at about
2.50 am and there he was declared dead at 3.30 am.
In this connection, I as a broken hunted father of my only son humbly request your
goodself to take appropriate stringent action by arresting the cold blooded murderers
and their conspirators for immediate necessary action.
Thanking you, Yours' faithfully, Sd/-
(P. INDRAJIT SINGH) S/o (Late) P. Ibohal Singh 56 yrs.
Thangmeiband Polem Leikai P.O. Imphal, Manipur Dated, Imphal, The 23rd June,
1989"
[14] The prosecution produced as many as 36 (thirtysix) witnesses in support of their case and
exhibited as many as 72 (seventy two) documents and articles, 10 (ten) material objectsthe oral
evidences of the prosecution witnesses are reproduced, re-
analaysed, re-assessed and re-reasoning of the deposition of the witnesses,we will do our analysis of
the depositions and give our reasonings on the depositions of the statements of the witnesses Cril
Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 50 and we will rely upon it while deciding the case and the same are
reproducedherein below.
Now, the question arises as to whether the decision of the Ld. Trial Court after taking into
consideration of the materials placed before him convicted the accused under Section 302 & 149 IPC
was the decision made as per the provision of law or not.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 46
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
ORAL EVIDENCE ON RECORD:
We shall now look into the deposition of P.W. No. 1 (Polem Indrajit Singh) and we
shall also analyse the statement and reassess with our reasoning. In his deposition,
he has deposed as under:
Statement of P.W. No. 1:
"I know the deceased Satyajit Singh. He is my son. He was killed by some unknown
person about 10 years ago.
2. On 23.06.1989 in the night at about 2 A.M. while I was in the bed one unknown
person came to our house and he awaken our family members by calling Iteima,
Iteima. At that time, I was not fully sleep as I was suffering from diabetis. The door
was opened by my daughter. The unknown boy stated that he was coming from the
Kholla of my deceased so Satyajit Singh. He further stated that Tamo Satyajit Singh
was lying on the road near the south-western side of the Koyathong Pukhri Achouba
Mapal with bleeding injuries as assaulted by some unknown persons. On getting the
said information my daughter Kh. Bobo Devi rushed immediately to the place of the
occurrence. The behavior of my daughter Bobo Devi is like that of man/boy. So we
called her a Bobo. By that time there was no male member in our house except
myself. The family members present at that time were my daughter Bobo Devi and
other 5 sisters of Bobo Devi, my wife and my daughter-in-law Smt. Chaoba Devi wife
of late Satyajit Singh.
3. After a few minutes I also went to the place of occurrence but I did not find my son
Satyajit Singh in the said place of occurrence.
The distance between the place of the occurrence and my house is about 3 electric posts. On my
enquiry I came to know that my deceased son Satyajit Singh was taken to R.M.C. Hospital by a Tata
Truck belonging to one Kumar Singh who is my relative. I left the place of occurrence and went to
my home for taking my bicycle. I went to Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 51 the RMC Hospital by
my cycle. On the way to RMC I met my daughter Kumari Bobo Devi at Thangmeiband Thingel near
the house of Ex- Commissioner of Imphal Municipality Shri L. Biramani Singh and she told me that
my deceased son Satyajit Singh was no more. On getting the said shocking news I came back to my
house without going to the RIMS Hospital. At about 1 p.m. of the said day he was brought to our
house after examination of the post mortem and cremation was performed according to our custom.
At about 3 p.m. of the said day Shri Nongmaithem Megha Singh (P.W. No. 4) told me that the
deceased Satyajit Singh was assaulted by unknown persons numbering about 10 to 12 at the
south-western side of the Thangmeiband Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal with deadly weapon
like daos, iron rods, sticks, club etc. As a result of their assault my son Satyajit Singh got bleeding
injuries on head, face, legs and eyes. He was lying on the floor with bleeding injuries.He further
stated that he was also assaulted and threatened his life by the accused persons if he made any
alarm about the occurrence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 47
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
4. On getting the said information I lodged a written report to the O/C, Imphal Police Station about
the occurrence. The said written report was written by one boy of our locality at my home but I do
not know the name of the person who wrote the said written report due to the lapse of time. The said
report was written by the said person on my dictation. I did not go to the police station at the time of
the lodging the said complaint petition to the police station. I sent one person to the police station
along with my written report. Ext.P/1 is the said written report and Ext.P/1 is my signature on the
said Ext.P/1.
5. I deny the suggestion that my son was a quarrelsome one but he was a courageous man. I deny the
suggestion that my said report marked Ext.P/1 is a fabricated document." Our analysis, observation
and reasoning -
As seen in the above deposition, the witness, in his examination-in-chief, deposed that at about 3.00
pm of the said dayi.e. 23.06.1989 (emphasis given), Shri N. Megha Singh (P.W. No. 4) informed him
about the assault meted out to his son (the deceased) by unknown persons numbering about 10 - 12,
as a result of the assault,his son got bleeding injuries on his head, face, legs and eyes. On getting
information from the said N. Megha Singh(P.W. No. 4/solitary eyewitness), at 3:00 p.m.,he lodged a
report/complaint to the O.C. Imphal Police Station about the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 52
occurrence at 4:00 p.m. and the said report was written by one boy of his locality at his home and
further said that he could not remember the name of the said boy due to lapse of time. The said
report was written on his dictation. Further, it is stated that he did not go to the police station at the
time of lodging the said complaint. But, he sent a person to the police station to file the said
complaint.This statement is contradictory to the statement of P.W. No. 35 who was the first I.O. of
the case. The P.W. No. 35 stated in his deposition before the Court that the complainant (the present
witness) was physically present before him when the complainant (the present witness) came to file
the complaint in the police station and he recorded the statement of the complainant.
For the sake of brevity and to save time, only operative portion of the statement of the P.W. No. 2,
Shri Polem Shyamkumar Singh&P.W. No. 3, Soibam Dhaneshwor Singh are reproduced herein
below as they are the inquest witnesses:
P.W. No. 2 Shri Polem Shyamkumar Singh who was the witness of the said inquest
made by the police officer on the dead body-
P.W. No. 2 has deposed that on 23-06-89 at about 7:30 A.M. while he was remained
in his house he learnt that Shri Satyajit alias Satyaji Kumar Singh, his relative was
killed by some unknown persons at the southern-western side of Khoyathong Pukhri
Achouba and removed to the RMC (RIMS), Lamphel. On hearing the shock news he
along with some people of his Leikal went to RMC and he found the deceased Satyajit
alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was lying on a stretcher covered with a cloth at the dirty
room of Casualty Department, RMC. P.W. No.2 Further goes to say that with the
permission of the police personnel who were present there he removed the cloth and
he found his left eye ball was absent. One police officer whose name was Helli Cril
Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 53 Mao held inquest of the dead body Satyajit alias
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 48
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Satyajit Kumar Singh. The said police officer removed the cover and found that 1) his
left eye ball was absent, 2) bleeding injury on the nose. 3) one injury mark on the
right forehead, 2 cut injury marks on the knee and one cut injury on the left thigh.
The said police officer prepared inquest report. The details of the injuries were noted
down by the said police officer in the said inquest report and he put his signature on
the said inquest report after knowing the full contents of it.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
The witness in his statement stated that he was the witness of the inquest made by
the police over the dead body of the deceased in that, he mentioned 7.30 a.m. of
23.06.1989 i.e. before the registration of the FIR and before the arrest of the accused.
P.W. No. 3 Soibam Dhaneshwor Singhwho was the witness of the said inquest made
by the police officer on the dead body-
"P.W. No. 3 has deposed that on 24-6-89 at about 7 a.m. he learnt that Satyajit alias
Satyajit Kumar Singh was killed by some unknown persons at the south western side
of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and removed to RMC Hospital and on getting
the said news he along with some her persons of Polem Leikai went to the RMC and
they found that the dead body of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was lying on a
stretcher covered with a cloth at the dirty room of Casualty, RMC. At that time some
police personnel of Imphal P.S. led by S.I. Helli Mao came there and he called him to
become a witness of the inquest over the dead body was identified by one Ranjit
Singh of his Leikai. The said police S.I. Helli Mao conducted the inquest over the
dead body of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh. The said police Officer removed the
cloth and they found that the dead body was lying on the stretcher, stretching his
head towards east and leg towards the west. He found the injury marks on the dead
body of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh-1) left eyebrow was absent. 2) bleeding
injury on the nose. 3) right injury on the right forehead. 4) 2 cut injuries on the right
knee and one injury on the left thigh. The said Heli Mao prepared an inquest report
and he put his signature on the said inquest report after knowing the full contents of
it."
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 54 Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
In the above statement, the witness stated that he was the witness of the inquest
made by the police over the dead body of the deceased in that, he mentioned 7.00
a.m. of 24.06.1989 i.e. before the registration of the FIR and before the arrest of the
accused.
[15] We shall now look into the evidence of P.W. No. 4 (the solitary eyewitness). The
examination-in-chief as well as cross examination of P.W. No. 4 is reproduced here
under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 49
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Statement of P.W. No. 4 namely, Nongmaithem Megha Singh on 27.07.2000:
"I know the deceased Polem Seitrajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai who was
killed by some persons about 10 years ago. I and my father have been running a
work-shop in the front portion of our house at Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba on the
southern side of the said Pukhri under the name and style of Panthoibi Iron & Steel
Works. About 10 years ago one day in the evening at about dusk while I was at my
workshop my friend deceased Polem Seitrajit Singh of Polem Leikai came to our
work-shop and asked me to lend our half lamp and to help him in his work of road
repairing in front of Sunny Thakur on khoyathong Road. Accordingly, I along with
Polem Seitrajit Singh went to his work-site with our half-lamp which was already
lighted up and I remained there upto late night of the same night. After finishing his
work myself, the deceased Seitrajit Singh, one S.O. of PWD Department, one Roller
Driver and other labourers of Seitrajit Singh left the work-site and came to the
KHOLLA of the labourers which was situated at the north-eastern corner of
Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal. We have had a meal at the Kholla and then
after having the meal the said S.O. of the PWD Manipur and the Roller Driver left the
Kholla. The deceased Seitrajit Singh asked me to drop him upto his house.
Accordingly, I along with Seitrajit Singh proceeded towards his house with my half
lamp on Thangmeiband Polem Leikai road towards Lamphel on fact. When we
reached near the south-western corner of the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal
on Thangmeiband Polem Leikai road I saw 2/3 persons came out from near the gate
of R.K. Bikom Sana Singh. The said persosn started to assault me and another 2/3
persons were also came out from the north-western corner of the Khoyathong Pukhri
Achouba Mapal. Thenall the persons approaching towards Seitrajit Singh and
surrounded the deceased Seitrajit Singh and they started to assault Seitrajit Singh by
iron rod. Hard sticks etc. held by them. They caught Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018
Page 55 hold of Seitrajit Singh and assaulted him. When those persons assaulted
Seitrajit Singh I was near the gate of Becomsanahal at the distance of about 10 ft.
from the place where the said Seitrajit was assaulted. Before rushing towards the gate
of Becomsana the burning half lamp sliped away from my hand and fell on the
ground when the said persons attacked me for the first time. And then the half lamp
light went off as a result of falling. As a result of heating on the said half lantern its
Chemney glass was broken, and the tanky portion of the half lantern was also lented.
I did not leave the place of the occurrence and I also did not raise any alarm as I was
asked not to leave from the place as well as not raise any alarm by 2 of the persons
who were guarding me.
While I was standing near the above said gate as I stated above the said Seitrajit
Singh fought with 5 or 6 person. The said Seitrajit Singh falling on the ground while
the said Seitrajit Singh was fighting with the said 5 or 6 persons, he raised alarm to
the effect that he was being killed (HATLE, HATLE). While the said Seitrajit Singh
was lying on the ground one of the said 5/6 persons hit him on his face with an iron
rod (YOTCHEI). I saw the said Seitrajit Singh lying unconscious. Then I saw a jeep
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 50
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
coming there from Nagamapal road and then I saw the jeep driving away after
picking up those assailants / attackers. I saw the said jeep driving away from the said
place along Thangmeiband Polem Leirak which leads to Goverdhon Achoba Road. As
it was dark I could not see registration No. of the said jeep. There was an electric post
at the distance of only about 2/3 feet from the place of the said occurrence. At the
relevant time, there was a lighted electric bulb at that electric post and from the light
coming from the said lighted bulb I could see the said occurrence.
As soon as the said assailants/attackers left the place in the said jeep I rushed to the
place where the Seitrajit Singh was lying. He was found lying only his back and I also
raised alarm saying "MEE HATLE, MEE HATLE". Then I picked up the said Seitrajit
Singh and I saw that his face was injured and found with profuse bleeding. Within a
short time some persons of the locality gathered there. First of all I saw my
mother/Smt. Nongmaithem Ongbi Tombi Devi coming there. Some labourers also
came there. After sometime, Yambem Jadumani Singh also came there. The injured
was taken to RMC (now RIMS) Hospital in a truck belonging to Polem Kumar Singh.
I also accompanied the injured to the Hospital.So far, I remember I myself, the said
Jadumani Singh and some labourers went to the hospital along with the injured.
After about half an hour of our reaching the hospital, the injured Seitrajit Singh
succumbed to his injuries at the casualty departmentof the hospital. The dead body
was brought back on the next day after the completion of post mortem examination
and other necessary formalities, and funeral ceremony was performed on the said
next day. On the said next day at about 9 or 10 a.m. police seized the said half lantern
on my production. I came to know that the said half lantern had been taken into our
house by family members while I was at the hospital. A seizure list was prepared by
the police in connection with the seizure of the half lantern and I put my signature on
the seizure list. Ext.P/3 is the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 56 said seizure list
for seizing of one half lamp. Ext.P/3/1 is my signature. I cannot say with certainty
that the half lantern which is produced now and shown to me is the very half lantern
seized by the police due to lapse of time.On the day of post mortem examination a
police officer of Imphal P.S. seized one polyster full shirt having blood stain, 2)
sample of blood on a paper, 3) Sample of scalp hair under a seizure memo prepared
by the said police officer at RMC Forensic Science and Medical Department, Lamphel
in my presence. Ext.P/ is the said seizure memo prepared by the said police officer
and Ext. P/4/1 is my signature appearing on Ext. P/4.
I was examined by the I.O. of this case in connection with the occurrence. At that
time, I stated to the said police officer that I will be able to identify the culprits if
shown to me. After about half a month from the date of the occurrence I was asked by
the police to attend at the jail compound Imphal at about 9.30 A.M. for identification
of the accused persons. Accordingly, I went to the Imphal Jail Compound and I
identified one person among the culprits -as one who took part in assaulting the said
Seitrajit Singh on the day of occurrence. The person who was identified by me is
called R.K. Sanayaima and the said person was identified by me in the third parade of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 51
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
test identification held in the Imphal Jail. I came to know the name of the person
R.K. Sanayaima after the said test identification parade. The said TI Parade was held
in the three groups of the UTPs of different person. The first and the 2ndgroups of TI
Parade consisting of about 20 persons in each group. The third group was of about 30
persons.I may or may not be able to identify the person whom I identified in the said
TI Parade due to lapse of time. However, the said accused is not present today. None
of the three accused persons who are present today in the Court is the one whom I
identified in the said TI Parade. I do not know if any Magistrate was present at the
time of holding the TI Parade.However, I put my signature on some paper in the jail.
On 29.07.2000 :
I can identify the papers prepared by one officer at the jail compound if shown to me.
Ext.P/5 is the T.I. Parade form for the identification of accused Shri Joykumar Singh.
Ext.P/5/1 is my signature. Ext.P/6/ is the TI Parade form for identification of the
accused Kh. Basanta Singh. Ext.P/6/1 is my signature Ext.P/7 is the TI Parade form
for identification of accused Ramananda Singh. Ext.P/7/1 is my signature. Ext.P/8 is
the TI Parade form for the identification of the accused Salam Somorendro Singh.
Ext.P/8/1 is my signature. Ext.P/9 is the TI Parade form for the identification of the
accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh and alias R.K. Moba Singh. Ext.P/9/1 is my signature.
Ext.P/10 is the TI Parade form for the identification of the accused Dhananjoy Singh.
Ext.P/10/1 is my signature. Ext.P/11 is the TI Parade form for the identification of
accused Khuraijam Rajen Singh. Ext.P/11/1 is my signature. I cannot now identify the
said person whom I identified at the time of TI Parade held at Imphal Central Jail. At
the time of making the said identification I was informed by one person inside the
said jail that the person whom I identified in the TI Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018
Page 57 Parade was one of the accused who took part in the said assault made to the
deceased Seitrajit Singh. I have not seen him before the day of the occurrence and I
saw him for the first time at the time of occurrence. I saw the said person for the 2nd
time at the time of holding the TI Parade.
I cannot identify the seized articles i.e. one shirt, scalp hairs an piece of paper having
blood stain due to lapse of time.
Xxxxx the defence counsel.
I am a little older than the deceased Seitrajit Singh. We belonged to the same Leikai.
Though I was a little older than him we used to address us by our names. I am not
related to him. My house and that of the deceased Seitrajit Singh's house was
intervened by about 3 or 4 houses. I know father of late Seitrajit Singh who was
addressed as Pabung by me. He also knows me both by name and face. He used to
call me by my name whenever we met each other. I also know all his family members.
I was not married at that time. At that time the deceased was doing a contract work of
the Government. However, I do not know whether he was a contractor of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 52
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Government or not. When doing the said work the deceased closed some portions of
the road for preventing the passersby disturbing the progress of the work.
The deceased a person of good physique and well built. I do not know whether the
deceased was violent and quarrelsome whenever he was disturbed by other persons. I
do not know whether there were many instances of quarreling with the said Seitrajit
Singh and other persons for his closing the road on his own for execution of contract
work. I also do not know whether such instances took place on the previous day of the
occurrence or on the same day.
My workshop was located at Nagamapal road. I was running the scoter workshop all
alone. My workshop opens in the early morning and closes at about 5 or 6 p.m. in the
evening. I knew that the deceased was during the said contract work from before the
day of the occurrence. That day was the first time when Seitrajit Singh came to my
shop for hiring my half lamp. I accompanied my half lamp for the reasons that my
help may be required for repairing at the refueling of the half lamp. I cannot say the
time of the completion of that night's work as I had no watch at that time however I
can say that the night was very late. I did not participate in the manual works of the
said contract work and I also did not have any interest in the said work. I remained at
the work site handling my half lamp all alone. I was not paid any amount of money by
the deceased for my doing so. I did not visit the Kholla of his labour on any other
previous occasions and that night was the first time of my visiting the same. We had
pork curry on that night. None of us had alcoholic drinks on the night. I also cannot
say even approximately the time when I myself and Seitrajit Singh returned from the
Kholla towards his house. I cannot now remember any one of those persons who took
dinner inside the said kholla on the said night. I will not be able to identify any one
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 58 of those persons even if they are shown to me
now.I accompanied Seitrajit Singh even after crossing my house on his request as I
was having my half lamp which was burning. The night was dark one and as such he
wanted me with my half lamp upto his house. The half lamp was refueled at the work
site or the night the light was still on when it was dropped from my hand on being
attacked by those assailants.
It is true that there is no mark of having been hit by a hard object on any mark of
damage on the tanky of the half lamp which is produced and shown to me today. I
was hit on my right arm by an object like stick resulting to falling down on the said
half lamp. I did not receive any notable injury as a result of the said blow though I felt
pain on my right arm. Just before the attack myself and Seitrajit Singh were walking
at the parallel along with the Polem Leikai road facing towards west. I was on the
right side of Seitrajit that is on the side of pond (Pukhri Achouba). Immediately on
being hit on my arm I ran towards the gate of R.K. Sanahal Becom but I could not do
so as the entrance gate of Becomesana was found locked. Being helpless I stood just
near the gate while the two persons ran after me came near me. They threatened me
not to raise alarm or leave the place. Therefore, I stood near the gate all alone facing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 53
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
towards the north. The said 2 persons were standing at the distance of about 6/7 ft.
from me. They were facing towards me and both of them were holding sticks. I do not
see their face as there was no light on the place where I was standing. However, I
could recognize their physical structures. One of them was of thin structure and
another one a little healthy. I did not come across those 2 persons in the TI Parade
held at the Jail after the occurrence.I did not aware of any possibility of being
attacked by 2 persons who were threatening me by holding sticks instead I kept on
watching the fighting that took place on the road.
I cannot say whether the distance between the place where the fighting took place
and that of the gate of Becomsana Singh is 55 ft. However it could be of that distance
though I cannot say exactly as I had not measured the distance. The household of RK
Becomsana Singh lies on the sought of Khoyathon Polem Leikai road. The gate of the
household was not erected just near the road. The gate existed by entering some
distance from the road. There were berbed wire fencings all around Khoyathong
Pukhri Achouba. I cannot say even approximately the area of the said pond. The said
electric post was outside the said berbed wire fencing. It stood just near the fencing. I
deny the suggestion that the said post was inside berbed wire fencing and not
outside. The bulb in the said electric post was a small one either of 100 or 60 watts.
The fighting between the deceased Seitrajit Singh and those assailants took place in
front of the said electric post. The post was behind the fighting area. The light was not
sufficient enough to recognize the physical structures of the other assailants except
the one whom I identified later one. The other reason was also that the deceased was
attacked by a number of persons and among them I could recognize the one who I
identified later on.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 59 The later was not sufficient enough to
recognize the colours, of the wearing apparels of the assailants and the weapons held
by them. I cannot say whether the assailants and the weapons held by them. I cannot
say whether the distance between electric post and the place of fighting would be
more than 10 ft. as I had not measured the distance with any instrument of
measurement.
I cannot either admit or deny the suggestion that I did not state to the police while I
gave my statement as regards the raising of alarming "Mee Hatle, Mee Hatle".
My shirt and pant were also stained with bloods of Seitrajit Singh when I hold of him at the place of
occurrence after running away of the assailants. The police did not seize my said wearing apparels. I
also did not produce the same to the police afterwards. The distance between the place of occurrence
and my house would be within 100 ft. There are rows of hoses on the southern side of the Polem
Leikai road. The house of occurrence on the southwestern side. I cannot say the distance in terms of
feet or yards or maters.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 54
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
None of the family members of deceased Seitrajit Singh came out to the place of occurrence till the
time of evacuating the injured to the hospital. It would be more than half an hour from the time I
raised alarm till the time of lifting the injured to the tata truck. I did not go to the house of Seitrajit
Singh on the night to inform his family members about the incident. I wore the same apparels when
I accompanied the injured to the hospital. After post mortem examination of the dead body we took
the body for funeral on the same day. It was in the afternoon that we took out the body from the
hospital after the post mortem examination. I was present in the hospital all alone till the
completion of the post mortem examination. I did not ask any person gathered at the place of
occurrence before lifting the inured to the hospital for getting information about the occurrence to
the family members of Seitrajit Singh. 2 police offices came to the hospital and made seizures of the
wearing apparels, hair etc. of the deceased. I did not change the blood stained shirt and pant which I
wore on the day.
I attended the funeral of the deceased till the end. I cannot read and write English. The seizure
memo Ext. P/3 was written in English and as such, I could read the same. I cannot now remember
whether the contents of the said seizure was read over to me by the I.O. or not due to lapse of time.
I met the father of late Seitrajit Singh in the morning of the following day. I cannot now remember
whether he came to the hospital or not. I also cannot now remember whether any family members of
late Seitrajit Singh came to the hospital or not. However, I saw some of his relatives coming to the
hospital. I did not accompany father of Seitrajit Singh to the police station on the following day. I
narrated about the incident to the father of Seitrajit Singh when I met him near the Khoyathong
Pukhri Achouba on the following morning.When I was at the hospital some police personnel came
to Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 60 the seizure of the half lamp on my production. I did not
return to the hospital thereafter. I did not narrate about the incident narration about the incident to
any other person except to the father of the deceased. My narration about the incident to the father
of the deceased could have been heard by some other persons who were near him. However, I did
not specifically narrated about the incident to any else besides the father of the deceased. I cannot
now remember whether I gave any detailed statement about the case to the I.O. of the case. But I
still remember some police personnel were present at the time of my narration about the incident to
the father of Seitrajit Singh on that morning. But I cannot say whether my narrations were reduced
into writing by the said police personnel or not. I never visited the Imphal P.S. in c/w the case.I got
the information that some persons were arrested in c/w the case and that they were detailed in
police custody at Imphal P.S. I deny the suggestion that I was taken to the Imphal P.S. on 26.06.89
by a police office and one person was shown to me on that day. I also deny the suggestion that the
said police officer asked me to identify that person during the TI parade.
I was called by some personnel to come to the Imphal Central Jail for identifying some persons in a
TI Parade. I cannot now remember whether they had given me any paper requiring my attendance
in the jail. I was taken to Imphal Central Jail in the police jeep. I was the only one taken by the
police for the said parade. It was at about 10/10.30 a.m. in the morning when I was taken to the jail.
After reaching jail premises I was asked to sit inside the jail in an open space. I found 2/3 persons
accompanied by the I.O. of this case till the time of my sitting in the said open space inside the jail
premises.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 55
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I know the I.O. of the case. I heard that he is from Bamon Leikai area. I do not know his name and
other particulars. The said I.O. was the very officer who seized the half lamp and other articles at
hospital. I myself and the I.O. of the case remained sitting in the said open space for about half an
hour and thereafter one jail official came out and called me inside another enclosure. The said jail
official was the jailor of the Imphal Central Jail and I know him from before. He is a resident of
Thangmeiband Sinam Leikai. I was taken inside a room by the jailor where I found about 20
persons. The said jailor was all alone present in the said room when the TI Parade was held. I do not
know if there was a Magistrate in the said room. A Magistrate could be present there at that time
and also during the entire course of the period. I cannot remember whether the said room has got
windows. However, there was a door of the said room. I also cannot say whether the said door was
kept closed or opened during the course of TI Parade. When I entered the room I found about 20
person standing inside the same in a circle. They were not wearing same type of dress of same
colour. Their faces were patched with pieces of white paper on their faces. The said paper pieces
were affixed on the faces of those persons at different portion on their face. Some of them were
having such white patches on beforehead, some on their cheeks, some on their chin. Such white
patches were not fixed on similar portions of the paces of Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 61
those persons. The places of fixing white papers were different from persons to persons. I was asked
to go round incircle near these standing persons to identify the assailants whom I saw on the night
of the occurrence. Those persons in the parade were of different structures and physical structures.
But those persons were generally of similar built. I agree with the suggestion that the said person
was slightly different from the rest of those who paraded with him in physical built and structure. I
found the I.O. of the case at present at the place where we sat together before the parade I came out
after identifying the said person.
The jailor asked me to identify the assailant in the said TI Parade. Nobody except the jailor told me
for the identification of the said assailant. The person who told me the name the identified personas
Sanayaima was also the jailor himself. It took quite sometime in the completion of the TI Parade.
The Parade was conducted three times separately. In the first and 2 nd parades, I could not identify
any of the assailants. It is the 3rd parade that I identified that person whose name given as
Sanayaima by the jailor. I came to know the name of said person only after the said TI Parade.
Just after identifying the said person by me he was asked to turn around and separated from the
other persons. Thereafter, I was asked to go out of the room. I identified the said person only once.
And after my identification no second parade was held. I cannot now remember whether I was asked
the reason for my identification of the said person or not by any official present inside the room. I
deny the suggestion that I identified that person at the instance of the I.O. and the jailor and that
they were determined to make me identify any of the assailants in the 1st and 2nd parades. I also
deny the suggestion that I.O. and the jailor had pointed the said person to me before my
identification.
The deceased was a football player of NISA which is a local club of Thangmeiband area. I do not
know whether the said jailor is also an active member of NISA. I do not know whether they had
close friends during the life time of Seitrajit Singh. I also deny the suggestion that the said jailor was
taking much interest in the case as the deceased happened to be one of this close associates.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 56
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I deny the suggestion that I did not accompany Seitrajit Singh on the night of the occurrence. I also
deny the suggestion that I did not see any occurrence on that night. I deny the suggestion that
Ext.P/3 is a fabricated document and my signature was obtained much after the date and time
indicated in the same. I deny the suggestion that I was made a witness in the identification parade as
threatened by the I.O. o the case. I also deny the suggestion that the I.O. threatened me for
implicating me as the person who killed Seitrajit if I refused to obligue him as I happened to be the
last man seen together with the deceased. I also deny the suggestion that the person whom I
identified in the TI Parade was another person who happened to be in jail at the relevant time in
other case. I also deny the suggestion that I am giving false evidence at the instance of the family
members of the deceased Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 62 who accompanied me to this Court
on that day of my giving evidence day before yesterday and I also deny the suggestion that the police
are also threatening me to give false evidence. I attended before this Court on day before yesterday
as asked by the family members of the deceased.
To the Court :
After the seizure the said half lantern at my house by the police on the said following
day of the occurrence I went back to the hospital. When I went to the hospital for the
2nd time the said blood stained shirt, scalp hair and blood samples etc. seized in my
presence but I cannot say whether the said seizure are made either at the morgue of
the said hospital or at the casualty department, within sometime of the said seizure
the dead body was brought to the house of the deceased. On the said following day I
was picked up by police personnel from the casualty department and then I was taken
to my house where the said seizure of the half lantern was made. My statement in the
cross-examination to the effect that I was at the hospital all along with the dead body
throughout the day of the next following day till the taking of the dead body to his
hose is not wholly correct. I gave the above said incorrect statement due to lapse of
time.
Xxx by the d/counsel.
After making the seizure of the half lamp the police party who picked me up from the
hospital went back. I returned to the hospital with the Leikai people again. I cannot
say any of those persons who accompanied me to the hospital due to lapse of time. I
deny the suggestion that due to lapse of time I cannot remember the incident and its
consequent happenings clear now. I also deny the suggestion that my statement given
this Court are on my surmises. It is also not a fact that Ext.P/4 is a fabricated
document and that my signature was obtained later on the said paper by the I.O. of
R.O. & A.C. Our analysis, observation and reasoning-
On perusal of the deposition as reproduced above, we foundthe following important
and reliable statementsin his deposition contrary to the prosecution story and the
same are highlighted and blackened in the above statements.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 57
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(i) After finishing his work myself, the deceased Seitrajit Singh, one S.O. of PWD
Department, one Roller Driver and other labourers of Seitrajit Singh left the
work-site and came to the KHOLLA of the labourers which was situated at the north-
eastern corner of Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal. We have had a meal at the Kholla and then
after having the meal the said S.O. of the PWD Manipur and the Roller Driver left the Kholla.
(ii) They caught hold of Seitrajit Singh and assaulted him. When those persons assaulted Seitrajit
Singh I was near the gate of Becomsanahal at the distance of about 10 ft. from the place Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 63 where the said Seitrajit was assaulted. Before rushing towards the gate
of Becomsana the burning half lamp sliped away from my hand and fell on the ground when the said
persons attacked me for the first time. And then the half lamp light went off as a result of falling. As
a result of heating on the said half lantern its Chemney glass was broken, and the tanky portion of
the half lantern was also lented. I did not leave the place of the occurrence and I also did not raise
any alarm as I was asked not to leave from the place as well as not raise any alarm by 2 of the
persons who were guarding me.
(iii) While I was standing near the above said gate as I stated above the said Seitrajit Singh fought
with 5 or 6 person. The said Seitrajit Singh falling on the ground while the said Seitrajit Singh was
fighting with the said 5 or 6 persons, he raised alarm to the effect that he was being killed (HATLE,
HATLE). While the said Seitrajit Singh was lying on the ground one of the said 5/6 persons hit him
on his face with an iron rod (YOTCHEI). I saw the said Seitrajit Singh lying unconscious. Then I saw
a jeep coming there from Nagamapal road and then I saw the jeep driving away after picking up
those assailants / attackers. I saw the said jeep driving away from the said place along
Thangmeiband Polem Leirak which leads to Goverdhon Achoba Road. As it was dark I could not see
registration No. of the said jeep. There was an electric post at the distance of only about 2/3 feet
from the place of the said occurrence. At the relevant time, there was a lighted electric bulb at that
electric post and from the light coming from the said lighted bulb I could see the said occurrence.
(iv) He was found lying only his back and I also raised alarm saying "MEE HATLE, MEE HATLE".
Then I picked up the said Seitrajit Singh and I saw that his face was injured and found with profuse
bleeding. Within a short time some persons of the locality gathered there. First of all I saw my
mother/Smt. Nongmaithem Ongbi Tombi Devi coming there. Some labourers also came there. After
sometime, Yambem Jadumani Singh also came there. The injured was taken to RMC (now RIMS)
Hospital in a truck belonging to Polem Kumar Singh. I also accompanied the injured to the Hospital.
(v) I cannot say with certainty that the half lantern which is produced now and shown to me is the
very half lantern seized by the police due to lapse of time.
(vi) I was examined by the I.O. of this case in connection with the occurrence. At that time, I stated
to the said police officer that I will be able to identify the culprits if shown to me. After about half a
month from the date of the occurrence I was asked by the police to attend at the jail compound
Imphal at about 9.30 A.M. for identification of the accused persons. Accordingly, I went to the
Imphal Jail Compound and I identified one person among the culprits -as one who Cril Jail Appeal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 58
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
No. 1 of 2018 Page 64 took part in assaulting the said Seitrajit Singh on the day of occurrence. The
person who was identified by me is called R.K. Sanayaima and the said person was identified by me
in the third parade of test identification held in the Imphal Jail. I came to know the name of the
person R.K. Sanayaima after the said test identification parade. The said TI Parade was held in the
three groups of the UTPs of different person. The first and the 2ndgroups of TI Parade consisting of
about 20 persons in each group. The third group was of about 30 persons.I may or may not be able
to identify the person whom I identified in the said TI Parade due to lapse of time. However, the said
accused is not present today. None of the three accused persons who are present today in the Court
is the one whom I identified in the said TI Parade. I do not know if any Magistrate was present at the
time of holding the TI Parade.
(vii) I cannot now identify the said person whom I identified at the time of TI Parade held at Imphal
Central Jail. At the time of making the said identification I was informed by one person inside the
said jail that the person whom I identified in the TI Parade was one of the accused who took part in
the said assault made to the deceased Seitrajit Singh. I have not seen him before the day of the
occurrence and I saw him for the first time at the time of occurrence. I saw the said person for the
2nd time at the time of holding the TI Parade.
(viii) I also cannot say even approximately the time when I myself and Seitrajit Singh returned from
the Kholla towards his house. I cannot now remember any one of those persons who took dinner
inside the said kholla on the said night. I will not be able to identify any one of those persons even if
they are shown to me now.
(ix) I do not see their face as there was no light on the place where I was standing. However, I could
recognize their physical structures. One of them was of thin structure and another one a little
healthy. I did not come across those 2 persons in the TI Parade held at the Jail after the occurrence.
(x) The post was behind the fighting area. The light was not sufficient enough to recognize the
physical structures of the other assailants except the one whom I identified later one. The other
reason was also that the deceased was attacked by a number of persons and among them I could
recognize the one who I identified later on. The later was not sufficient enough to recognize the
colours, of the wearing apparels of the assailants and the weapons held by them. I cannot say
whether the assailants and the weapons held by them. I cannot say whether the distance between
electric post and the place of fighting would be more than 10 ft. as I had not measured the distance
with any instrument of measurement.
(xi) None of the family members of deceased Seitrajit Singh came out to the place of occurrence till
the time of evacuating the injured to the hospital. It would be more than half an hour Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 65 from the time I raised alarm till the time of lifting the injured to the
tata truck. I did not go to the house of Seitrajit Singh on the night to inform his family members
about the incident. I wore the same apparels when I accompanied the injured to the hospital. After
post mortem examination of the dead body we took the body for funeral on the same day. It was in
the afternoon that we took out the body from the hospital after the post mortem examination. I was
present in the hospital all alone till the completion of the post mortem examination. I did not ask
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 59
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
any person gathered at the place of occurrence before lifting the inured to the hospital for getting
information about the occurrence to the family members of Seitrajit Singh. 2 police offices came to
the hospital and made seizures of the wearing apparels, hair etc. of the deceased. I did not change
the blood stained shirt and pant which I wore on the day.
(xii) I narrated about the incident to the father of Seitrajit Singh when I met him near the
Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba on the following morning.
(xiii) I never visited the Imphal P.S. in c/w the case.
(xiv) The jailor asked me to identify the assailant in the said TI Parade. Nobody except the jailor told
me for the identification of the said assailant. The person who told me the name the identified
personas Sanayaima was also the jailor himself. It took quite sometime in the completion of the TI
Parade. The Parade was conducted three times separately. In the first and 2nd parades, I could not
identify any of the assailants. It in the 3rd parade that I identified that person whose name given as
Sanayaima by the jailor. I came to know the name of said person only after the said TI Parade.
In the above statement, the witness in his examination-in-chief stated that he identified one person
among the culprits during the T.I. Parade and the name of the said culprit was RK. Sanayaima (the
accused expired during the course of trial). He further mentioned that he came to know the name of
the said culprit as RK Sanayaima during the identification periodas told to him by the I.O. of the
case. Further, it is also stated that he may or may not be able to identify the person whom he
identified due to lapse of time. On the day of giving his statement before the Court,he further said
that none of the accused, who were in the dock, was the one whom he identified during the T.I.
Parade. On Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 66 his further examination, the witness failed to
mention the name of RK Sanayaima whom he identified during the T.I. Parade for identification of
the accused.The witness further deposed that he cannot now identify the said person whom he
identified at the time of T.I. Parade held at Imphal Central Jail. The witness stated in the first part of
his statement that he along with the deceased were at the Khola along with one S.O. of P.W.D., one
roller driver and other labourer. But, in the later part of his examination, the witness stated that he
cannot remember any one of those persons who took dinner inside the said Khola and he will not be
able to identify any one of those persons even if they are shown to me.The discrepancies and
contradictory shown in his statement is to be taken seriously as he is the solitary eyewitness.
[16] On perusal of the above reproduced portion of the statement, it hasseen and emerged that the
witness identified one accused namely, RK Sanayaima Singh in the T.I. Parade even though as per
the prosecution story during the TI Parade all the accused were put up from amongst other people
butthe witness even failed to identify the two persons who guarded him throughout during the time
of the said occurrenceand the witness said that he will not be able to identify the said person whom
he had identified in the T.I. Parade if asked again to identify in the Court room. The witness did not
identify the accused who were in the dock saying that they are not the persons he identified during
the T.I. Parade, after going through the above statement, we found a lot of discrepancies,
contradictory and find it unreliable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 60
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 67 On perusal of the overall evidences particularly from the
solitary eyewitness testimony, it has emerged that the witness himselfis found to be not wholly
reliable and on top of that, he failed to identify the only accused identified in the T.I. Parade. The Ld.
Trial Court, while discussing the case in regard to the solitary eyewitness, stated/opined that the
version of the P.W. No. 4 is well supported by P.W. No. 8, 16, 17 & 18.For the sake of brevity and to
save time, we rely on the statements of these witnesses which are going to be reproduced herein
below. But, on careful perusal of the statements of the above mentioned witnesses, we find no
corroboration let alone supporting the version of the present witnessi.e. P.W. No. 4, instead their
version go against the witnesscontradicting their statements with each other, hence considered
unreliable.
In addition to that, the prosecution also failed to produce/examine some of the most important
witnesses, for example, woman pan vendor, roller driver, labourers who can throw light on the
statement of the present witness due to non-
production of these persons as witnesses before the Court to corroborate the testimonies of the P.W.
No. 4, this lecuna could not be cured the defect made by the P.W. No. 4. The lecuna created by the
statement of the present witness in support of the prosecution case, these lecuna remain, creating
doubt to the statement of the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 68 present witness. Accordingly,
the prosecution failed to prove the case on the single eyewitness which could be convicted the
accused on the direct evidence. On top of that, since the solitary eyewitness as well as the witnesses
No. 8, 16, 17 & 18 failed to identify the accused in the Court, the prosecution failed to prove their
case on the solitary eyewitness (direct evidence) which could otherwise convict the accused on the
direct evidence. In the light of these, we are of the opinion that the P.W. No. 4 (the solitary
eyewitness) and witnesses mentioned above cannot be regarded as reliable witnesses.
In this regard, we rely on the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation made in Anil Phukan v. State of
Assam [(1993) 3 SCC 282]:
"3. This case primarily hinges on the testimony of a single eyewitness Ajoy PW 3.
Indeed, conviction can be based on the testimony of a single eyewitness and there is
no rule of law or evidence which says to the contrary provided the sole witness passes
the test of reliability. So long as the single eyewitness is a wholly reliable witness the
courts have no difficulty in basing conviction on his testimony alone. However, where
the single eyewitness is not found to be wholly reliable witness, in the sense that there
are some circumstances which may show that he could have an interest in the
prosecution, then the courts generally insist upon some independent corroboration of
his testimony, in material particulars, before recording convictgion. It is only when
the courts find that the single eyewitness is a wholly unreliable witness that his
testimony is discarded in toto and no amount of corroboration can cure that defect. It
is in the light of these settled principles that we shall examine the testimony of PW 3
Ajoy."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 61
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 69 Mention is made here that the P.W. No. 13 who
came face to face with the two accused namely, (i) P. Joykumar Singh and (ii) P.
Dhananjoy Singh. While recording the statement under Section 27 Evidence Act, in
the Police Station and inspite of witnessing the recording of the statement and
subsequently, seen the seizure of some of the seized articles failed to identify the said
two accused in the Court while giving their statements(P.W. No.
13).
Mention is made here that the P.W. No. 9 who came face to face with the accused namely, P.
Joykumar Singh. While recording the statement under Section 27 Evidence Act, in the Police Station
and inspite of witnessing the recording of the statement and subsequently seen the seizure of some
of the seized articles failed to identify the said accused in the Court while giving his statement(P.W.
No. 9).
The P.W. No. 24 who is a seizure witness on the seizure of clothing of the accused Salam Bodo Singh
on production by the accused Salam Bodo Singh but, he stated that he cannot identify the said long
pant jean in grey colour due to lapse of time.
Even though the witness stated that he knows the accused Salam Bodo Singh, he did not identify the
accused in the Court (P.W. No.
24).
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 70 The P.W. No. 17 inspite of coming close contact with the said
3 (three) youths, one of whom was assaulted by the deceased,the witness did not identify the
accused who were present in the Court when he was giving his statement as to whether the said 3
(three) youths were amongst the accused present in the Dock or not (P.W. No. 17).
The P.W. No. 18 inspite of knowing both the accused Shahajahan and the deceased in his statement,
the witness failed to identify the accused in the Dock (P.W. No. 18).
Mention is also made here that the two witnesses who were the witnesses for the recording of
confessional statement under Section 27 of Evidence Act of the accused P. Dhananjoy Singh were
also not produced as P.Ws. to support, identify the accused and prove the statement of the P.W. No.
4 (solitary eyewitness) before the Court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in series of judgments observes that Dock Identification is the most
reliable evidences and in this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in series of cases observed on -
Dock Identification is a conclusive and substantive evidence:
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Sidhartha Vashisht alias Manu Sharma v. State (NCT
of Delhi) [(2010) 6 SCC 1], observed that -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 62
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 71
255. ............ These judgments make it abundantly clearthat even where there is no
previous TIP, the court may appreciate the dockidentification as being above board
and more than conclusive.
256. The law as it stands today is set out in the following decisions of this Court
which are reproduced as hereinunder:
Munshi Singh Gautam v. State of M.P., (2005) 9 SCC 631:
"16. As was observed by this Court in Matru v. State of U.P., (1971) 2 SCC 75,
identification tests do not constitute substantive evidence. They are primarily meant
for the purpose of helping the investigating agency with an assurance that their
progress with the investigation into the offence is proceeding on the right lines. The
identification can only be used as corroborative of the statement in court. (See
Santokh Singh v. Izhar Hussain, (1973) 2 SCC 406) The necessity for holding an
identification parade can arise only when the accused are not previously known to the
witnesses. The whole idea of a test identification parade is that witnesses who claim
to have seen the culprits at the time of occurrence are to identify them from the midst
of other persons without any aid or any other source. The test is done to check upon
their veracity. In other words, the main object of holding an identification parade,
during the investigation stage, is to test the memory of the witnesses based upon first
impression and also to enable the prosecution to decide whether all or any of them
could be cited as eyewitnesses of the crime. The identification proceedings are in the
nature of tests and significantly, therefore, there is no provision for it in the Code and
the Evidence Act. It is desirable that a test identification parade should be conducted
as soon as after the arrest of the accused. This becomes necessary to eliminate the
possibility of the accused being shown to the witnesses prior to the test identification
parade. This is a verycommon plea of the accused and, therefore, the prosecution has
to be cautious to ensure that there is no scope for making such an allegation. If,
however, circumstances are beyond control and there is some delay, it cannot be said
to be fatal to the prosecution.
17. It is trite to say that the substantive evidence is the evidence of identification in
court. Apart from the clear provisions of Section 9 of the Evidence Act, the position in
law is well settled by a catena of decisions of this Court. The facts, which establish the
identity of the accused persons, are relevant under Section 9 of the Evidence Act. As a
general rule, the substantive evidence of a witness is the statement made in court.
The evidence of mere identification of the accused person at the trial for the first time
is from its very nature inherently of a weak character. The purpose of a prior test
identification, therefore, is to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that
evidence. It is, accordingly, considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for
corroboration of the sworn testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 63
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
accused who are strangers to them, in the form of earlier identification proceedings.
This rule of prudence, however, is Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 72 subject to
exceptions, when, for example, the court is impressed by a particular witness on
whose testimony it can safely rely, without such or other corroboration. The
identification parades belong to the stage of investigation, and there is no provision
in the Code which obliges the investigating agency to hold or confers a right upon the
accused to claim a test identification parade. They do not constitute substantive
evidence and these parades are essentially governed by Section 162 of the Code.
Failure to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the evidence
of identification in court. The weight to be attached to such identification should be a
matter for the courts of fact.
In appropriate cases it may accept the evidence of identification even without insisting on
corroboration. (See Kanta Prashad v. Delhi Admn. AIR 1958 SC 350, Vaikuntam Chandrappa v.
State of A.P., AIR 1960 SC 1340, Budhsen v. State of U.P., (1970) 2 SCC 128 and Rameshwar Singh
v. State of J&K, (1971) 2 SCC 715.) Harbajan Singh v. State of J&K, (1975) 4 SCC 480 "19. Though a
testidentification parade was not held, this Court upheld the conviction on thebasis of the
identification in court corroborated by other circumstantialevidence. In that case it was found that
the appellant and one Gurmukh Singh were absent at the time of roll call and when they were
arrested on the night of 16-12-1971 their rifles smelt of fresh gunpowder and that the empty
cartridge case which was found at the scene of offence bore distinctive markings showing that the
bullet which killed the deceased was fired from the rifle of the appellant. Noticing these
circumstances this Court held:
4. In view of this corroborative evidence we find no substance in the argument urged
on behalf of the appellant that the investigating officer ought to have held an
identification parade and that the failure of Munshi Ram to mention the names of the
two accused to the neighbours who came to the scene immediately after the
occurrence shows that his story cannot be true. As observed by this Court in
Jadunath Singh v. State of U.P., (1970) 3 SCC 518, absence of test identification is not
necessarily fatal. The fact that Munshi Ram did not disclose the names of the two
accused to the villagers only shows that the accused were not previously known to
him and the story that the accused referred to each other by their respective names
during the course of the incident contains an element of exaggeration.
The case does not rest on the evidence of Munshi Ram alone and the corroborative circumstances to
which we have referred to above lend enough assurance to the implication of the appellant."
Malkhan Singh v. State of M.P., (2003) 5 SCC 746 "7. It is trite to say that the substantive evidence is
the evidence of identification in court. Apart from the clear provisions of Section 9 of the Evidence
Act, the position in law is well settled by a catena of decisions of this Court. The facts, which
establish the identity of the accused persons, are relevant under Section 9 of the Evidence Act. As a
general rule, the substantive evidence of a witness is the statement made in court. The evidence of
mere identification of the accused Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 73 person at the trial for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 64
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
first time is from its very nature inherently of a weak character. The purpose of a prior test
identification, therefore, is to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that evidence. It is
accordingly considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn
testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them, in the
form of earlier identification proceedings. This rule of prudence, however, is subject to exceptions,
when, for example, the court is impressed by a particular witness on whose testimony it can
safelyrely, without such or other corroboration. The identification paradesbelong to the stage of
investigation, and there is no provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure which obliges the
investigating agency to hold, or confers a right upon the accused to claim a test identification
parade. They do not constitute substantive evidence and these parades are essentially governed by
Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Failure to hold a test identification parade would not
make inadmissible the evidence of identification in court. The weight to be attached to such
identification should be a matter for the courts of fact. In appropriate cases it may accept the
evidence of identification even without insisting on corroboration."
258. The learned Solicitor General submitted that, even otherwise, an adverse inference ought to be
drawn against the appellants for their refusal to join the TIP. This view has found favour time and
again by this Court. It is pertinent to note that it is dock identification which is a substantive piece of
evidence. Therefore even where no TIP is conducted no prejudice can be caused to the case of the
prosecution.
259. In Mullagiri Vajram v. State of A.P., 1993 Supp (2) SCC 198, it was held that though the accused
was seen by the witness in custody, any infirmity in TIP will not affect the outcome of the case, since
the depositions of the witnesses in court were reliable and could sustain a conviction. The photo
identification and TIP are only aides in the investigation and does not form substantive evidence.
The substantive evidence is the evidence in the court on oath.
Matru v. State of U.P., (1971) 2 SCC 75 "17. ........Identification tests, it may be pointed out, do not
constitute substantive evidence. Such tests are primarily meant for the purpose of helping the
investigating agency with an assurance that their progress with the investigation into the offence is
proceeding on right lines."
Santokh Singh v. Izhar Hussain, (1973) 2 SCC 406 "12. Such identification is not substantive
evidence and it can only be used as corroborative of the statement in court................."
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 74 Kanta Prashad v. Delhi Admn. AIR 1958 SC 350 "3. ......It
would no doubt have been prudent to hold a test identification parade with respect to witnesses who
did not know the accused before the occurrence, but failure to hold such a parade would not make
inadmissible the evidence of identification in court..."
Vaikuntam Chandrappa v. State of A.P., AIR 1960 SC 1340 "6. It is also true that the substantive
evidence is the statement in court; but the purpose of test identification is to test that evidence and
the safe rule is that the sworn testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who
are strangers to the witnesses, generally speaking, requires corroboration which should be in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 65
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
form of an earlier identification proceeding..............."
Budhsen v. State of U.P., (1970) 2 SCC 128 "7. Now, facts which establish the identity of an accused
person are relevant under Section 9 of the Indian Evidence Act. As a general rule, the substantive
evidence of a witness is a statement made in court. The evidence of mere identification of the
accused person at the trial for the first time is from its very nature inherently of a weak character.
The evidence in order to carry conviction should ordinarily clarify as to how and under what
circumstances he came to pick out the particularaccused person and the details of the part which the
accused played in the crime in question with reasonable particularity. The purpose of a prior test
identification, therefore, seems to be to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that evidence. It
is accordingly considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn
testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them, in the
form of earlier identification proceeding. There may, however, be exceptions to this general rule,
when for example, the court is impressed by a particular witness, on whose testimony it can safely
rely, without such or other corroboration. The identification parades belong to the investigation
stage. They are generally held during the course of investigation with the primary object of enabling
the witnesses to identify persons concerned in the offence, who were not previously known to them.
This serves to satisfy the investigating officers of the bona fides of the prosecution witnesses and
also to furnish evidence to corroborate their testimony in court. Identification proceedings in their
legal effect amount simply to this:
that certain persons are brought to jail or some other place and make statements
either express or implied that certain individuals whom they point out are persons
whom they recognise as having been concerned in the crime. They do not constitute
substantive evidence. These parades are of the essentially governed by Section 162,
Criminal Procedure Code. It is for this reason that the identification parades in this
case seem to have been held under the supervision of a Magistrate. Keeping in view
the purpose of identification parades the Magistrates holding them are expected to
take all possible precautions to eliminate any suspicion of unfairness and to reduce
the chance of testimonial error. They must, therefore, take intelligent interest in the
proceedings, bearing in mind two considerations: (1) that the life and liberty of an
accused may depend on their vigilance and caution and (ii) Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of
2018 Page 75 that justice should be done in the identification. Those proceeding
should not make it impossible for the identifiers who, after all, have, as a rule, only
fleeting glimpses of the person they are supposed to identify. Generally speaking, the
Magistrate must make a note of every objection raised by an accused at the time of
identification and the steps taken by them to ensure fairness to the accused, so that
the court which is to judge the value of the identification evidence may take them into
consideration in the appreciation of that evidence. The power to identify, it may be
kept in view, varies according to the power of observation and memory ofthe person
identifying and each case depends on its own facts, but there are two factors which
seem to be of basic importance in the evaluation of identification. The persons
required to identify an accused should have had no opportunity of seeing him after
the commission of the crime and before identification and secondly that no mistakes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 66
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
are made by them or the mistakes made are negligible. The identification to be of
value should also be held without much delay. The number of persons mixed up with
the accused should be reasonably large and their bearing and general appearance not
glaringly dissimilar. The evidence as to identification deserves, therefore, to be
subjected to a close and careful scrutiny by the Court.
Rameshwar Singh v. State of J&K, (1971) 2 SCC 715 "5. Before dealing with the
evidence relating to identification of the appellant it may be remembered that the
substantive evidence of a witness is his evidence in Court but when the accused
person is not previously known to the witness concerned then identification of the
accused by the witness soon after the former's arrest is of vital importance because it
furnishes to the investigating agency an assurance that the investigation is
proceeding on right lines in addition to furnishing corroboration of the evidence to be
given by the witness later in court at the trial. From this point of view it is a matter of
great importance both for the investigating agency and for the accused and a fortiori
for the proper administration of justice that such identification is held without
avoidable and unreasonable delay after the arrest of the accused and that all the
necessary precautions and safeguards are effectively taken so that the investigation
proceeds on correct lines for punishing the real culprit. It would, in addition, be fair
to the witness concerned who was a stranger to the accused because in that event the
chances of his memory fading are reduced and he is required to identify the alleged
culprit at the earliest possible opportunity after the occurrence. It is thus and thus
alone that justice and fairplay can be assured both to the accused and to the
prosecution. The identification during police investigation, it may be recalled, is not
substantive evidence in law and it can only be used for corroborating or contradicting
evidence of the witness concerned as given in Court. The identification proceedings,
therefore, must be so conducted that evidence with regard to them when given at the
trial, enables the courtsafely to form appropriate judicial opinion about its
evidentiary value for the purpose of corroborating or contradicting the statement in
Court of the identifying witness.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 76 Jadunath Singh v. State of U.P., (1970) 3 SCC
518 "14. In Kanta Prasad v. Delhi Administration a point was made regarding
non-holding of test identification parade by the police and this Court observed:
"As for the test identification parade, it is true that no test identification parade was
held. The appellants were known to the police officials who had deposed against the
appellants and the only persons who did not know them before were the persons who
gave evidence of association, to which the High Court did not attach much
importance. It would no doubt have been prudent to hold a test identification parade
with respect to witnesses who did not know the accused before the occurrence, but
failure to hold such a parade would not make inadmissible the evidence of
identification in Court. The weight to be attached to such identification would be a
matter for the Courts of factand it is not for this Court to reassess the evidence unless
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 67
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
exceptional grounds were established necessitating such a course." 15. It seems to us
that it has been clearly laid down by this Court, inParkash Chand Sogani v. State of
Rajasthan, that the absence of test identification in all cases is not fatal and if the
accused person is well- known by sight it would be waste of time to put him up for
identification. Of course if the prosecution fails to hold an identification on the plea
that the witnesses already knew the accused well and it transpires in the course of the
trial that the witnesses did not know the accused previously, the prosecution would
run the risk of losing its case. It seems to us that if there is any doubt in the matter
the prosecution should hold an identification parade specially if an accused says that
the alleged eyewitnesses did not know him previously. It may be that there is no
express provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure enabling an accused to insist on
identification parade but if the accused does make an application and that application
is turned down and it transpires during the course of the trial that the witnesses did
not know the accused previously, as pointed out above the prosecution will. Unless
there is some other evidence, run the risk of losing the case on this point."
Mullagiri Vajram v. State of A.P., 1993 Supp (2) SCC 198 "3. We have gone through the judgment of
the lower courts and have perused the record and have considered the arguments advanced by
learned counsel for the parties. The High Court has considered the prosecution evidence in detail
and has placed reliance on the statements of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 as eyewitnesses of the incident. The
High Court has placed implicit reliance on the testimony of PW 2 who was a clerk working in the
panchayat office of Ramaraogudem and had accompanied the deceased in an autorickshaw and had
seen the incident. We find no infirmity in the statement of PW 2 and the High Court has rightly
placed reliance on his evidence."
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 77 Relying on the facts and circumstances made above and
relying on the observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court(supra), we are of the view that the
prosecution failed to prove their case on solitary eyewitness (direct evidence).
[17] Statement of P.W. No. 5:
About 11 years ago, one day I the morning while I was at my home I learnt that Shri Satyajit Singhof
our Leikai was assaulted by some unknown persons on the Polem Leikai Road at or near the south
western corner of the Khoyathong Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal in the night when he came
back to his house from his kholla and that he was taken to the RMC hospital Lamphel on the same
night. On getting the said news I went to the place of occurrence at about 6 a.m. ad I found some
people of our Leikai were present at or near the place of occurrence. When I was staning near the
place of occurrence along with other Leikai people, a police party led by one police officer came at
the spot. The said police officer made an inquiry about the occurrence. The said police officer seized
one hald lamp on production by Nongmaithem Megha Singh by preparing a seizure memo in my p
resence and y signature of the other Leikai people at about 9 a.m. I put my signature on the said
seizure memo preparing the said police officer after knowing the full contents of it. The said half
lamp was produced by Shri Megha Singh and handed over the same half lamp to the police by
Nongmaithem Megha Singh. The Chemni (glass of the half lamp) was found broken and its tanky
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 68
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
portion had a depression mark. Ext. P-3 is the said seizure memo prepared by the said police officer
bearing my signature Ext. P-3/2. I can identify the said half lamp seized by the police if shown to
me. The witness identify the said half lamp. It is marked as M.O. - 1. The house cum work shop of
Nongmaithem Megha Singhl is situated on the south eastern corner of the
Thangmeiband/Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal which is intervened by a road in between the
house of S. Megha Singh and the said Pukhri. The distance between the place of occurrence and the
house of Sorokhaibam Megha Singh is within the 100 feet.
Xxxxxxx by the ld. Counsel for the accused persons.
I deny the suggestion that no half lamp was seized on production by Megha Singh in my presence. I
also deny the suggestion that I have never signed on the said seizure memo Ext. P-3. I also deny the
suggestion that I am giving false evidence before the court today. I also deny that I never visited to
the place of occurrence.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 78
[18] Statement of P.W. No. 6:
About 11 years ago one day in the morningwhile I was remained in my house I heard from my family
members that Shri Satyajit Singh of our relative was assaulted by some persons on the Polem Leikai
Road at or near south western corner of the Thangmeiband/Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal in
the night when he came back to his house from his work site and then he was taken to the R.M.C.
Lamphel for his medical treatment. On getting the said information I went to the said place of
occurrence and I found some people of our locality were collected at or near the place of occurrence.
After a while a police party led by S.I. Heli Mao of Imphal P.S. came to the place of occurrence. He
made an inquiry about the occurrence. The said police officer seized blood stain sticks, wooden
sticks in two pieces and another short stick, some blood stain earth mixed with pabbles by
prepairing a seizure memo on the place of occurrence. I put my signature on the said seizure memo
prepared by the said Helli Mao after knowing the full contents of it. Ext. P/12 is the said seizure
memo prepared by the said police officer bearing my signature Ext. P-B/1. I can identify the said
seized sticks if shown to me. Ext. M.O. - 2 is the short stick measuring about 5 or 6 inches in length.
M.O.-3 is the broken sticks measuring about 22 inches in length. M.O.-4 is the broken stick
measuring about 31/2feet in length. After seizure of the Ext. M.O.-2 to 4 the said police officer also
seized one half lamp at the place of occurrence on production by N. Megha Singh. On the same day
at about 12 noon the injured Satyajit Singh expired at the hospital and he was brought back to his
home at about 12 noon.
I deny the suggestion that I never went to the place of occurece and further that I never saw the
inquiry made by the S.I. Heli Mao at the place of occurrence I also dey that the said Heli Mao SI
never seized blood stain stick, wooden stick and another short stick and some blood stain earth
mixed with pabbles in my presence. I also deny that I never signed on the seizure memo after
knowing the contents of it. I also deny the suggestion that none of the Ext. M.O.-2 to 4 were seized
in my presence. I also deny the suggestion that the seizure memo Ext. P-12 is a forged and fabricated
document. I also deny the suggestion that I never saw the seizure of any half lamp by the police. It is
true that in my statement given to the police u/s 161 Cr.P.C. I did not state that I saw the seizure of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 69
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
any half lamp by the police.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning-
The witness, in his statement, states that "one day in the morning" and "the police came to the place
of occurrence and seized blood stain sticks, wooden sticks in two pieces and another short stick,
some blood stain earth mixed with pabbles by Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 79 prepairing a
seizure memo on the place of occurrence." "The said police officer also seized one half lamp at the
place of occurrence on production by N. Megha Singh. On the same day at about 12 noon the injured
Satyajit Singh expired at the hospital and he was brought back to his home at about 12 noon."
Mention is made here that the ejahar was lodged by the P.W. No. 1, the father of the deceased to the
police at 4:00 p.m. on 23.06.1989. But, the police visited the place of occurrence and started to seize
the seized articles by preparing seizure memo with seizure witnesses in the morning of the same
day.
[19] Statement of P.W. No. 7:
I know the deceased Seityajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leiaki. One day about 11 years ago
while I was at home I learnt that Shri Seityajit Singh was assaulted by some unknown persons while
he return at hism home in the night at or near the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal and the
said Seityajit Singh was removed to the RIMS for his treatmet. On getting the said information I
went to the said place of the occurrence. While I and some youths of our Leikai were standing near
the place of occurrence a police party led by one police officer namey Heli Mao of Imphal PS. The
said police officer made the spot enquiry in our presence and he seized 1) one blood stained paper,
2) blood stained earth mixed with stones, 3) 2 pieces of sticks with blood stained of 5 ft. and half
inch long, 4) half broken wooden stick length about 31/2 ft. with the blood stained, 5) one piece of
broken wooden stick about 22 inches long with wooden handle of about 6 inches long under the
seizure memo prepared by the said police officer in my presence and in the presence of Magha
Banna Singh and other youths of our Leikai. I put my signature on the said seizure memo prepared
by S.I. Heli Mao after knowing the full contents of it.
On the same day one half lamp was also seized by the said police officer on production by Shri
Megha Singh under a seizure memo prepared by the said police officer. I put my signature on the
seizure memo for seizing half lamp after knowing the full contents of it.I can identify the above
mentioned seized articles is shown to me and the seizure memo prepared by the said police officer.
Ext. P/12 is the seizure memo prepared by the said poice officer. Ext. P/12 is the seizure memo for
the seizure of 1) blood stained paper, 2) blod stained earth mixed with stones, 2 pieces of Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 80 sticks with blood stained, 4) half broken wooden stick, and one piece
of broken wooden stick. Ext. P/12 is my signature. Ext. P/3 is the seizure memo for the seizure of
one half lamp bearing my signature Ext. P/3/3.
I cannot identify the half lantern show to me now which is already marked as Ext. M.O. 1 is the said
half lantern seized by the police in my presence due to lapse of time.Ext. M.O.2 is the short ooden
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 70
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
stick. Ext. M.O. 3 is the broken wooden stick of 22 inches in length. Ext. M.O. 4 is the broken stick of
3 ft and half inch in length. Ext. M.O. 5 is the wooden stick five feet in length. Ext. M.O. 6 is the
wooden stick having wooden handle.
On the same day at about noon I went to the RMC Casualty along with some Leikai villagers and I
find dead body of Seityajit Singh was lying on the streture in front of the RMC Casualty and S.I. Heli
Mao was also present near the dead body of Polem Seityajit Singh. The dead body of Seityait Singh
was removed to the RMC morgue for post mortem examination by the said police officer. We also
followed the dead body up to the RMC morgue. At the morgue the said police officer seized one dirty
brown polyster full shirt torn over the shirt within blood stained, sample of blood on filter paper and
samle of skull hair on production by the said police offier. I put my signature on the said seizure
memo after knowing the full contents of it. I can identify the said seizure memo if shown to me. Ext.
P/4 is the said seizure memo for the seizure of the aove mentioned articles. Ext. P/4/2 is my
signature. I can identify the above mentioned seized articles if shown to me. Ext. P/7 is the sample
of blood on a piece of paper.
Xxxxxx by the defence counsel.
The Leikai situated around Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba is known as Polem Leikai. My house lies on
the southern side of the said Pukhri Achouba. My house and the place of occurrence from where the
sticks, blood stained earth were seized is intervened by the ingkhol of R.K. Bekomsana. I received
the information about the death of the said Seityajit Singh at about 4 A.M. while I was at my house. I
reached the place of occurrence at about 4.30 a.m. when I reached the spot I found the father of the
said Seityajit already present at the spot. I cannot now remember the particulars and identifies of
those leikai people who were found assembled at the spot. The police party came to the spot at about
8 or 9 a.m. Before the arial of the police I went to the hospital to see the condition of the said
Seityajit Singh. At the time of my visit at the hospital dead body of Seityajit Singh was lying at the
Casualty Department of the RIMS Hospital, Imphalafter seeing his condition I again came back to
the spot. When I reached the spot in the morning for the first time I fond the two broken pieces of
sticks at the gate of R.K. Bekomsana Singh. The said blood stained earth and the stone were also
found at the said spot i.e. near the gate of R.K. Becomsana. The stick Ext. M.O. 5 was found lying on
the norther side of Polem Leikai Road on a vacant portion. The distance between the gate of R.K. B.
Comsana and Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba will be about 15/20 feet. It is true that there was a Cril
Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 81 berbed wire fecing all around the said Pukhri Achouba but there
were some broken pieces of the berbed wires at some places.
I did not hear any alarm on the previous night i.e. the night of the occurrence.The dead body of P.
Seityajit Singh was taken to RIMS Morgue from the Casualty Department at around 12 noon. At
about 2.30 or 3 p.m. the dead body was taken from the morgue and brought to our Leikai for funeral
and other religious rites.
I deny the suggestion that I did not visit the place of occurrence on the said day at any time. I also
deny the suggestion that I was not present at the time of making seizure of the Ext. MO 2 to M.O. 6.
I also deny the suggestion that I put signatures on the seizure memos at Ext. P/12 Ext. P/3 and Ext.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 71
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
P/4 without knowing its contest and also on a must later date on the asking of the police officers. I
also deny the suggestion that the distance between the gate of R.K. Becomsana and that of the
Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba is around 50 feet. I deny the suggestion that I do not know the location
where the occurrence took place. I deny the suggestion that I am giving false evidence as tutored by
the prosecution.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) The said police officer made the spot enquiry in our presence and he seized 1) one
blood stained paper, 2) blood stained earth mixed with stones, 3) 2 pieces of sticks
with blood stained of 5 ft. and half inch long, 4) half broken wooden stick length
about 31/2 ft. with the blood stained,
5) one piece of broken wooden stick about 22 inches long with wooden handle of
about 6 inches long under the seizure memo prepared by the said police officer in my
presence and in the presence of Magha Banna Singh and other youths of our Leikai.
(ii) On the same day one half lamp was also seized by the said police officer on
production by Shri Megha Singh under a seizure memo prepared by the said police
officer. I put my signature on the seizure memo for seizing half lamp after knowing
the full contents of it.
(iii) I cannot identify the half lantern show to me now which is already marked as
Ext. M.O. 1 is the said half lantern seized by the police in my presence due to lapse of
time.
(iv) At the morgue the said police officer seized one dirty brown polyster full shirt
torn over the shirt within blood stained, Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 82
sample of blood on filter paper and samle of skull hair on production by the said
police officer. I put my signature on the said seizure memo after knowing the full
contents of it. I can identify the said seizure memo if shown to me. Ext. P/4 is the said
seizure memo for the seizure of the aove mentioned articles. Ext. P/4/2 is my
signature. I can identify the above mentioned seized articles if shown to me. Ext. P/7
is the sample of blood on a piece of paper.
(v) My house and the place of occurrence from where the sticks, blood stained earth
were seized is intervened by the ingkhol of R.K. Bekomsana. I received the
information about the death of the said Seityajit Singh at about 4 A.M. while I was at
my house. I reached the place of occurrence at about 4.30 a.m. when I reached the
spot I found the father of the said Seityajit already present at the spot. I cannot now
remember the particulars and identities of those leikai people who were found
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 72
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
assembled at the spot. The police party came to the spot at about 8 or 9 a.m. Before
the arrival of the police I went to the hospital to see the condition of the said Seityajit
Singh. At the time of my visit at the hospital dead body of Seityajit Singh was lying at
the Casualty Department of the RIMS Hospital, Imphal
(vi) The said blood stained earth and the stone were also found at the said spot i.e.
near the gate of R.K. Becomsana. The stick Ext. M.O. 5 was found lying on the
norther side of Polem Leikai Road on a vacant portion. The distance between the gate
of R.K. B. Comsana and Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba will be about 15/20 feet. It is
true that there was a berbed wire fecing all around the said Pukhri Achouba but there
were some broken pieces of the berbed wires at some places.
(vii) I did not hear any alarm on the previous night i.e. the night of the occurrence.
On perusal of the above reproduced portion of the statement of the witness, it is seen and has
emerged that the witness was the seizure witness for the above mentioned seized materials and the
half lantern which was seized on production by the P.W. No. 4 but, he failed to identify the said half
lantern. He was also a seizure witness for the seizure of one dirty brown polyster full shirt torn over
the shirt within blood stained, sample of blood on filter paper and samle of skull hair on production
by the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 83 said police officer at hospital morgue.In spite of his
house and the place of occurrence were intervened only by one ingkhol, he did not hear any alarm
on the previous night i.e. the night of occurrence in spite of raising alarm "Mee Hatle Mee Hatle"
raised by the deceased and P.W. No. 4 (solitary eyewitness) and stated that the police party came to
the spot at about 8.00a.m. or 9.00 a.m. that shows the police already visited the place and started to
seize the articles i.e. before lodging of the original ejahar and inspite of his house very close to the
place of occurrence, he did not hear any alarm on the previous night as per the prosecution story the
deceased as well as P.W. No. 4 raised alarm "Mee Hatle, Mee Hatle".
[20] Statement of P.W. No. 8:
I know the deceased Seityajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai as he is my brother-in-law. Smt.
Omita alias Chaobi Devi is the wife of Seityajit Singh. Smt. Omita alias Chaobi is my sister. The
deceased Seityajit Singh was a well known football player as well as a Government contractor during
his life time. He was killed by some persons for about 11 years ago.
About 11 years ago he took a contract work of black topping from the PWD, Manipur from
Khoyathong to Dharmasala, Thangal Bazar, I also helped him in the said contract work, while the
work of black topping was going on we got the road one at Khoyathong and one at or near the Jalal
Provision store by using a rope in order to prevent the disturbance from the passersby and in order
to do the work smoothly, and as a result of this several problems were created by the passers-by.
Some persons trying to enter forcibly and someone asked me politely to enter in the said road. At
the relevant time I was in front of the Jalal Provision Store and my brother-in-law Shri Seityajit
Singh was at the Khoyathong side on the day while the work of black topping was going. It was about
4.30 p.m. of that day. Some argumatic persons threatened me.So I was compelled to proceed to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 73
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Khoyathong to talk with my brother-in-law Seityajit Singh whether I was to permit to enter the
person in the said area, when I was just reaching at or near the Star Auto work which was situated to
the northern side of the road, I saw Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 84 some people were
gathering there. On my reaching I enquired about it. At that time one labour told me that one person
was slapped on his head by my brother-in-law Shri Seityajit Singh. But I did not find my
brother-in-law Seityajit Singh and the person who was slapped by my brother-in-law at that place.
So I left the said place and came back to my duty place. While I was objecting the other passers-by to
enter in the working area some persons threatened me. Then I again went towards the khoyathong
to make a report to my brother-in-law Seityajit Singh. But at that time also I did not find my
brother-in-law Seityajit Singh at khoyathong. At that time I met one TombaSingh roller driver of P.
W. D. who was engaged in the said contract work by my brother- in-law and he told me that one
Sidam Singh and the person who was slapped by my brother-in-law came there and searched my
brother-in-law Shri Seityajit Singh.
It was about 5.30 p.m. Then I came back to my duty place in front of the Jajal Provision, Thangal
bazar, we stopped our work at about 11 p.m. on that day and then I came to my home on that day.
In the early morning at about 4 a.m. I received a telephone from Thangmeiband to the effect that my
brother-in-law Seityajit Singh was assaulted by some youths and he was taken to the hospital. On
getting the said information I went to the residence of Shri Seityajit Singh and I got the information
that my brother-in-law died at the hospital.
xxx by the defence counsel.
I cannot say whether my deceased brother-in-law Seityajit Singh was a registered Govt. contractor. I
also do not know whether the said contract work was allotted to my said brother-in-law by the PWD
in his name or not. The distance between Jalal Provision Store where I stood blocking the road and
the traffic point of Khoyathong will be about half a kilometer. There are rows of shops and other
business establishments on both sides of the said road i.e. both on eastern and western side. There is
a post office and some banks in between the said portion of the Thangal Bazar road. The said road is
one of the busy roads of the Imphal bazar area. We blocked the said road by rope on both ends at the
said points which I mentioned in my examination-in-chief.I wastold by the said Seityajit Singh that
he obtainedpermission for blocking the said road from the competent authority. However I did not
possess the said permission with me while I was blocking the passers-by from entering into the said
portion of the road. I deny the suggestion that there was no written permission from any authority
for our blocking the public road during those pick business hour of the day, and further that we
blocked the road on hour on causing much disturbance to the general public did not know whether
my deceased brother-in-law had similar problems which I faced on my side from the passers-by
public.I connot say whether my deceased brother-in-law had quarrels with manypassers-by as he
blocked the road forcibly without authority.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 85 The caller who woke me in the early morning on the nextday
was my sister Chaobi Levi wife of my deceased brother-in-law Seityajit Singh. I alone went to the
house of my brother-in-law to enquire about the matter. I went to the house of my brother-in-law
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 74
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
directly instead of visiting to my injured brother-in-law at Hospital. It was only after I reached the
house of my brother-in-law that I heard the news of his death. I deny the suggestion that I am false
evidence.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
On perusal of the above statement of the witness, we found a lot of reliable statements contradictory
to the prosecution story and in his deposition as highlighted and blackened in the above
statements,it is seen that the deceased while working i.e. the black topping, the deceased used to
block the road from Khoyathong to Jalal Provision,a lot of disturbances created to the passersby and
even quarrelling as well as slapping incidence were occurred. It is further mentioned that the
brother-in-law of the witness (deceased) was a quarrellsome.
(i) While the work of black topping was going on we got the road one at Khoyathong and one at or
near the Jalal Provision store by using a rope in order to prevent the disturbance from the passersby
and in order to do the work smoothly, and as a result of this several problems were created by the
passersby. Some persons trying to enter forcibly and someone asked me politely to enter in the said
road. At the relevant time I was in front of the Jalal Provision Store and my brother-in-law Shri
Seityajit Singh was at the Khoyathong side on the day while the work of black topping was going. It
was about 4.30 p.m. of that day. Some argumatic persons threatened me.
(ii) I saw some people were gathering there. On my reaching I enquired about it. At that time one
labour told me that one person was slapped on his head by my brother-in-law Shri Seityajit Singh.
But I did not find my brother-in-law Seityajit Singh and the person who was slapped by my
brother-in-law at that place. So I left the said place and came back to my duty place. While I was
objecting the other passers-by to enter in the working area some persons threatened me. Then I
again went towards the khoyathong to make a report Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 86 to my
brother-in-law Seityajit Singh. But at that time also I did not find my brother-in-law Seityajit Singh
at khoyathong. At that time I met one TombaSingh roller driver of P. W. D. who was engaged in the
said contract work by my brother-in-law and he told me that one Sidam Singh and the person who
was slapped by my brother-in-law came there and searched my brother-in-law Siri Seityajit Singh.
(iii) There are rows of shops and other business establishments on both sides of the said road i.e.
both on eastern and western side. There is a post office and some banks in between the said portion
of the Thangal Bazar road. The said road is one of the busy roads of the Imphal bazar area. We
blocked the said road by rope on both ends at the said points which I mentioned in my
examination-in-chief.
The statement of the witness as highlighted above shows that while the work of black topping was
carried out by the deceased, several problems were created by passersby and tried to forcibly enter
the road of the black topping. It was also seen from his statement that there was a slapping incident
i.e. his brother-in-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 75
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
law slapped someone and further, it is seen that one, Sidham Singh and the person who was slapped
by the deceased searched for the deceased.
[21] Statement of P.W. No. 9:
I know S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma of Brahmapur Thangapat Mapal, Imphal. He is no more. About 10
years ago one day in the morning at about 10 am while I was at Yaiskul Atheltic Club Ground in
front of the Kalimai Hotel along with my friend namely Kshetrimayum Ronikanta Singh of Yaiskul,
SI Sorojkumar Sharma of Imphal P.S. asked us to bcome a witness in connection with a case relating
to the death of Seityajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Lekai. As asked by SI Sarojkumar Sharma I
and my friend Rohinikanta Singh went to the Imphal P.S. along with SI Sarojkumar Sharma. We
reached at Imphal P.S. and we entered into the police station and we were sitting on chairs inside
the police station. While we were sitting in the Imphal P.S. SI Sarojkumar Sharma took out one
accused person from the police lock-up. The face of the said person was covered with a towel. The
cloth was removed by SI Sarojkumar Sharma and then the said person was examined by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. I came to the said person was examined by SI Sarojkumar Sharma. I came to
know the name of that person was Joykumar Singh of Sagolband as he disclosed his identity to the
police. He also stated that about 10 years ago one day in the night he along with Cril Jail Appeal No.
1 of 2018 Page 87 his friends numbering about 4/5/6 persons whose names I cannot now remember,
assaulted Seityajit Singh with deadly weapons such as cane stick, iron handle of jeep and knife near
the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal, and that they immediately left the place of occurrence by
a jeep the weapons of the crime such as iron handle of the jeep, cane stick and knife held by them,
which were used by them at the commission of the crime, were kept concealed inside the clumb of
bamboo which was lying in the eastern side of his garage. He further stated that he would be able to
point out the hidden place of weapons and would be able to hand over the aforesaid weapons to the
police. SI Sarojkumar Sharma recorded the statement of the accused Joykumar Singh in my
presence and in the presence of my friend Ronikanta Singh. I and my friend Ronikanta Singh put
our signature son the statement of the accused recorded by SI Sarojkumar Sharma as asked by
Sarojkumar Sharma.
After that I along with a police party led by SI Sarojkumar Sharma, the accused Joykumar Singh and
my friend Ronikanta Singh went to the house of the accused Joykumar Singh at Sagolband in a
police jeep. When we reached at the said place the accused Joykumar Singh pointed his finger at the
hidden place of weapons and then he took out one iron handle of a vehicle, one knife and one cane
stick having bold head and handed over the aforesaid weapons of crime to SI Sarojkumar Sharma.
SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized the above mentioned weapons of crime on production by the accused
Joykumar Singh by prepairing a seizure memo at the spot. I put my signature on the said seizure
memo after knowing the full contents of it. At the relevant time a photographer took some
photographs in connection with the recovery of the aforesaid weapons. I can identify the statement
of the accused recorded by SI Sarojkumar Sharma if shown to me. Expt. P/13 is the statement of the
accused Joykumar Sing. Ext. P/13/1 is my signature. The relevant portion of the statement given by
the accused Joykumar Singh is marked as Ext. P/13/2.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 76
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Ext. P/14 is the seizure memo prepared by SI Sarojkumar Sharma in connection with the seizure of
one cane stick, having bold head, one iron handle of the jeep and one knife (heijrang). Ext. P/41/1 is
my signature. I can identify the aforesaid three weapons if shown to me. The weapons are produced
before the Court with sealed cover (with the permission of the Court sealed cover of the said 3
weapons are opened and shown to the witness).The witness identified that the three weapons are
the said weapons which were seized by the SI Sarojkumar Sharma on production by accused
Joykumar Singh. Ext. M.O. 8 is the can stick having bold head. Ext. M.O.9 is the handle of the
vehicle and Ext. M.O.10 is the knife (Heijrang). I cannot identify the said accused Joykumar Singh
due to lapse of time. On 29.01.2001 (Continuation) I am a permanent residence of Moirangkhom
Bokul Makhong which stituates just near the bank of Imphal River. Late Sarojkumar Sharma the
I.O. of the case was also a permanent resident of Brahmapur Nahabam which lies on the adjacent
bank Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 88 of Imphal River. As he was a resident of my
neighbouring Leikai I knew him since my childhood.
Smt. Chaobi Devi the wife of deceased Seityajit Singh is from Bokul Makhong. She is a Brahamani of
the surname of Aribam. She is related to me as my daughter. She is daughter of my cousin brother.
Her parental house lies on the southern side of my house and intervened by 2 other ingkhols. The
occasion of which I acted as a witness was the first time in my life to act as such. There were many
other Leikai people at the YAC Ground when SI Saroj came there for asking us to act as a witness in
the present case. Those Leikai people were preparing for a Mela (Exhibition) at the said ground. S.I.
Saroj did not ask any of these persons gathered at the said ground for becoming witness in the
present case. He specially asked me and my friend Ronikanta Singh who happened to be standing
with me at the relevant time to act as a witness. He was accompanied by some police personnel who
came on a police jeep.The said YAC ground is located on the western bank of Imphal River just in
front of MSRTC compound and kalimai temple. The said ground all the person standing thereon are
not visible from Indo-Burma road or from Kalimai Hotel as the view is obstructed by an elevated
long earthen bund. At the relevant time, I was standing on the said elevated earthen bund. He came
to the said ground from the northern side on foot by leaving the vehicle on Indo- Burma Road. I do
not know from which direction the vehicle came.
By that time the present building of the Imphal P.S. was not existed. In its place there was a wooden
structure having tin roof police station. I cannot now remember how many rooms were there in the
said police station. I also cannot remember in which room we were seated in the police station. I
also cannot now remember if there were any other police personnel or members of the public
present in the said room where we were seated. I do not know on which portion of the building the
lock-up room was located. I cannot remember whether there were any other persons besides those
which I named in my examination i.e. police personnel or members of the public at the time or
recording the statement of the person who was taken out from by SI Saroj sentence by sentence after
questioning him. The answer of that person to one question on the I.O. was recorded by the I.O. I do
not know whether the said statement was recorded in English or in Manipuri. Due to lapse of time I
cannot now remember whom between myself and my friend Ronikanta put signature first on the
said recorded statement. The statement was not read out by the I.O. to us.I also did not read the
same on my own. I just put my signature on the said statement as asked by the I.O. The place for
subscribing my signature was also indicated to us by the I.O. I also do not remember who else
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 77
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
besides myself and Ronikanta put signatures on the said statement. We remained at the police
station for about half an hour. Thereafter we proceeded towards the house of the accused which I
mentioned in my examination-in-chief. There were 2 or 3 police personnel beside SI Saroj when we
went to the house of the accused. Besides, the said police personnel I myself, my friend Ronikanta
and the acused person were in the same jeep.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 89 The house of the accused lies on the eastern side of the Meino
Leirak. There was a byelane running from Meino Leirak to the house of the accused. I cannot say
whether the said byeland connects Sagolband Salam Leikai running through the easternmost
portion of the Ingkhol of the accused. I also cannot say whether the said byeland is used by the
inhabitants of both Sagolband Salam Leikai and Sagolband Meino Leirak. So far I remember there
was a main structure (house) and a garage in the said Ingkhol of the accused. But I cannot say
whether the said house was of wooden structure of RCC building. The garage lies on the northern
portion of the ingkhol. I cannot remember as to whether therer were another structures i.e. one big
eastern (mamang sangoi) and one two storied northern outhouse in the said Ingkhol of the accused.
The said Ingkhol was a big one having an approximate breadth of 70 ft. and a length of about 200 ft.
I did not enter into any room of the said house or garage on that day.
There were many other Leikai People during the period of our remaining there in the said house. I
cannot now remember where the document Ext. P/14 was prepared. The witness again clarified that
he had already stated in his examination that the said document was prepared at the spot. We
remained at the house of the accused for about half an hour. I put my signature on the said
document first. After I put my signature my friend Ronikanta also put signature on the said paper I
do not know whether any other person also put his signature on the said document. I did not see any
other person putting signature on the said document along with myself and my friend Ronikanta.
On seeing the said document today I came to know that there was another witness by the name of S.
Rajen Singh who put his signature on the said document. I do not know the said Rajen Singh. I also
did not see him signing on the said document on the aforesaid day at the house of the accused. I
cannot now remember whether the content of Ext.P/14 was read over to me on that day or not.
I deny the suggestion I was asked to be a witness in the case as specifically picked up by the I.O. as
happened to be a relative of the deceased. I deny the suggestion that the show called statement at
Ext. P/13 was not given or delivered by the accused Joykumar on any day. I further deny the
suggestion that Ext. P/13 is a fabricated document.
I deny the suggestion that I did not visit the house of the accused on any and that of seizure was
made either at the instance of the accused or at his pointing. I deny the suggestion that Ext. M.O. 8,9
and 10 were not seized from the house of the accused or from any portion of his Ingkhol. It is also
not a fact that Ext. P/14 is a fabricated document. I deny the suggestion that I am giving false
evidence.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 78
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 90
(i) At about 10 am while I was at Yaiskul Atheltic Club Ground
in front of the Kalimai Hotel along with my friend namely Kshetrimayum Ronikanta Singh of
Yaiskul, SI Sorojkumar Sharma of Imphal P.S. asked us to bcome a witness in connection with a
case relating to the death of Seityajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Lekai. As asked by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma I and my friend Rohinikanta Singh went to the Imphal P.S. along with SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. We reached at Imphal P.S. and we entered into the police station and we were
sitting on chairs inside the police station. While we were sitting in the Imphal P.S. SI Sarojkumar
Sharma took out one accused person from the police lock-up. The face of the said person was
covered with a towel. The cloth was removed by SI Sarojkumar Sharma and then the said person
was examined by SI Sarojkumar Sharma. I came to the said person was examined by SI Sarojkumar
Sharma. I came to know the name of that person was Joykumar Singh of Sagolband as he disclosed
his identity to the police. He also stated that about 10 years ago one day in the night he along with
his friends numbering about 4/5/6 persons whose names I cannot now remember, assaulted
Seityajit Singh with deadly weapons such as cane stick, iron handle of jeep and knife near the
Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal, and that they immediately left the place of occurrence by a
jeep the weapons of the crime such as iron handle of the jeep, cane stick and knife held by them,
which were used by them at the commission of the crime, were kept concealed inside the clumb of
bamboo which was lying in the eastern side of his garage. He further stated that he would be able to
point out the hidden place of weapons and would be able to hand over the aforesaid weapons to the
police. SI Sarojkumar Sharma recoded the statement of the accused Joykumar Singh in my presence
and in the presence of my friend Ronikanta Singh. I and my friend Ronikanta Singh put our
signature son the statement of the accused recorded by SI Sarojkumar Sharma as asked by
Sarojkumar Sharma.
(ii) I cannot identify the said accused Joykumar Singh due to lapse of time.
On 29.01.2001 (Continuation)
(iii) I am a permanent residence of Moirangkhom Bokul Makhong which stituates just near the bank
of Imphal River. Late Sarojkumar Sharma the I.O. of the case was also a permanent resident of
Brahmapur Nahabam which lies on the adjacent bank of Imphal River. As he was a resident of my
neighbouring Leikai I knew him since my childhood.
Smt. Chaobi Devi the wife of deceased Seityajit Singh is from Bokul Makhong. She is a Brahamani of
the surname of Aribam. She is related to me as my daughter. She is daughter of my cousin brother.
Her parental house lies on the southern side of my house and intervened by 2 other ingkhols. The
occasion of which I acted as a witness Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 91 was the first time in my
life to act as such. There were many other Leikai people at the YAC Ground when SI Saroj came
there for asking us to act as a witness in the present case. Those Leikai people were preparing for a
Mela (Exhibition) at the said ground. S.I. Saroj did not ask any of these persons gathered at the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 79
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
ground for becoming witness in the present case. He specially asked me and my friend Ronikanta
Singh who happened to be standing with me at the relevant time to act as a witness. He was
accompanied by sone police personnel who came on a police jeep.
(iv) I do not know whether the said statement was recorded in English or in Manipuri. Due to lapse
of time I cannot now remember whom between myself and my friend Ronikanta put signature first
on the said recorded statement. The statement was not read out by the I.O. to us.I also did not read
the same on my own. I just put my signature on the said statement as asked by the I.O. The place for
subscribing my signature was also indicated to us by the I.O.
Mention is made here that the present witness who came face to face with the accused namely, P.
Joykumar Singh,while recording the statement under Section 27 Evidence Act, in the Police Station
and inspite of witnessing the recording of the statement and subsequently, seen the seizure of some
of the seized articles failed to identify the said two accused in the Court while giving their
statements.
As stated above, the present witness is from Bramhapur Thangapat Mapal (not periphery area of the
place of occurrence) and he along with his friend namely, Ksh. Ronikanta Singh of Yaiskul were
called and asked to become witnesses.
Further, in his above statement, it was also stated that the SI, Sorojkumar Sharma took out one
accused person from the police lock-up and examined the said person in front of them and
thereafter, he came to know the name of the said person was Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 92
Joykumar Singh of Sagolband and further stated that in front of them and police, the accused
Joykumar Singh pointed his finger at the hidden place and took out one iron handle of the vehicle,
one knife and one cane stick and the same were seized in front of them. Further, it was stated that
the I.O. of the case was a permanent resident of Brahmapur Nahabam Leikai his neighbouring
Leikai and he knew the I.O. since his childhood. Further, it was in his statement that Smt. Chaoba
Devi, the wife of the deceased from Bokul Makhong and she is related to him as she is daughter of
his cousin brother and house of the deceased wife and his are intervened by two other ingkhols.
Further, it was stated that the said recorded statement of the accused was not read out to him and
his friend and he did not read the same on his own.
As observed above, we find the present witness not reliable and not trustworthy. For this, we rely on
the Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment in Anil Phukan V. State of Assam [(1993) 3 SCC 282](supra).
[22] For the sake of brevity and to save time, only operative portion of the statement of the P.W. No.
10, 11 &12 are reproduced herein below.
Statement of P.W. No. 10:
P.W. No. 10 has deposed that he is serving as Additional Professor in Forensic
Medical Department, Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal and on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 80
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
23-06-1989 at 11:15 am, he conducted post Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 93
mortem examination on a dead body of one Polem Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar
Singh, 36 years S/o P. Indrajit Singh of Khoyathong Polem Leikai in connection with
FIR Case No. 384(6)89 Imphal P.S. u/s 302/34 IPC in RMC Morgue, Imphal. The
dead body was identified to him by one SI P. Helli Mao of Imphal P.S. and one
relative, P. Dorendrakumar Singh.
On examination of the dead body, he found the following.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE:-
1) The dead body having good physic, fair nutrition right eye black face deformed,
rigor mortis present all over the body, post mortem staining present on back.
EXTERNAL INJURIES:
i) Incise looking wound 2.5 x 1cm. x 1cm scalp deep on temporal area. 3.5cm. above
left eye-brow and 7 on from mid-line.
ii) Incise looking wound 5.5 x 0.8 cm. bone deep on right side forehead, one cm. from
mid-line and 1.5 cm, above eye brow. It is horizontally placed.
iii) Multiple abraded contusion and multiple laceration on right temporal area in an
area of 19 x 8 cm. skull deep over face with committed fractures on both maxillary
and nasal bones
iv) Contused swelling on right temporo-prietal area.
v) Contusion 13 x 2 em obliquely placed on right side back 4 cm.
from mid-line and 25 cm, below the tip of should
vi) Abraded contusion 5 x 1 cm. over mid-line back over 7 the cervical spine
vii) Multiple abraded contusion 9 x 6 cm. over right side outer aspect of chest 6 cm.
below posterior axillary fold.
viii) Incise injury 7 x 3 cm. muscle deep, obliquely placed front and outer aspect of
right thigh 63 cm, above heel Tailing of the wound present at left lower portion of the
wound.
ix) Incise injury 4.5 cm. x 1 cm. subcutaneous deep in front of right thigh 61 cm.
above heel.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 81
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
x) Stab injury 3 x 1.5 cm. on outer aspect of left thigh 7.2 cm above heel. The margin
is irregular, direction of force is left to right and upwards.
xi) Stab injury 1.8 x 0.7 cm. on outer aspect of left thigh 8:5cm below injury No. (x).
xii) Abraded contusion 7 x 2 cm, in front and inner aspect of right forearm 1 cm above
wrist.
xiii) Multiple abrasions in an area of 10 x 5 cm. on back of right hand.
xiv) Multiple abraded contusion 3 x 1.5 cm. on outer aspect of right arm 19 cm. below
tip of shoulder.
xv) Abraded contusion 3 x 2cm on top of right shoulder. xvi) Lacerated wound 4.x 0.5
cm. muscle deep over left palmand adjoining finger claft between ring and little
finger.
xvii) Abraded contusion 21 x 3cm on outer aspect of left cum
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 94
xviii) Abraded contusion 3.5 cm. x 0.8 cm. on outer aspect of leftside chest 18 cm.
below enterior axillary fold.
xix) Multiple abraded contusion 7 x 5cm in front of left knee. xx) Abraded contusion
2 x 1.5cm inner aspect of left food.
INTERNAL APPEARANCE.
A. Head, Neck and Spinal column:
a) Scalp: as described in the external injuries above.
b) Skull: Fracture of right parietal, both temporal andfrontal
bones, depressed communited fractures on baitmaxilla and nasal bones. Middle and anterior
cranialJossae also fractured.
c) Meninges and vessels: Ruptured subdural and subarachnoid heamorrhages present
d) Brain: - Lacerated arid contused over right temporal and both frontal lobes, weight of the brain
1400 gms.
e) Vertebrae and Spinal bones: No abnormality dictated.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 82
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
f) Orbital, aural, and nasal cavities: As described in the external injuries above.
g) Mouth, tongue, pharynx, larynx and other
neckstructures: No abnormality dictated.
B. Thorax and Abdomen: No abnormality detected.
C. Muscles, Bones and Joints: As described above.
Opinion:-
The cause of death in his opinion is due to head injuries factures of skull bones and laceration of the
brain, Injury No. (viii) and
(ix) were produced by sharp weapon: injury No. (x) and (xi) were produced by pointed weapon and
the rest of the injuries were produced by blunt weapon. The injuries are homicidal in nature and
ante mortem in nature. The time since death is 4 to 12 hours. The age of the injuries i.e. survival
period fresh.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
As per the above statement, the doctor who conducted the post mortem examination on the dead
body of the deceased, the injuries are homicidal in nature and ante mortem in nature as such, the
cause of death is un-natural one. In spite of this finding given by the doctor, the prosecution failed to
connect the injuries, the assault meted out to the deceased with the accused.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 95
State of P.W. No. 11:
P.W. No. 11 has deposed that on 01-07-1989 S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma, who is no more, seized one
photo copy enlarged appearing the picture of the scene of crime and one photo copy (enlarged)
taken at the RMC Morgue along with the negatives of its photographs on production by Naorem
Chandramani Singh the then Police Photographer of Imphal S.P. Office under seizure memo dt.
01-07-1989 prepared by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma. He and Md. Hafijur Rahaman put their signatures
on the said seizure memo prepared S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma. P.W. No. 11 identified the said seizure
memo and photographs along with negatives.
Statement of P.W. No. 12:
P.W. No. 12 has deposed that since 1984 he has been working as a Photographer at
the photo Section of Imphal District Police, Imphal at the Photo section of the office
of the S.P., Imphal West. One day in the Morning of 1989 he went to the Sagolband
Meino Leirak along with SI Sorojkumar Sharma who is no more and he took
photographs of the jeep smeared with blood on the hoods near the back side of the
said jeep on the advice of S.I. Sarajkumar Sharma in different angels in connection
with FIR Case No. 384/6/89I.P.S. u/s 302/326/34 I.PC. On the next day of his taking
photographs of the above mentioned jeep he also went to Sagolband Meino Leirak
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 83
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
along with S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma and his party and one accused person for
recovery of the weapons at the instance of the said persons and he took some
photographs of the place of the recovery of weapons of the crime at the instance of
the accused on the direction of S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma. The pace of the recovery of
weapon is near the garage of the accused inside the plank of bamboo. The accused
took out one iron handle of a jeep, one cane stick having bold head and a knife from
the midst of the bamboos. At the police station he took out photo prints and
developed the negatives of the said photo prints. The said photo prints and the
negatives were seized by St. Sarojkumar Sharma at the office of the photo Section,
Imphal District Police, Imphal on 01-07- 1989 at 2:40 p.m. on his production under a
seizure memo prepared by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma in the presence of 2 witnesses,
namely Md. Hifjur Rahaman and one Nabachandra Singh. He put his signature on
the said seizure memo for receiving a copy of the seizure list prepared by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma.
[23] Statement of witness No. 13:
About 10 years ago one day in the morning around 10 a.m. while I was standing on
the earthernbathat Yaskul Atheletic Club just in front of Kalimai Hotel along with my
friend namely Bebe Sharma alias Chandrakumar Sharma of Yaiskul, one person in
civil dress came towards us and talked with Shri Bebe @ Chadrakumar Sharma and
then he asked Bebe Sharma to go to the I.P.S. Accordingly I along with Bebe Sharma
alias Chandrakumar Sharma and unknown civil dress person went to Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 96 the Imphal P.S. on reaching at Imphal PS. We were sitting on
the chair inside the Imphal P.S. I came to know at Imphal P.S. that the unknown
civilian person who asked Bebe sharma to go to the Imphal P.S. was a police officer of
Impahl P.S. When we were sitting inside the room at Imphal P.S. the said police
officer brought one person before us.The face of that person was covered with a
towel. The said police officer examined the said person brought before us. He
disclosed that the weapons such as iron handle of a jeep, cane stick, knife etc. used by
them at the time of commission of the crime were kept concealed inside the clump of
bamboos which was lying in the eastern side of his garage he further stated that he
would be able to point out the hidden place of the weapons and will be able to and
over the said weapons of crime to the plice. The statement of the said person was
rercorded by the said police officer in my presence and in the presence of Bebe
Sharma put our signatures on the recorded statement of the said person after
knowing the contents of it. The person who stated to the police was also signed on the
said statement recorded by the police.
After a few minues a police party of Imphal P.S. led by the said police officer went to
the house of the said person at Sagolband Meino Leirak in a police jeep. My friend
Bebe @ Chandrakumar Sharma, myself and the person who gave statement to the
said police officer also accompanied with the said police party. When we reached at
the said place the said person pointed his finger at the concealing place of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 84
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
weapons of crime stated above and he took out one iron handle of vehicle, one knife
and one cane stick and handed over the said weapons of crime to the said police
officer. The said police officer seized the said weapons of crime by reparing a seizure
memo at the spot on PRODUCTION BY THE SAID PERSON. I put my signature on
the said seizure memo prepared by the said police officer after knowing the full
contents of it. Ext. P/13/2 is the relevant portion of the statement of the said person
recorded by the said police officer at Imphal P.S. in my presence and in the presene of
Bebe Sharma. Ext. P/13/3 is mysignaure. Ext. P/14 is the seizure list for seizure of the
one irn handl of the jeep, one cane stick and one knife on production by the said
person. Ext. P/14/2 is my signature. I can identify the said weapons of crime if shown
to me. The witness identifies the knife and cane stick. Ext. M.O. 8 is the cane stick
and Ext. M.O. 10 is the knife but I cannot identify the said iron handle of a jeep due to
lapse of time.
Xxxxxxx by the defence counsel.
It is true that I do not know the police officer who came in fornt of Kalimai hotel
where I was standing with my friend Aribam Bebe Sharma. It is also true that the said
police officer never asked me to go to Imphal P.S. with him. I was going on the said
day to the Imphal P.S. only on the direction of my friend Aribam Bebe Sharma. It is
also true that I never heard anything about the talking between the said police officer
and the said Aribam Bebe Sharma. I do not know on the said day whether the said
police officer was coming on foot or not. However we proceeded to thepolice station
on foot on that day. After reaching at the police station I and my friend Aribam Bebe
Sharma sat ina room.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 97 When we first entered into the said room we
did not find ay person inside it.I have no knowledge from which direction the said
accused was brought to the room. The said statement of the accused recoreded when
the police officer interrogated him. I was nto knowing while the statement were being
rercorded, in which language the said statement being recorded. However after
recording the statement the contents were read over in our presence and hearing I
myself did not read the contents of the said statement and I put my signature without
reading it. But after hearing the contents being read over.I also do not remember who
else besides myself, Aribam Bebe Sharma and the unknown person put signatures on
the said statement I cannot say how long I remained at the police station. Thereafter I
myself, police officer, Aribam Bebe Sharma, unknown person who gave statement to
the police and one or two police constables proceeded towards the house of the
accused person. It is also true that I never read the contents of the seizure memo, i.e.
Ext. P/4. However, I know in what connection the seizure memo was prepared. I
myself and my friend Aribam Bebe Sharma put our respective signature on the said
seizure memo. But however I do not know who puts the signature first.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 85
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I deny the suggestion that the so called statement Ext. P/13 was never rercorded or
delivered by the accued on that day and further that Ext. P/13 is a false and fabricated
one. I also deny the suggestion that I did not sit the house of the accused on the said
day or on any other day and that no seizure was made at the pointing of the accused
or at his instace. I deny the suggestion that Ext. M.O. 8, 9 and 10 were not seized
from the house of the accused or from any portion of his ingkhol. I also deny the
suggestion that Ext. P/14 is a false and fabricated document. It is also true that cane
stick, handle of a jeep and knife of such type may be commonly available in every
house. There were many other persons during the period of our remaining at the
house of the accused. I cannot say how long we remained at the house of the accused.
I have no knowledge as to who else but signature on the seizure memo after me and
my friend Bebe Sharma. I deny the suggestion that I do not identify Ext. M.O. 9 and
M.O. 10.
I cannot now remember if the said house where to I and my friend along with police
person and the said accused went was one having gate or not. The said club of
bamboo (wapal) was on the eastern side of the house of the accused. I have no
knowledge if the same road leads to Salam Leikai. I do not know whether the said
road connects with Salam Leikai road or not.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the
narration and finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced
herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 98
(i) About 10 years ago one day in the morning around 10 a.m. while I was standing on
the earthernbath at Yaskul Atheletic Club just in front of Kalimai Hotel along with my
friend namely Bebe Sharma alieas Chandrakumar Sharma of Yaiskul, one person in
civil dress came towards us and talked with Shri Bebe @ Chadrakumar Sharma and
then he asked Bebe Sharma to go to the I.P.S. Accordingly I along with Bebe Sharma
alias Chandrakumar Sharma and unknown civil dress person went to the Imphal P.S.
on reaching at Imphal PS. We were sitting on the chair inside the Imphal P.S. I came
to know at Imphal P.S. that the unknown civilian person who asked Bebe sharma to
go to the Imphal P.S. was a police officer of Impahl P.S. When we were sitting inside
the room at Imphal P.S. the said police officer brought one person before us.The face
of that person was covered with a towel. The said police officer examined the said
person brought before us. He disclosed that the weapons such as iron handle of a
jeep, cane stick, knife etc. used by them at the time of commission of the crime were
kept concealed inside the clump of bamboos which was lying in the eastern side of his
garage he further stated that he would be able to point out the hidden place of the
weapons and will be able to and over the said weapons of crime to the plice. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 86
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
statement o the said person was rercorded by the said police officer in my presence
and in the presence of Bebe Sharma put our signatures on the recorded statement of
the said person after knowing the contents of it. The person who stated to the police
was aso signed on the said statement recorded by the police.
(ii) I have no knowledge from which direction the said accused was brought to the
room. The said statement of the accused recoreded when the police officer
interrogated him. I was not knowing while the statement were being rercorded, in
which language the said statement being recorded. However after recording the
statement the contents were read over in our presence and hearing I myself did not
read the contents of the said statement and I put my signature without reading it. But
after hearing the contents being read over.
(iii) It is also true that I never read the contents of the seizure memo, i.e. Ext. P/4.
However, I know in what connection the seizure memo was prepared. I myself and
my friend Aribam Bebe Sharma put our respective signature on the said seizure
memo. But however I do not know who puts the signature first.
Mention is made here that the present witness who came face to face with the accused namely, P.
Joykumar Singh,while recording the statement under Section 27 Evidence Act, in the Police Station
and inspite of witnessing the recording of the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 99 statement and
subsequently seen the seizure of some of the seized articles failed to identify the said accused in the
Court while giving his statement. The witness said that there was no local people were with them but
only himself his friend Bebe Sharma and the police. This shows that the I.O. of the case intentionally
made the present witness and the said Bebe Sharma as the present witness was the close friend of
Bebe Sharma and Bebe Sharma was the close relative of the deceased's wife. Therefore, we find that
these two witnesses are the interested witnesses.Of the two witnesses for 27 Evidence Act for the
accused Shahajahan, their statemetns were contradictory to each other. The present witness said
that the contents of the recorded statements read over in their presence.
But, P.W. No. 4 said that the contentswere not read over to them.
In spite of the present witness and P.W. No. 9 were the witnesses to the confessional statement of
the accused Shahajahan, their statements were contradictory to each other.
Hence, not reliable.
[24] The P.W. No. 14 who identified the dead body of the deceased and witness of the inquest made
over the dead body of the deceased by the police-
Statement of P.W. No. 14:
P.W. No. 14 has deposed that one day about 11 years ago while he remained in his
house he learnt that Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was assaulted by some
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 87
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
unknown persons and on getting the said information along with one Leikai people
went to RIMS Casualty, Lamphelpat and they found the injured Satyajit alias Satyajit
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 100 Kumar Singh was lying on a stretcher
unconscious. The said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar was giving medical treatment by
the Doctor of the RIMS Causality and after a while the doctor of RIMS Casualty
declared the said Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh had died. The dead body of
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was removed to the temporary morgue which was
situated near the cycle shed of RIMS and covered with a white cloth. After a while a
police party of Imphal P.S. led by one S.I. came there and he removed the cloth and
conducted inquest over the dead body of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh. He
found injuries marked on the dead body of Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh. 1)left
eye brow, was hent, 2) bleeding injury on the nose. 3) injury on the right forehead
and injury on the right knee etc. The said police officer prepared an inquest report at
the spot. He and one Soiban Dhaneshwor Singh put their signatures on the inquest
report prepared by the said police officer after knowing the full contents of it.
[25] Statement of P.W. No. 15:
Now I am working as Deputy Resident Commissioner, Manipur Bhawan, Guwahati.
In the year 1989 I was posted as Sub- Deputy Collector/Executive Magistrate, Imphal
West Central. I know Shri B. Achouba Sharma who was working as S.D.O./SDM,
Imphal West-I, while I was working as Sub-Deputy Collector/Executive Magistrate,
Imphal West Central.
During my posting at Imphal West as Executive Magistrate I conducted T.I. Parade of
accused persons in connection with FIR Case No. 384(6)89 I.P.S. u/s 302/326/34
IPC on 11.7.1989 vide Memo of SDO/SDM/I-W-I dated 10.7.1989. Accodingly, I
informed the concerned P.S. to direct witness Shri Nongmaithem Megha Singh to
present at the Central Jail, Imphal on 11.7.89. I held T.I. Parade of the accused (1)
Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh@Sahajahan Singh s/o Shyamnagar Singh of
Sagolband Meino Leirak, Imphal, (2) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh Lulubi Singh
s/o Ahanjao Singh of do, (3) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh s/o Ibotombi Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai, Imphal, (4) Salam Bodro Singh@ Somorendro Singh s/o
Achou Singh of do, (5) R.K. Moba Singh@Sanatomba Singh s/o Budhisana Singh of
Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai, Imphal, (6) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh@Bobi
Singh s/o late Ibotombi Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai and Khwairakpam
Rajen Singh s/o Budhi Singh of Naranseina, P.S. Moirang. The above accused
persons were in the jail at the relevant time, and I also informed the jail authority to
produce the above mentioned under trial accused person from their rooms/cell inside
the Central Jail premises. Shri Nongmaithem Megha Singh was also present on
11.7.1989 at Central Jail compound Imphal. The parade was conducted in three
groups of U.Ts. the beginning 4 (four) accused persons were mixed up with the first
two groups with 20 U.Ts. and the remaining 3 accused person were mixed among
third group of 30 U.Ts. The accused Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh @ Sahajahan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 88
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Singh and Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh @ Lulibi Singh were mixed with 20 U.T.Ps.
The accused Pangoijam Ramananda Singh and Salam Budro Singh@Somorendro
Singh were mixed up with 20 U.T.Ps in the 2nd parade. The 1st and 2nd Parade
consists of 22 persons Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 101 including two accused
person each. They (U.T.Ps.) were almost the same size, physics and age not distinct
body marks. Before holding the T.I. Parade the dress of the accused persons were
changed in a separate room inside the premises of the Central Jail, Imphal. The dress
of the U.T.Ps. were also changed in another room at the premises of the Central Jail,
Imphal. I do not allow to see the said accused persons by the witnesses as well as the
U.T.Ps. before conducting the T.I. Parade.
Amongst the 7 accused persons, accused Potsangbam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh has got two
marks, one near the right side of the forehead and another below the right side of the mouth,
Pangoijam Ramananda Singh has got 4 visible mark, one below the right eye, another near the right
nose and other 2 mark on the forehead, R.K. Moba @ Sanatomba Singh has got 2 marks one near
right elbow and another on the forehead so the above U.T.Ps. of their group were covered by a piece
of small paper on the face of the marks along with accused persons having visible marks at the
relevant time of the T.I. Parade. I prepared the list of U.T.Ps. in three separate sheets with the
assistance of the jail staff.
At the T.I. Parade the accused Moba Singh @ Sanatomba Singh was identified by the witness namely
Nongmaithem Megha Singh. The remaining 6 accused persons were not identified by the witness
Nongmaithem Megha Singh. I prepared a brief report of the said T.I. Parade in the prescribed form
and I recorded the statement of the accused as well as the witness in the prescribed form. I also
obtained the signature of the accused persons in the separate forms and also obtained the signature
of Megha Singh of the 7th prescribed T.I. Parade form prepared by me.
After conducting the T.I. Parade at the premises of the Central Jail, Imphal, I also prepared a
Memorandum of the said T.I. Parade on 12.7.89 at my office, and a copy of the said memorandum
being No. SDC/IW(C)/TIP/89 dt. 12.7.89 was sent to the Sub-Divisional Officer/SDM, I.W.-I along
with the relevant papers i.e. 7 T.I. Parade forms for 7 accused persons namely Pukhrambam
Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh, Khangjarakapam Basanta @ Lulubi Singh, Pangoijam Ramananda
Singh, Salam Bodro @ Somorendro Singh, R.K. Moba Singh @ Sanatomba Singh, Pukhram
Dhananjoy @ Bobi Singh and Khwairakpam Rajen Singh; and the list of U.T.Ps in 3 sheets for doing
necessary action and for onward submission to the concerned P.S. I can identify the said T.I. Parade
Memos prepared by me in the prescribed for the above mentioned 7 accused persons if shown to me.
Ext. P/5 is the memo of T.I. Parade prepared by me for the T.I. Parade of the accused Pukhrambam
Joykumar Sing @ Sahajahan Singh Ext. P/5/1 is the signature of witness Megha Singh, Ext. P/5/2 is
my signature. Ext. P/5/3 is the signature of accused Joykumar Singh. Ext. P/6 is the memorandum
of the T.I. Parade for the accused Khangjarakpam Basanta @ Lulubi Singh prepared by me. Ext.
P/6/1 is the signature of witness Megha Singh. Ext. P/6/2 is my signature as well as initial.
Ext.P/6/3 is the signature of Basanta Singh. Ext. P/7 is the memo of T.I. Parade prepared by me for
the accused Ramananda Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 102 Singh. Ext. P/7/1 is the signature of
witness Megha Singh. Ext. P/7/2 is my signature as well as initial. Ext. P/7/3 is the signature of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 89
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Ramananda Singh (accused).
Ext. P/8 is the memo of the T.I. Parade prepared by me for the accused Salam Bodro Singh. Ext.
P/8/1 is the signature of witness Megha Singh. Ext. P/8/2 is my signature as well as initial. Ext.
P/8/3 is the signature of accused Salam Bodro@Somorendro Singh. Ext. P/9 is the memo of the T.I.
Parade prepared by me for the accused R.K. Moba @ Sanatomba Singh. Ext. P/9/1 is the signature
of witness Megha Singh. Ext. P/9/2 is my signature as well as initial. Ext.P/9/3 is the signature of
accused R.K. Moba @ Sanatomba Singh. The accused R.K. Moba @ Sanatomba Singh was identified
by the accused N. Megha Singh. The same was mentioned in the para No. 8 of this Memorandum
(Ext. P/9). Ext. P/10 is the memorandum of TI Parade prepared by me for the accused P. Dhananjoy
Singh. Ext. P/10/1 is the signature of witness N. Megha Singh. Ext. P/10/2 is my signature as well as
initial. Ext. P/10/3 is the signature of the accused Dhananjoy Singh. Ext. P/11 is the memo of T.I.
Parade prepared by me for the accused Kh. Rajen Singh. Ext. P/11/1 is the signature of witness
Megha Singh. Ext. P/11/2 is my signature as well as signature. Ext. P/11/3 is the signature of
accused Rajen Singh.
Ext. P/36 is the copy of the memorandum of T.I. Parade prepared on 12.7.1989 sent to the S.D.M.
ImphalWest vide my office memo No. SDC/I.W/TIP/89 dt. 12.7.1989. Ext/ P/36/1 is my initial.
Ext. P/37 is the list of U.T.Ps. for the first parade consisting of 20 persons of U.T.I. The names of
U.T.Ps are mentioned in Ext. P/37. Ext. P/37/1 is my initial. Ext. P/38/ is the list of U.T.Ps (for the
2nd phase) consisting of 20 U.T.Ps. The name of the U.T.Ps were mentioned in Ext. P/38. Ext.
P/36/1 is my initial. Ext. P/39 is the list of U.T.Ps for the 3rd phase consisting of 30 Nos. of U.T.Ps.
The names of the U.T.Ps were mentioned in Ext. P/39. Ext. P/39/1 is my initial. Ext. P/40 is the
order of the S.D.M., I.W., B. Achou Sharma. I know the initial and signature of Achou Sharma. Ext.
P/40/1 is the initial of B. Achou Singh the then SDM, IW-I. Ext. P/41 is the letter sent by Achou
Sharma the then SDM, IW-I addressed to the officer-in-charge of Imphal P.S. Ext. P/41/1 is the
initial of B. Achou Sharma, the then SDM, IW-I. Xxxx by the defence counsel.
I reached the premises of the Imphal Central Jail at about 10.30 A.M. on the same day.
On15.6 2001 (continuation) I alone went to the Jail for conducting the parade. I cannot now
remember whether any official intimation regarding the parade was made to the jail authority or
not. I do not find the witness when I reached Jail. I met some jail officials in the jail premises on
reaching there. I did not see the investigating officer of the case in the jail premises. It took 2 or
21/2hours in making arrangement for the parade. The parade started at about 2 pm. and concluded
at 4 pm. The parade Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 103 was conducted inside the jail campus in
a room. The said room has got some windows and doors. All the said doors and windows were found
opened earlier but the same were closed on my direction at the time of conducting the parade. There
was no man when I entered inside the said room. I was informed by the jail officials before the
parade about the presence of the witness in the jail premises.
The corresponding case numbers for the under trial prisoners who were mixed with the suspended
persons were not furnished to me by the jail authority. The jail authority informed me that the said
persons are all U.I.T.Ps. I also did not make demand about such details. I cannot now remember of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 90
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
the Manipur Central Jail. I saw the witness for the first time when he entered the room where the
parade was conducted after making all arrangements of the parade. He was identified to me by one
official of the jail. 1 or 2 jail officials assisted me in conducting the said parade. Before the parade the
witness stated to me that he went to Imphal P.S. before coming to the jail on that day and he has
been within the jail premises from 10.50 am. All the entries made in Ext. P/9 are all made in my
own hand writings.
I cannot now remember whether the identified person was man having peculiar physical structure
i.e. in height and body or physics. I have no coment to the suggestion that it will not be possible to
find 30 persons of similar structure of the identified man either in jail or in a school, a college or in
an office immediately.The identified person was mixed up with other 30 U.T.Ps. list who were made
to stand in a semilccircle inside the room. The U.T.Ps were in different dress i.e. half shirt, full shirt,
T-shirt. The accused persons were also made to change his cloth inside the room.
I cannot remember now long the witness took in identifying the accused. I did not repeat the parade
after the identification of the accused, and the parade was concluded just after the identification was
made. After the identification the accused was given an opportunity of having his say about the
reasons of his identification by the witness.The accused stated to me that he was shown to the
witness at the Imphal Police Station on 26.6.89 at around 11.30 a.m. Ext. P/9 was prepared during
the process of the parade. Ext. P/5 to Ext.P/11 were prepared by me during the course of the parade
in respect of each individuals who were mixed up with the U.T.Ps.The time of the parade for all the
suspected persons are however given as 2 p.m. I deny the suggestion that Ext/ P/5 to Ext. P/11 were
prepared at my office later on. I deny the suggestion that the investigating officer of this case was
physically present at the time of holding the parade at the jail premises.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 104 Our analysis, observation and reasoning-
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) At the T.I. Parade the accused Moba Singh @ Sanatomba Singh was identified by
the witness namely Nongmaithem Megha Singh. The remaining 6 accused persons
were not identified by the witness Nongmaithem Megha Singh. I prepared a brief
report of the said T.I. Parade in the prescribed form and I recorded the statement of
the accused as well as the witness in the prescribed form. I also obtained the
signature of the accused persons in the separate forms and also obtained the
signature of Megha Singh of the 7th prescribed T.I. Parade form prepared by me.
(ii) I cannot now remember whether the identified person was man having peculiar
physical structure i.e. in height and body or physics. I have no coment to the
suggestion that it will not be possible to find 30 persons of similar structure of the
identified man either in jail or in a school, a college or in an office immediately.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 91
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(iii) The accused stated to me that he was shown to the witness at the Imphal Police
Station on 26.6.89 at around 11.30 a.m. Ext. P/9 was prepared during the process of
the parade. Ext. P/5 to Ext.P/11 were prepared by me during the course of the parade
in respect of each individuals who were mixed up with the U.T.Ps.
Exhibit P. 36:
IN THE COURT OF EXECUTIVE MAGISTRATE/IMPHAL-
WEST(CENTRAL).
Ref:-FIR Case No.384(6)/89/I.P.S. U/S 302/326/34-1.P.C. State of Manipur
-Vs-
1. Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh @Sahajahan Singh S/o Shyamnagar Singh of
Sagolband Meino Leirak, Imphal.
2. Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh @Lulubi Singh s/o Ahanjao Singh of -do-
3. Pangoijam Ramananda Singh s/o Ibotombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai,
Imphal.
4. Salam Bodro Singh@ Somorendro Singh s/o Achou Singh of -do-
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 105
5. R.K.Moba Singh Sanatomba Singh s/o Budhisana Singh of Uripok
Ningthoukhongjam Loikai, Imphal.
6. Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh Bobi Singh s/o late Ibotombi Singh of Uripok
Haobam Dewan Leikai.
7. Khwairakpam Rajen Singh s/o Budhisan Naranseina, Moirang.
MEMORANDUM Imphal, the 12th July, 1989 No. SDC/IW(C)/TIP/89:-In pursuance of orders of
SDM/Imphal- West of dated 10th July, 1989 vide his Memo No.SDO/IW-I/FIR/ 384(6)89/IPS, a
test identification period (TIP) was conducted on 11-7- 89 between 2:00 p.m. 4.00 p.m. in
connection with an F.I.R. Case No.384(6)89 of Imphal Police Station (IPS) in the premises of
Manipur Central Jail, Imphal. 7(seven) accused persons namely 1) Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh
Sahajahan Singh s/o Shyamnagar Singh of Sagolband Meinc Leirak, Imphal,2) Khangjarakpam
Basanta Singh Lulubi Singh s/o Ahanjao Singh of -do-, 3) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh s/o
Ibotombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, Imphal, 4) Salam Bodro Singh Somorendro Singh s/o
Achou Singh of -do-,5) R.K.Moba Singh Sanatomba Singh s/o Budhisana Singh of Uripok
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 92
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Ningthoukhongjam Leikai, Imphal, 6) Pukhrambam Dhanan Joy Singh@Bobi Singh
@/00ulateilbotombi Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai, and 7) Khwairakpam Rajen Singh s/o
Budlid Singh of Naranseina, P.S.Moirang, were produced for identification by 1(one) witness namely
Nongmaithem Megha Singh s/o Bir Singh of Khuyathong Polem Leikai, Imphal.
The period was conducted in 3(three) groups of Rach 4(four) accused persons were mixed up with
the first 2(two) groups of 20(twenty) U.T.B.each. The remaining 30 accused persons were mixed
amongst the third group of 30- (thirty) U.T.S. Among the 7(seven) accused persons 1) Shri
Potsangbam Joykumar Sahajahan has got 2(two) marks,one near the right s side of the forehead and
another below the fight of the mouth, 2) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh has got 4(four) visible marks
one below the right eye, another near the right nose and other two marks on the forehead,
3) R.K.Moba @Sanatomba has got 2(two) marks one near right elbow and another one on the
forehead. Hence all the U.T. S. of their groups were covered by a piece of small papers on the place
of marks along with the accused persons having visible marks.
All the required detail information in the prescribed form are enclosed herewith.
(H.Goshwami) Sub-Deputy Collector, Imphal-West(C).
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 106 From the statement of the witness, it emerged that he cannot
remember whether the identified person was a man having peculiar physical structure i.e. his height
and body or physics and it is also seen that the accused stated to him that the accused was shown to
the witness at Imphal Police Station on 26.06.89, i.e. before the T.I. Parade thereby creating doubt
as to whether the Police had shown the accused to the witness to enable the witness to identify the
accused during the T.I. Parade. The witness did not identify the identified accused in the Court.
[26] Statement of P.W. No. 16:
I am a resident of Nagamapal PhougeisangbamLeikai, Imphal. I know the deceased Seityajit Singh
of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai. Seityajit Singh was my co-villager. I know the accused Sahajan
Singh now present before the Court. (The witness points to the accused Pukhrambam Bijoykumar
Singh and identifies him as the accused Sahajan).We used to call him as Sahajan and I know him
very cosely. About 11/12 years ago I was running a firewood stall at Khuyathong Road at Thangal
Bazaropposite to P.W.D. old gate. I know the accused Pukhrambam Sahajan Singh s/o Shyamnagor
Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak as he and his father running a tyre retreated shop in front of my
firewood stall at Khuyathong Road Thangal Bazar, Imphal.
About 11/12 years ago one day at about 2.30 p.m. while I was remained at my homeShri Sahajan
Singh along with one unknown person come to our house by a scooter and he told me that he was
assaulted by the deceased Seityajit Singh, who was doing a contract work of black topping between
Khoyathong to Thangal Bazar, Gandhi Avenue Road. They also enquired the whereabout of the
Seityajit Singh then I told them he is the resident of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai, then I along with
Sahajan and his friend came out from my house for making an amicable settlement between
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 93
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Seityajit Singh and Sahajan Singh at their worksite. I couldnot bring on amicable settlement
between them as I did not find the deceased Seityajit Singh at his work-site. Then the accused
Sahajan Singh went alone with his friend from there and I also left the said place for my home.
On the next day in the morning, I learnt that Polem Seityajit Singh was assaulted by some unknown
persons in the night and succumbed to his injuries of the RIMS, Lamphel and the dead body was
lying in the RIMS morgue. On the said next day I went to the house of Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018
Page 107 the deceased Seityajit Singh. At that time I found one police officer namely Sarojkumar
Sharma, of Imphal P.S.I narrated to the said police officer SarojkumarSharma about the facts of
coming of accused Pukhramban Sahajan (Joykumar Singh) on the previous day seeking my help for
settlement of dispute in between the said Seityajit Singh and the said accused. Thereafter, the said
police officer asked me to point out the house of the said accused. Then I along with the police
officer went to Sagolband Meino Leirak and I pointed the house of the saidaccused to the said police
officer. When I and the said police officer entered into the ingkhol of the said accused we learnt that
the said accused had not come back and that he was not available at his house. The said police
officer and his companion police personnel looked around the said ingkhol of the accused and they
found a jeep parking inside the garage. I also saw the said jeep parking inside a garrage situated at
the north-eastern portionof the said ingkhol of the accused. I also saw blood stained marks on the
side of the hood of the said jeep. The police officer also examined the said blood stained mark and
then he seized the said jeep. At the time of the seizure of the said jeep some inmates of the house of
the said accused including his father were present. Thereafter I and the said police officer and his
companion left the place with the seized vehicle(Jeep). The police officer went away towards the
police station and I was brought at Khuyathong.
xxxxxx by the defence counsel.
I am a summoned witness.
(Continuation) My firewood shop normally opens at about 6.30 a.m. and closes at about 6 pm. My
mother used to managed and run the said shop. I also sometime helped my mother in the business. I
was not present at the shop on that particular date as my mother was handling the shop on that
particular day. On the said day I remained at my house all alone. It is true that Thangal Bazar road
which is also known as Khoyathong road isone of the busiest road in the Imphal Town. There are
rows of shops, business establishment, post office, banks and other private and government
officeson both sides of the said road.It is also true that the deceased late Sytajit Singh was doing/
executing a contract work for metalling/black topping the road from Khoyathong to Dharma Shala
along the said Thangal Bazar road. I do not know as to whether the said Sytajit Singh blocked the
read on both ends one at Khaythong point and another near the Jalal provisions Store for
preventing the public from entering to the said portion of the road. As I remained at my house I do
not have knowledge of the same.I have been knowing the accused Sahajan Singh or about 10 years
trial to the said incident. I know him as a modest and humble type of man.The deceased Sytajit
Singh was a resident of my Leikai and I know him since his childhood. He was a regular football
player of NISA which is the local football team of Thangmeiband Kendra. He was a well built and
healthy person. I do not know as to whether the said Satyajit Singh was a short temper and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 94
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
quarrelsome person. On the said particular day I remained all through at my house Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 108 till the time of the coming of the accused Sahajahan. I did not hear anything
about any incident taken place at anywhere involving late Satyjit and the said accused. Myself and
my wife were present at my house when Sahajahan came to me. My wife did not hear about the
conversation that took place between myself and the said accused, However, I narrated about the
purpose of the Sahajahan, visit to me to my wife later on my wife is still living with me.The said
Sahajan came to me only for seeking my help in settling his quarrel/dispute with the said Sytajit
amicably and peacefully. After returning from the worksite of Sytajal Singh I did not make any
attempt to meat the said Sytajit Singh on that day.
The house of late Sytajit Singh lies to the adjacent west from my house. I heard about the death of
Sytajit Singh at about 5.30 a.m. of the next morning. Immediately from receiving the information I
went to his house. When I reached the house S.I. Sorojkumar was already found present in the said
house. I know the said Police officer Sorojkumar Sharma from before I also found many Leikai
people and relatives of late Sytajit Singh already present there. I narrated to those persons gathered
at the house about the visit of Sahajan Singh to me on the previous day. I have also told them that
Sahajan came for an amicable settlement with Sytajit with my help.
There are many shops around the Khoyathong Traffic point. Late Sytajit Singh was a populor person
who is well known by the general public of Thangmeiband, Khoyathong area. As the matter did not
concern me I did not make any enquiry to ascertain as to whether there was any altercationor
quarrel between late Sytajit Singh and the accused Sahajan on that particular day. Nobody also
informed me about the fact.
None besides me from the public accompanied S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma and police team to the
house of the accused, Sahajahan Singh at Sagolband Meino Leirak.It was at about 9.30/10 a.m. that
we reached the house of the accused Sahajan at Sagolband. It is true that there is a public path just
near the outhouse of the accused Sahajan which leads to Sagolband Salam Leikai. The blood stain
mark which I mentioned in my in chief appearing on the left side hood of the jeep was at the lower
portion. Itwas the blood stain mark was on the left side of the jeep and the same was also sighted by
the said police officer SI Sarojkumar Sharma.A document was prepared by the said Police Officer for
the seizure of the said jeep at the spot. However I was not asked by the said Police Officer to be a
witness for the seizure of the Jeep I cannot now remember who are those persons signed on the said
paper. I did not see any other blood stain mark on the whole jeep except the one which I stated
above.The accused, Sahajan mentioned the name of Sytajit Singh as a person with whom he had a
quarrel on the day when he came to me at my house. When I gave my statement to the police I
stated that the accused mentioned the name of Sytajit Singh when I referred to the person with
whom he had a quarrel. I did not state to the police that Sahajan Singh stated to me that he was
assaulted by one contractor who had beard and moustache who was presently Cril Jail Appeal No. 1
of 2018 Page 109 doing contract at Khoyathong to Thangal Bazar road. I cannot say as to why the
police described the said person as above and by mentioning the name which I stated so at the time
of my giving to the police. I cannot say as to how the police recorded the portion marked X-1 to X-1
as my statement recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 95
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I cannot say how many brothers and sisters were of late Sytajit Singh. One of his elder sisters is
living as my neighbour as she married to a person of my neighbouring house. One of his younger
sister also is living as my neighbour as married to the family. Both the said sisters of late Sytajit
Singh are married to persons of same family.
I deny the suggestion that the accused Sahajahan never came to my house andinformed about any
quarrel between himself and late Sytajit or anybody else. I also deny that the said accused did not
ask for sought for my help in settling any quarrel involving himself, I also deny that the whole case
was fabricated and concocted by the police with the active assistance of the family members of late
Sytajit Singh and our Leikai people including myself merely on surmises, I deny the suggestion that
I did not visit the house of Sahajahan with the police team and that I did not see the actual seizure
any jeep from the house of Sahajahan I also deny that I did not see any blood stain mark on any
portion of the jeep as stated by me in my statement, I also denythat I am giving false evidence is
requested by the family members of late Sytajit Singh including his two sisters who are living
together with me asa adjacent neighbours. I amgiving deny the suggestion that I depose falsely. I
also deny the suggestion that I came to this court today as requested by the said two sisters of late
Sytajit Singh.
The statement of the witness that the accused/appellant No. 1, Mr. P. Joykumar Singh came to his
house for settling peacefully and amicably with the deceased about the incident of slapping by the
deceased on him cannot be taken as related to the present crime as no inference can be made from
the mere fact that the accused/appellant No. 1 came to his house for settling the matter of slapping
him by the deceased peacefully and amicably and in his own statement, it only shows the peaceful
intention of motive of accused No. 1 for the peaceful solution as the witness did not mention that
there was any violent or revengeful motive or intention of the accused/appellant No. 1 as the witness
failed to establish the criminal motive or intention on the part of the accused/appellant.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 110 Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and of which are reproduced herein below:
(i) Shri Sahajan Singh along with one unknown person come to our house by a
scooter and he told me that he was assaulted by the deceased seityajit singh, who was
doing a contract work of black topping between Khoyathong to Thangal Bazar,
Gandhi Avenue Road. They also enquired the whereabout of the Seityajit Singh then I
told them he is the resident of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai, then I along with
Sahajan and his friend came out from my house for making an amicable settlement
between Seityajit Singh and Sahajan Singh at their worksite. I couldnot bring on
amicable settlement between them as I did not find the deceased Seityajit Singh at his
work-site. Then the accused Sahajan Singh went alone with his friend from there and
I also left the said place for my home.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 96
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(ii) I narrated to the said police officer SarojkumarSharma about the facts of coming
of accused Pukhramban Sahajan (Joykumar Singh) on the previous day seeking my
help for settlement of dispute in between the said Seityajit Singh and the said
accused. Thereafter, the said police officer asked me to point out the house of the said
accused. Then I along with the police officer went to Sagolband Meino Leirak and I
pointed the house of the saidaccused to the said police officer. When I and the said
police officer entered into the ingkhol of the said accused we learnt that the said
accused had not come back and that he was not available at his house. The said police
officer and his companion police personnel looked around the said ingkhol of the
accused and they found a jeep parking inside the garage. I also saw the said jeep
parking inside a garrage situated at the north-eastern portionof the said ingkhol of
the accused. I also saw blood stained marks on the side of the hood of the said jeep.
The police officer also examined the said blood stained mark and then he seized the
said jeep. At the time of the seizure of the said jeep some inmates of the house of the
said accused including his father were present. Thereafter I and the said police officer
and his companion left the place with the seized vehicle(Jeep). The police officer
went away towards the police station and I was brought at Khuyathong.
(iii) one of the busiest road in the Imphal Town. There are rows of shops, business
establishment, post office, banks and other private and government officeson both
sides of the said road.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 111
(iv) I have been knowing the accused Sahajan Singh or about
10 years trial to the said incident. I know him as a modest and humble type of man.
The said Sahajan came to me only for seeking my help in settling his quarrel/dispute with the said
Sytajit amicably and peacefully. After returning from the worksite of Sytajal Singh I did not make
any attempt to meat the said Sytajit Singh on that day.
(v) The house of late Sytajit Singh lies to the adjacent west from my house. I heard about the death
of Sytajit Singh at about 5.30 a.m. of the next morning. Immediately from receiving the information
I went to his house. When I reached the house S.I. Sorojkumar was already found present in the said
house. I know the said Police officer Sorojkumar Sharma from before I also found many Leikai
people and relatives of late Sytajit Singh already present there. I narrated to those persons gathered
at the house about the visit of Sahajan Singh to me on the previous day. I have also told them that
Sahajan came for an amicable settlement with Sytajit with my help.
(vi) The accused, Sahajan mentioned the name of Sytajit Singh as a person with whom he had a
quarrel on the day when he came to me at my house. When I gave my statement to the police I
stated that the accused mentioned the name of Sytajit Singh when I referred to the person with
whom he had a quarrel. I did not state to the police that Sahajan Singh stated to me that he was
assaulted by one contractor who had beard and moustache who was presently doing contract at
Khoyathong to Thangal Bazar road. I cannot say as to why the police described the said person as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 97
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
above and by mentioning the name which I stated so at the time of my giving to the police. I cannot
say as to how the police recorded the portion marked X-1 to X-1 as my statement recorded under
section 161 Cr.P.C.
(vii) I cannot say how many brothers and sisters were of late Sytajit Singh. One of his elder sisters is
living as my neighbour as she married to a person of my neighbouring house. One of his younger
sister also is living as my neighbour as married to the family. Both the said sisters of late Sytajit
Singh are married to persons of same family.
The witness was the one who narrated about the accused with one of his friends coming to his house
for settlement of the incidence of slapping by the deceased to the accused Shahajahan Singh. The
witness narrated to the future I.O. of the case Shri Sarojkumar Sharma about the fact of coming of
the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 112 accused P. Shahajahan on the previous day, seeking his
help for settlement of the dispute in between the accused and the deceased. Just after hearing the
narration, it has emerged and seen that the said police officer Sarojkumar took the witness for
pointing out the house of the accused and at the house of the accused the police officer seized a jeep
parking inside the garage without knowing anything as to whether the said jeep was used in the
commission of the crime or not and not at the pointing of anyone and the police started
investigation pointing suspiciontowards the accused Shahajahan.In this regard, we rely on the
Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment passedin (1994) Supp (3) SCC 463in which, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed at para No. 10that -
Suspicion is no substitute of proof:
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Jagga Singh v. State of Punjab [1994 (3) SCC 463],
observed that-
"10. The aforesaid is all that is on record which the prosecution relied upon to fasten the guilt on the
appellant. According to us, the aforesaid material only points the needle of suspicion towards the
appellant and nothing more. Suspicion, however, is no substitute for proof, and in criminal law the
prosecution has to prove the guilt beyond reasonable doub. The offence alleged in the present case
being murder, which visits the perpetrator of the crime with the minimum sentence is
imprisonment for life, a court of law would be justified in demanding full satisfaction before the
lethality of Section 302 can be used against anyone. The materials on record in the present case do
not have so much of cutting-ege as to penetrate the fortress of innocence built round an accused in
our criminal jurisprudence."
As per the prosecution story, the investigation started when the father of the deceased (P.W. No. 1)
lodged the original ejahar at 4.00 p.m. But, it has emerged that as per the statement Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 113 of the present witness, the investigation and the seizure of the articles already
started in the morning when the present witness disclosed the above fact to the said police officer
(the investigation of the case started from the narration of the present witness to the said police
officer) i.e. on suspicion, on the sole ground that the accused was slapped by the deceased and the
police, even before registration of the original ejahar, started the investigation and started seizing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 98
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
the materials as such, according to us, the aforesaid facts only points the needle of suspicion towards
the appellant and nothing more. The present witness supported the version of P.W. No. 8 to the fact
that the road where the black topping was executed by the deceased was one of the busiest road in
Imphal town and it has rows of shops, business establishments, post office, banks and other private
and Government offices on both sides of the said road. The witness further stated that the police
recorded some of the portion which he did not say during the course of giving his statement to the
police. Further, it was stated that the said accused Shahajahan came to him for seeking his help in
settling the quarrel/dispute with the said Satyajit the deceased amicably and peacefully. This is the
only statement related to the deceased with the accused as such, the suspicion as to whether the
accused will have the motive to take revenge/kill the accused cannot be drawn.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 114
[27] Statement of witness No. 17:
I know the deceased Polem Seityajit Singh, about 12 years and the deceased Seityajit Singh did a
contract work for black topping on the road between Khoyathong to Gandhi Avenue, Thangal Bazar.
During the period of the said contract work deceased Seityajit Singh remained at the work-site and I
was at the Betanyard Chingmeirong for preparing the premix. One day at about 1 p.m.of 20 years
ago I came to the khoyathong work-site for taking sum of 400/- from the deceased Seityajit Singh
for purchasing the Diesel oil. I found Seityajit Singh at khoyathong at work-site and when I asked
him to give a sum of Rs. 400/- for taking diesel oil.The deceased Seityajit Singh went to his home for
taking money by my vehicle Sujuki. Then I went towards a woman vendor who was running her
vendor inside the waiting shed situated at the road side of Khoyathong road for having Pan. When I
reached near the said woman vendor I found 3 young persons standing near the said woman vendor
in angry mood. On seeing their angry mood I asked them what happened. On my enquiry the
woman told me that deceased Seityajit Singh assaulted to one person among them. I told the said 3
persons not to angry (emphasis given).At that time deceased Seityajit Singh came to the place and I
took a sum of Rs.400/- from the deceased Seityajit Singh and when went to north A.O.C., Imphal for
taking diesel oil and then I went to Betanyard, Chingmeirong with the diesel oil. At about 2 A.M.
(night) of the same day I come back at Khoyathong at our working place. When I reached at our
work-site at Khoyathong the work of black topping was almost finished on that day. Then I along
with the deceased Seityajit Singh, driver of the roller and tabler machine, S.O. and the labourers
came to our kholla situated. north- eastern side of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal, and we took
our meals at the said kholla after having meal at our kholla I myself, driver of the Roller and pebbler
Machin and S.O. of P.W.D. who looked the work of our contract work left the said Kholla for our
respective home. The deceased Seityajit Singh and Nongmaithem Megha Singh were remained at
the said kholla when we left the said place, while I was to bath at my courtyard 2 labourers of our
contract work come to my house and they told me that Seityajit Singh was assaulted by unknown
person.
After giving the said information the said 2 labourers left my house without any loss of time I along
with my younger brother Tomba Singh went to the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal, when I
reached at Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal I found Seityajit Singh lying on the road with pool
of blood near the southeastern side of Khoyathong Pukhri Achauba Mapal. At that moment I found
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 99
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
some Leikai people were present there. The injured Seityajit Singh was taken to the RIMS hospital
immediately by Tata Truck belonging to Polem Mill. I did not accompany with them after taking my
vehicle from my house I went to the RIMS Hospital, Lamphel, when I reached at hospital I learnt
that Seityajit Singh was no more.
xxxxxxx by the defence counsel.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 115 The Khoyathong ThangalBazar Road was blocked by
deceased Seityajit Singh one at Khoyathong Traffic point and another near Jalan Provision Store.
The general public were not allowed to enter into the said road while the work at for black topping
was going on. Many persons however insisted for allowing them to enter inside the said blocked
portion of the road.
Late Seityajit Singh was a hot tampered person reacted to provocations easily by his nature.The said
Pan Vendor from where I took Pan was run by Smt. Kamini Devi. She was from our locality. She
died about 2 years back. I cannot now remember those labourers who gave me information
regarding the injury sustained by late SeityajitSingh on that night.WhenI reached the place where
Seityajit Singh laid injured I found about 30 or 40 persons already assembled there. I do not know
whether M. Megha Singh was amongst those persons assembled at that time or not. I had no talk
with the said Nongmaithem Megha Singh after the incident of Seityajit's sustained injuries. The
work shed of the said Seityajit Singh was located on the eastern side of the Khoyathong Pukhri
Achouba just near the main road.After having dinner I proceeded towards my house on the road
lying to the adjacent north of the khayathong Pukhri Achouba. My house lies on the northern side of
the said Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba. I did not hear any alarm about anything raised by anybody on
that night. I cannot now remember any of those three persons who were found standing near the
said Pan shop of KaminiDevi on that day.l will not also be able to identify those persons now due to
lapse of time.I deny the suggestion that I am giving false evidence at the instance of the family
members of late Seityajit Singh.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning-
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) The deceased Seityajit Singh went to his home for taking money by my vehicle
Sujuki. Then I went towards a woman vendor who was running her vendor inside the
waiting shed situated at the road side of Khoyathong road for having Pan.
When I reached near the said woman vendor I found 3 young persons standing near the said woman
vendor in angry mood. On seeing their angry mood I asked them what happened. On my enquiry the
woman told me that deceased Seityajit Singh assaulted to one person among them. I told the said 3
persons not to angry (emphasis given).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 100
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(ii) The Khoyathorng Thangal Bazar Road was blocked by deceased Seityajit Singh one at
Khoyathong Traffic point and another near Jalan Provision Store. The general public were not
allowed to enter into the said road while the work Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 116 at for black
topping was going on. Many persons however insisted for allowing them to enter inside the said
blocked portion of the road.
(iii) Late Seityajit Singh was a hot tampered person reacted to provocations easily by his nature.The
said Pan Vendor from where I took Pan was run by Smt. Kamini Devi. She was from our locality. She
died about 2 years back. I cannot now remember those labourers who gave me information
regarding the injury sustained by late SeityajitSingh on that night.
(iv) After having dinner I proceeded towards my house on the road lying to the adjacent north of the
khayathong Pukhri Achouba. My house lies on the northern side of the said Khoyathong Pukhri
Achouba. I did not hear any alarm about anything raised by anybody on that night. I cannot now
remember any of those three persons who were found standing near the said Pan shop of
KaminiDevi on that day.l will not also be able to identify those persons now due to lapse of time.
It is seen and has emerged that the witness while waiting for the deceased,he went towards the
women vendor for having pan when reached near the women vendor, he found three young persons
standing near the vendor in angry mood and when enquired, the women told him that the deceased
assaulted one of them. This is one of the incidents as per the prosecution story that because of the
said black topping, a lot of problems were created, no-one clarified that the present incident is the
incident of slapping by the deceased to the accused and further, the witness stated that the deceased
was the hot tamper person, reacted to provocation easily by his nature. The prosecution failed to
produce the said women vendor who was the witness of the assault made by the deceased to one of
the persons among the three. The prosecution Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 117 should
produce and examine the said women vendor to throw light as to whether the said assault was to the
same accused person or not.The witness further stated that he cannot remember the said three
persons who were found standing near the said pandukan and further stated that he will not be able
to identify the persons due to lapse of time (even though he met the said three persons, he could not
identify from amongs the accused in the Court). He also stated that inspite of having his house near
the said place of occurrence; he did not hear the alarm raised by anybody on that night. But, as per
the prosecution story, the witness No. 4 as well as the deceased raised alarm by shouting "Mee
Hatle, Mee Hatle".
The witness supported the statement of P.W. No. 8 and P.W. No. 16 to the fact that the road,where
the work of black topping was executed, was the busiest road in Imphal.
Inspite of coming close contact with the said 3 (three) youths, one of whom was assaulted by the
deceased. The witness did not identify the accused who were in the Dock when he was giving his
statement as to whether the said 3 (three) youths were amongst the accused present in the Dock or
not.
[28] Statement of witness No. 18:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 101
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I was running a shop at Khoyathong before 12/13 years ago. I know the deceased Seityajit Singh of
Thangmeiband Polem Leikai and Shyamnagor Singh of Sagolband and his son Sahajan Singh they
run a shop of Tyre Retreating at Khoyathong, Thangal Bazar under the name and style of P.
Shyamagor Tyre Retreat workshop. About 12/13 years ago one day in the morning at about 11/12
A.M. while I was playing Ludu in front of the a Scooter workshop of Shri Tomba Singh a long Cril
Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 118 with my friends (I cannot remember who are my friends playing
the Ludu) we saw some persons were gathering on the Khoyathong Bridge at Thangal Bazar near the
creamation ground.Immediately on seeing the said crowd we rushed towards the said place.When
we reached at the spot found the deceased Seityajit Singh and Shri Sahajan Singh. On my enquiry I
came to know that Shri Sahajan Singh was assaulted by the deceased Seityajit Singh.On getting
thesaid information we left the said place.
x x x x by the defence counsel.
I know Seityajit Singh from before that day. He was a man of good physics. At the relevant time he
was executing a contract work of laying metals on the Thangal Bazar Road. For the execution of the
said work Seityajit Singh blocked the road at the mouth of Thangal Bazar Khayathong Road near the
Khoyathong Traffic point.The Khoyathong Thangal Bazar Road one of the business road of the
Imphal Town and there are rows of shops and business establishments, post office, banks etc. on
both sides of the road. I cannot say there were several instances of quarrelling with thesaid Seityajit
Singh and the general Public when public were not allowed to enter inside the said road as blocked
by him. I also do not know as to whether such instances were taking place many times on such days
of blocking the roads. I agree that Setyajit Singh was a quarrelsome person who came easily
proboked.
I myself did not see the actual quarrelling between Seityajit Singh and Sahajan Singh. I cannot now
remember who was theperson who gave me information about the said quarrel. I deny the
suggestion that there was no quarrel between Seityajit Singh andSahajan Singh on any day.I deny
the suggestion that I am deposing falsely on the request of the relatives of the deceased Seityajit
Singh.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) When we reached at the spot found the deceased Seityajit Singh and Shri Sahajan
Singh. On my enquiry I came to know that Shri Sahajan Singh was assaulted by the
deceased Seityajit Singh.On getting thesaid information we left the said place.
(ii) The Khoyathong Thangal Bazar Road 1st one of the business road of the Imphal
Town and there are rows of shops and business establishments, post office, banks etc.
on both sides of the road. I cannot say there were several Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of
2018 Page 119 instances of quarrelling with thesaid Seityajit Singh and the general
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 102
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Public when public were not allowed to enter inside the said rood as blocked by him.
I also do not know as to whether such instances were taking place many times on
such days of blocking the roads. I agree that Setyajit Singh was a quarrelsome person
who came easily provoked.
(iii) I myself did not see the actual quarrelling between Seityajit Singh and Sahajan
Singh. I cannot now remember who was theperson who gave me information about
the said quarrel. I deny the suggestion that there was no quarrel between Seityajit
Singh andSahajan Singh on any day.I deny the suggestion that I am deposing falsely
on the request of the relatives of the deceased Seityajit Singh.
The witness supported the version of the P.W. No. 8, 16 and 17 to the fact that the road, where the
work of black topping was executed, was the busiest road in Imphal. The witness came to know that
the accused Shahajahan Singh was assaulted by the deceased but, further stated that he himself did
not see the actual quarrelling between Satyajit Singh and Shahajahan Singh and he cannot
remember the person who gave information about the said quarrel.
Inspite of knowing both the accused Shahajahan and the deceased in his statement, the witness
failed to identify the accused in the Dock.
[29] For the sake of brevity and to save time, only operative portion of the statements of the P.W.
No. 19, 20 & 21 are reproduced herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 120
Statement of P.W. No.19:
P.W. No. 19 has deposed that about 14/15 years ago one day in the morning at about 4 a.m. he along
with S.I. Heli Mao of Imphal P.S. and since police constables went to the Thangmeiband
Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal for taking photographs of the place of the occurrence in c/w FIR
Case No. 384(6)89 IPS u/s 302/326. 34 IPC as asked by the I.O. of this case namely Helli Mao and
they found a pool of blood on the ground and one wooden broken stick into two parts on the road to
the southeast corner of the Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal. On the instruction of the S.I. Heli
Mao he took a photograph of the place of the occurrence. The place of occurrence was identified by
one person at the spot. After that he along with S.I. Heli Mao and some police personnel went to the
RMC morgue and on reaching at the RMC morgue we found the dead body of Shri Polem Satyajit
alias Satyajit Kumar Singh lying on a stretcher at RMC morgue, Lamphal. He had taken the
photographs of the deceased Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh on the instruction of the S.I. Helli
Mao and he took the prints of the said photographs of the place of occurrence and dead body of
Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh and the said photographs and negative were seized by SI
Surajkumar Sharma who is no more under a seizure memo dt. 01-07-1989 onhis production in
presence of witnesses. Md. Hifjur Rahaman and A. Tomba Singh ASI of I.P.S. and he put his
signature on the seizure memo for receiving copy of the said seizure memo prepared by S.I. H.
Sarojkumar Sharma.
Statement of P.W. No. 20:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 103
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
P.W. No. 20 has deposed that on 01-07-1989 at 2 p.m. SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized
8 different photographs taken at different angles during the seizure of jeep and 2
different photographs taken at different angles during the seizure of the weapon of
crime along with the negative of the above mentioned photographs on production by
Shri Khamba Singh Photographer of Photo Section of S.P. Office, Imphal under a
seizure memo prepared by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma at Photo Section, Imphal and he
put his signature on the said seizure memo after knowing the full contents of it as
asked by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma.
Statement of P.W. No. 21:
P.W. No. 21 has deposed that while he was attached to the photo section, Imphal
District Police as constable, one day at afternoon SI Sorojkumar Sharma who is no
more seized 2 enlarged photographs with its negatives on production by Naorem
Chandramani Singh under a seizure memo dated 1-7-89 in his presence and he put
his signature on the said seizure memo prepared by S.I. H. Sarojkumar Sharma after
knowing the full contents of it. P.W. No. 21 has also deposed that on the same day
after the seizure of above photographs S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma of Imphal P.S. seized
5 different photographs showing the picture of the jeep and others and 2 photographs
showing picture of the recovery of weapons of crime on production by photographer
Khamba Singh of Photo section of Imphal District Police under a seizure memo dt.
01-07-1989 and he also put his signature on the said seizure memo after knowing the
full contents of it.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 121
[30] Statement of P.W. No. 22 (father of the accused):
The accused Pukhrambam Sahajan@Joykumar Singh is my son. I was running a tyre
retreat shop at Thangal Bazar on the eastern side of the Khoyathogn Road.About 13
years ago, one day at about noon a police party led by one police officer came to our
house and he said police officer conducted search of my house. During the search
they did not find my son Shahajan @ Joykumar Singh. Later on, they produced one
battery from the room of my sister- in-lawnamely Akashini Devi. On that day the said
police officer seized one battery and one jeep from our outhouse by preparing a
seizure memo for the seizure of the battery and jeep. I subscribed my signature on the
two seizure memos and asked by the said police officer. Ext. P/42 is the seizure
memo for the seizure of jeep. Ext. P/42/1 is my signature. Ext. P/43 is the seizure
memo for the seizure of battery. Ext. P/43/1 is my signature, sister-in- law Akashini
Devi is in the zimadar of the said jeep and she is no more. At the time of seizing the
said jeep Shri Pukhrambam Kunjakeshore was recorded in the papers and documents
in respect of he said jeep. He died 10 years ago at the time of the said seizure. My said
elder brother died in 1982.
Xxxxxx by the defence counsel.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 104
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Sagolband Meino Leirak runs from north to south. There are rows of houses on both
sides of Meino Leirak. My house is connected to Meino Leirak by a small lane. My
house is the last house of Meino Leirak and my adjacent northern house belonged to
another Leikai namely Salam Leikai. The said lane coming from Meino Leirak upto
my house cuts through the eastern portion of my ingkhol and the same leads to
Sagolband Salam Leikai Road. The villagers of both the Leikais used the said lane for
going to and fro in between the said 2 Leikais.
My residential house is of Asamese type i.e tin roof and mud plastered walling. The
same is facing towards east. There are 3 structures in between my ingkhol. One is our
eastern outhouse and another on the orther outhouse.
The said northern outhouse is two outhouse is having wall on 3 sides except the
western side. The said lane runs on the eastern side of the said outhouse. The said
jeep which was seized by the police was kept on the eastern outhouse. The ground
floor of the norther outhouse is used as my workshops for retreating tyrers. I installed
machines of the said tyre works in the said northern outhouse.
There was no close garage within our ingkhol at any time.
After about 3/4 days of the seizure of the said jeep the police one day came to my
house taking my son Joykumar Singh with handcupped on his hands. My son was
crying when he was taken from the police jeep at my courtyard and on seeing his
condition his sisters were crying. To his sisters my son told that he was innoncent
and he had no false.The police officer who led the police team thereafter Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 122 asked my wife and dauhters to bring out any knife and
sticks to my arrested son in future. Accordingly, my wife and children took out knives
and sticks from inside my house and handed the same over to the police. Some of
police teams also took out iron rods and handle of the jeep which were kept inside my
workshop. After collecting the said items police put them the same together and the
same were taken to a place just near the said lane running on the eastern portion of
my ingkhol.My son was thereafter made to sit on the said spot and after making him
sit there the police personnel put those items collectively in his front. Thereafter, a
police photographer who was in civil uniform and came together with the police team
took photographs of my son for about  times. There was no civilian except the
cameraman in the police team that visited my house along with my son.
On 15.11.2002 (Continuation) It is true that my house is no the last house of Meno
Leirak. It is true that Sagolband Meino Leirak coming from the main road i.e. New
Cachar Road leading upto Kwakeithel. It is also true that land coming from Meino
Leirak upto my house is not a busy road. It is not true that my statement in my
cross-examination that there was no close garage within our ingkhol at any time is
false. I deny the suggestion that the police officer who came to our house along with
my son Joykumar Singh and never asked my wife and daughter to bring out any knife
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 105
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
and sticks available in our house stating that the same would be useful to my arrested
son in future. I also deny the suggestion that my wife and children never took out
knife and stick from inside my house and handed over the same to the police and that
some police team never took out iron rods and handle of the jeep which were kept
inside my workshop. I also deny the suggestion that my statement in my
cross-examination that after collecting the said items police put the same together
and the same were taken to a place just near the said land running on the eastern
portion of my ingkhol.......... There was no civilian except the camera man in the
police team that visited my house along with my son are false. I deny the suggestion
that a police officer of Imphal P.S. had seized one iron handle of a jeep, one knife and
one cane stick on production by my son Joykumar Singh.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found some revelation contrary to the prosecution story and unreliable statement
in his deposition as highlighted and blacked in the above statement as well as the
narration and finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced
herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 123
(i) About 13 years ago, one day at about noon a police party led
by one police officer came to our house and he said police officer conducted search of
my house. During the search they did not find my son Shahajan @ Joykumar Singh.
Later on, they produced one battery from the room of my sister- in-lawnamely
Akashini Devi. On that day the said police officer seized one battery and one jeep
from our outhouse by preparing a seizure memo for the seizure of the battery and
jeep. I subscribed my signature on the two seizure memos and asked by the said
police officer. Ext. P/42 is the seizure memo for the seizure of jeep. Ext. P/42/1 is my
signature. Ext. P/43 is the seizure memo for the seizure of battery. Ext. P/43/1 is my
signature my sister-in-law Akashini Devi is in the zimadar of the said jeep and she is
no more. At the time of seizing the said jeep Shri Pukhrambam Kunjakeshore was
recorded in the papers and documents in respect of the said jeep. He died 10 years
ago at the time of the said seizure. My said elder brother died in 1982.
(ii) The police officer who led the police team thereafter asked my wife and dauhters
to bring out any knife and sticks to my arrested son in future. Accordingly, my wife
and children took out knives and sticks from inside my house and handed the same
over to the police. Some of police teams also took out iron rods and handle of the jeep
which were kept inside my workshop. After collecting the said items police put them
the same together and the same were taken to a place just near the said lane running
on the eastern portion of my ingkhol.My son was thereafter made to sit on the said
spot and after making him sit there the police personnel put those items collectively
in his front. Thereafter, a police photographer who was in civil uniform and came
together with the police team took photographs of my son for aobut  times. There
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 106
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
was no civilian except the cameraman in the police team that visited my house along
with my son.
The present witness is the father of the accused Shahajahan, in his statement, he stated that the
police searched for his son Shahajahan at his residence but, his son was not at home during that
time and seized one battery and one jeep from their house and he was asked to put his signature on
the seizure memo. During the said search, the police team asked his wife and daughters to bring out
any knife and sticks to have his son in future (to check). Accordingly, his wife and children took
knife and Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 124 sticks from his house and handed over to the
police. The police team also took out iron rod, handle of the jeep which were kept inside his
workshop and after collecting the said items, the police put the same at the place on the eastern
portion of his ingkhol.
Thereafter, his son was made to sit on the spot and the police put those items collectively in his front
and took photographs and also stated that there was no civilian except the said cameraman.
[31] Statement of P.W. No. 23:
About 13 years ago one day at about noon while I was working in the Oil Mill stituated to the
western side of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal I saw a police party led by onepolice officer
came to the place of occurrence of this case i.e. to the south-western corner of the Khoyathong
Pukhri Achouba Mapal on the Polem Leikai Leirak, Thangmeiband along with the person whose face
was covered by a cloth. The police party along with the person whose face was covered a cloth made
a search by looking at or near the north- easterncorner of the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal
on the southern side of the road of PolemLeikai Leirak.At the relevant time I went out from inside
the mills and stood near on the varendah of the said mill and looked towards them. After a while the
person whose face was covered picked up a wooden stick (cheitup) from inside the said nullah from
amongst KABOKANG. The police officer prepared a seizure memo and I put my signature on the
seizure memo as a witness. I myself did not read the contents of the said seizure memo. I am coming
to the Court today to depose about the said seizure of thesaid wooden stick as the said seizure was
made inmy presence.Ext. P/44 is the seizure memo pepared by the said police officer and
Ext.P/44/1 is my signature. Ext. M.O. 15 is the said wooden stick seized by the police.
Xxxxxx by the defence counsel.
It is true that the road of Polem Leikai Leirak is a busy road, and that many passers-by are goig to
and fro in day time. I was working in the said mill for about 3/4 years by that time. Sometimes I
spent night in the said mill, if there was a work. It is true that on that particular day I was not in the
mill in the night.
I deny the suggestion that at the relevant time I never went out from inside the mill and that I was
not standing on the varendah of the said mill. I also deny the suggestion that on the said day I was
not looking forward towards the said party. It is also denied that I never Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of
2018 Page 125 saw any police party led by one police officer come to the alleged place of occurrence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 107
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
It is also denied that the police party along with a person who covered his face with a cloth never
came to the alleged place of occurrence and that they never made search nearby the aforesaid area. I
also deny the suggestion that the said person with his face covered never picked any wooden stick
from inside the nullah, and that the police officer never seized any wooden stick in my presence
under a seizure memo. I also deny the suggestion that Ext. P/44 is a forged and fabricated
document. I deny the suggestion that I put my signature on a blank paper. I deny the suggestion that
many pesons of thelocality gathered at the time of the said seizures. So far I remember only a few
women were present at that time. It is true that I did not put any identification mark on the said
wooden stick at the time of the said seizure. It is true that a wooden stick of the type of wooden stick
marked Ext. M.O. 5 may be available in most of the household. I have no knowledge if any other
person put his signature on the said seizure memo. I deny the suggestion that I am giving false
evidence.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) At the relevant time I went out from inside the mills and stood near on the
varendah of the said mill and looked towards them. After a while the person whose
face was covered picked up a wooden stick (cheitup) from inside the said nullah from
amongst KABOKANG. The police officer prepared a seizure memo and I put my
signature on the seizure memo as a witness. I myself did not read the contents of the
said seizure memo. I am coming to the Court today to depose about the said seizure
of the said wooden stick as the said seizaure was made inmy presence.
The witness is a seizure witness of the seizure of one wooden stick as picked up by a person whose
face was covered inside a nullah from amongst Kabokang. The police prepared a seizure memo and
he was made a seizure witness. He stated that he did not read the contents of the seizure memo. The
witness did not mince a word to the fact that the seized stick was the weapon of offence used by the
accused thereby creating doubt and we Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 126 observe that the
present accused failed to connect with the seized articles with the commission of the crime and to
connect with the accused.
[32] Statement of S.W. 24:
I have been working as Editor of local newspaper Kangleipaki Meira since 1982. In the year 1989 the
office building of the said Kalgleipaki Meira was at Sagolband Salam Leikai, Imphal at the rented
house of Salam Rajen Singh. Now the said office is at Keishamthong Bazar, Imphal. I know Shri Kh.
Ranjit Singh of Yumnam Huidrom Khunjao village. He was also working as Joint Editor of the local
newspaper Kangleipaki Meira in the year 1989. Sometimes in the year 1989 at about 10/11 A.M.
while I was working with Kh. Ranjit Singh Joint Editor of our news Kangleipaki Meira, in front of
our press office a police party led by one police officer namely S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma of Imphal
P.S. came there along with Salam Bodo Singh and other civilians by a vehicle and the said vehicle
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 108
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
was stopped in front of our press. I know Bodo Singh before that day as his house was situated at the
Western side of our press building. S.I Sarojkumar Sharma was no more. S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma
asked Bodo Singh and other civilians who got down from the said jeep. Accordingly persons i.e.
Salam Bodo Singh and other civilians got down from the vehicle. S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma asked
both us (myself and Kh. Ranjit Singh) to witness the seizure of clothings worn by the two accused
persons at the time of commission of the crime i.e. in connection with the death of Seityajit Singh.
S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma seized one Blue Jin pant with blood like stain and one grey colour full shirt
on production by Salam Bodo Singh in my presence and in the presence of Ranjit Singh under a
seizure memo dt. 28.6.89 at about 11.15 a.m.Ext. P/45 is the seizure memo prepared by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma for the seizure of one Jin pant and one grey colour full shirt on production by
Salam Bodo Singh. I and Ranjit Singh put our signatures on the said seizure memo prepared by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/45/1 is my signature. The said articles i.e. one blue Jin pant and one
grey colour full shirt were brought by the accused Bodo Singh along with SI Sarojkumar Sharma and
other police personnel near to our press office. Due to lapse of time I cannot identify the said long
pant Jin and grey colour full shirt.
On the same day another newly washed long pant dark- grey in colour and one full shirt white-blue
and grey colour polyster shirt were seized by SI Sarojkumar Sharma under a seizure memo dt.
28.6.89 at about 11.30 a.m. on production by Salam Debajit Singh in the instance of Bodo Singh and
another civilian person in my presence. I put my signature on the said seizure memo as asked by SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/46 is the said seizure memo and Ext. P/46/1 is my signature. Due to
lapse Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 127 of time I cannot identify the said articles. The said Bodo
is not present in the Court today. The said Bodo Singh is no more.
xxxxx by the defence counsel.
The said house of Salam Bodo Singh and our said press lies in the same ingkhol. It is true that there
are many houses in and around the house of said Salam Bodo Singh. I cannot now say as to who else
other than myself and the said Ranjit were present at the time of the said seizure. I deny the
suggestion that no long pant and full shirt was seized at the instance or on production by the said
Salam Bodo Singh. I also deny the suggestion that the said Sarojkumar never seized any long pant or
shirt on production by Salam Deven. I also deny the suggestion that Ext. P/45 and P/46 are
fabricated documents. I deny the suggestion that I am giving false evidence.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) Accordingly persons i.e. Salam Bodo Singh and other civilians got down from the
vehicle. S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma asked both us (myself and Kh. Ranjit Singh) to
witness the seizure of clothings worn by the two accused persons at the time of
commission of the crime i.e. in connection with the death of Seityajit Singh. S.I.
Sarojkumar Sharma seized one Blue Jin pant with blood like stain and one grey
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 109
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
colour full shirt on production by Salam Bodo Singh in my presence and in the
presence of Ranjit Singh under a seizure memo dt. 28.6.89 at about 11.15 a.m.
(ii) The said articles i.e. one blue Jin pant and one grey colour full shirt were brought
by the accused Bodo Singh along with SI Sarojkumar Sharma and other police
personnel near to our press office. Due to lapse of time I cannot identify the said long
pant Jin and grey colour full shirt.
(iii) On the same day another newly washed long pant dark-grey in colour and one
full shirt white-blue and grey colour polyster shirt were seized by SI Sarojkumar
Sharma under a seizure memo dt. 28.6.89 at about 11.30 a.m. on production by
Salam Debajit Singh in the instance of Bodo Singh and another civilian person in my
presence. I put my signature on the said seizure memo as asked by SI Sarojkumar
Sharma.
Ext. P/46 is the said seizure memo and Ext. P/46/1 is my signature. Due to lapse of time I cannot
identify the said articles. The said Bodo is not present in the Court today. The said Bodo Singh is no
more.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 128 The witness is a seizure witness for the seizure of clothing of
the accused Salam Bodo Singh on production by the accused Salam Bodo Singh but, he stated that
he cannot identify the said long pant jean in grey colour due to lapse of time. Even though the
witness stated that he knows the accused Salam Bodo Singh, he did not identify the accused in the
Court.
[33] Statement of P.W. No. 25:
Now I am working as Assistant Librarian to the Gauhati High Court, Imphal Bench. In the year 1989
I was working as Joint Editor of Manipur Local Newspaper Kangleipakki Meira. I know Shri
Shyamjai Singh was a Joint Editor of Manipur Local weekly newspaper Kangleipakki Meira in the
year 1989. One day in the month of June 1989 while I along with Shyamjai Singh, Editor of our
Press standing in front of our Press, a police party led by SI Sarojkumar Sharma came by a vehicle
and he asked me and Shyamjai Singh to witness a seizure of some articles from the house of Salam
Bodo Singh, whose house was situated in the western of our Press. I myself and Shyamjai Singh
along with the police party went to the house of Bodo Singh. On reaching to the house of Bodo
Singh, SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized one long pant Jin and one full shirt from the house of Bodo
Singh under a seizure memo dt 28.06.89. I put my signature on the said seizure memo as asked by
the said Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/45 is the said seizure memo prepared by SI Sarojkumar
Sharma. Ext. P/45 is my signature. As per seizure memo Ext. P/45 the said articles were seized on
production by accused Bodo Singh. However, I cannot say say if Bodo Singh and accused Joykumar
Singh were present at the time of the said seizure or not.
At this stage the ld. PP prays the Court for allowing the witness to declare as a hostile as the witness
resiled from his previous statement. The prayer is allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 110
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I deny the suggestion that on the said day of the seizure of long pant and T-Shirt the accused Bodo
Singh and the accused Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh were also accompanied with the police party
and that on that day SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized one blue Jin long pant and one grey colour full
shirt on production by Shri Bodo Singh from his house. (The attention of the witness is drawn to the
relevant portion of the statement recorded u/s 161 Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 129 CrPC
which is marked X to X for identification. The portion marked X to X is read over to the witness.)
The witness states that I do not know my statement in my examination in-chief that however I
cannot how say ............ or not" is false.
Xxxxxxx by the defence counsel.
I deny the suggestion that I myself and Shyamjai Singh never accompanied with the police party led
by SI Sarojkumar Sharma to the house of Salam Bodo Singh. I also deny the suggestion that I never
entered the house of the said Bodo Singh. I deny the suggestion that SI Sarojkumar Sharma never
seized one long pant and one full shirt from the house of the said Bodo Singh in our presence. It is
true that my signature was obtained by the said Sarojkumar Sharma on blank paper as asked to do
so. I also do not know as to who put signature on the said blank paper other than me.
[34] Statement of S.W. No. 26:
I know the accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh of Ningthoujam Leikai. Now he is sitting in the dock.
About 13 years ago one day in the afternoon at about 2 p.m. while I was living at my house I learnt
that some police persons were coming to the house of the accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh of Uripok
Ningthoujam Leikai. On getting the said information I along with Romen Singh of Uripok
Ningthoujam Leikai went to the house of R.K. Sanatomba Singh. On that I found some leikai along
with the police party and the accused R.K. Sanatomba at their house. On the same day one police
officer seized 2/3 clothes from the house of R.K. Sanatomba Singh under a seizure memo prepared
by the said police officer. On that day I and my friend Romen Singh put our signatures on the said
seizure memo as asked by the said police officer. Ext. P/47 is the said seizure memo prepared by one
police officer on that day at the house of R.K. Sanatomba Singh @ Moba Singh. Ext. P/47/1 is my
signature.
XXXX by the defence counsel.
I deny the suggestion that I did not go to the house of the said Moba Singh on the said day. I also
deny the suggestion that no article was seized on the said day.It is true that the said seized articles
were not shown to me. I cannot say definitely if anything was written on the said paper on which I
and the said Romen Singh put our signature. I deny the suggestion that Ext. P/47 is a false and
fabricated one and that my signature at Ext. P/47/1 was also put on blank paper as asked by the
police on that day.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 130 Our analysis, observation and reasoning-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 111
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) It is true that the said seized articles were not shown to me.
I cannot say definitely if anything was written on the said paper on which I and the said Romen
Singh put our signature. I deny the suggestion that Ext. P/47 is a false and fabricated one and that
my signature at Ext. P/47/1 was also put on blank paper as asked by the police on that day.
Even though the witness identified one of the accused Shri RK Sanatomba (now expired), the
witness is only the seizure witness and he is neither the eyewitness nor the person who knows about
the occurrence and he happens to be the seizure witness of the seizure of the wearing apparel as
requested by the police, but the witness stated that the seized articles were not shown to him and
further said that he cannot say definitely if anything was written on the said paper, on which, he and
his friend Romen Singh put their signatures.
[35] Statement of S.W. No. 27:
I know the accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh @ Moba Singh of our Leikai and he is now sitting in the
dock. About 13 years ago one day at about 2 p.m. while I was on Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai
Road I saw some police persons entered into the ingkhol of accused RK Sanatomba @ Moba Singh.
After a few minutes I also entered to the house/ingkhol of R.K. Sanabtomba @ Moba Singh. When I
entered to the courtyard of the house of RK Sanatomba Singh I found some Leikai people including
R.K. Sanatomba Singh and some police persons were also present in the courtyard of accused
Sanatomba Singh. On that one police officer seized wearing clothes of the accused Moba Singh. I put
my signature on a paper as asked by the said police Officer. I do not know from whose possession
the said clothes were seized by the police. And I also do not know whether the said paper on which I
put Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 131 my signature was a written or not. Ext. P/47 is the paper
on which I put my signature. Ext. P/47/2 is my signature.
(At this stage the ld. P.P. prays the Court for allowing him to declare the witness as a hostile as the
witness resiles from his previous statement recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C and to allow him to put the
leading questions in the nature of crossexamination. The prayer is allowed).
It is not a fact that what I stated in my examination that I do not know whether the said Ext. P/47 is
a written or not is false. I also deny the suggestion that SI Sarojkumar Sharma the I.O of this case
seized one white cotton Paiyama stained with blood being found was properly and one nylon T-shirt
on production by the accused R.K. Moba @ RK Sanatomba Singh on 27.7.89 at about 2 p.m. I also
deny the suggestion that I am giving false evidence in order to save the accused Mobo singh and
others from this case as they belong to our Leikai. I also deny the suggestion that I and Premjit
Singh put our signatures on the seizure memo prepared by SI Sarojkumar Sharma after knowing the
full contents of it. I also deny the suggestion that appearingaccused RK Sanatomba Singh also put
his signature on the said seizure memo on that day.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 112
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(The attention of the witness is drawn to the relevant portion of the statement recorded u/s 161
Cr.P.C which is marked XI to XI for identification) The portion marked XI to XI is read over and
explained to the witness.
The witness states that I do not know as to how and why the police recorded which is marked XI to
XI as my statement.
XXX by the defence counsel.
I deny the suggestion that I never went to the ingkhol of RK Sanatomba @ Moba Singh. I also deny
the suggestion that I never saw the accused R.K. Sanatomba Singh and police party were present in
the courtyard of R.K. Sanatomba Singh. I also deny the suggestion that the police never seized the
wearing cloths of Moba and that I was never stated by the police that the alleged seized clothes was
of R.K. Moba Singh. I deny the suggestion that Ext. P/47 is a false and fabricated one and that my
signature at Ext. P/47/2 was also obtained by the police on a blank paper.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
The witness is a seizure witness for the seizure of wearing cloths of accused Moba and the witness
identified the accused RK Sanatomba @ Moba Singh. But, the witness was declared hostile. In his
statement, the witness stated that he did Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 132 not know in whose
possession the said wearing cloths were seized by the police. Further the witness stated that he did
not know whether the said paper on which he put his signature was a written or not.
[36] For the sake of brevity and to save time, only operative portion of the statement of the P.W. No.
28, 29, 30, 31 & 32 are reproduced herein below:
Statement of P.W. No. 28:
P.W. No. 28 has deposed that he know the accused persons now present in the Court
and they are Sahajan Singh his younger brother-in-law, Ramananda Singh, Basanta
Singh. The accused Bodo Singh is his younger her but he is no more. P.W. 28 further
goes to say that he know Shri Srokhaibam Lakhikanta Singh, Advocate and he is his
brother-in-laws. He know nothing about this case except he learnt that the accused
Salam Bodo Singh, Pukhrambam Joykumar@Sahajan Singh. Khwairakpam Basanta
Singh and Pangoijam Ramanamda Singh were arrested by the police in c/w FIR No.
384(6)89 I.P.S. u/s 302/34/326 IPC.[This witness was declared as hostile witness
and cross examined by the Ld.PP.] The witness was declared hostile.
Statement of P.W. No. 29:
P.W. No. 29 has deposed that about 12 years ago one day at about 9 A.M. he met a
police party of Imphal P.S. on the road at Salam Leikai near the Saikhom Kollup.
They asked him to enter to the house Singh at Sagolband Meino Leirak for making
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 113
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
arrest of one person from the house of Basanta Singh. One police officer who led the
said police party obtained his signature on the blank paper stating that they came to
search one person to the house of accused Basanta Singh. The said signature was
seen on the said paper at the gate of Basanta Singh. After obtaining his signature on
the said blank paper they entered to the house of Basanta Singh however he did not
accompany with them on that day upto the house of accused Basanta Singh. [This
witness is also declared as hostile witness and cross examined by the Id. PP.] The
witness was declared hostile.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 133
Statement of P.W. No. 30:
P.W. No. 30 has deposed that about 13/14 years ago one day in the morning at about
10 A.M. while he came out from his home for going to his personal work he found a
police party led by Inspector Tomba Singh the then O/C of Imphal P.S. at his gate.
Tomba Singh asked him to put his signature on the blank paper accordingly he put
his signature on 2/3 blank papers and except this he knows nothing about this case.
[This witness is also declared as hostile witness.] The witness was declared hostile.
Statement of P.W. No. 31:
P.W. No. 31 has deposed that about 13/14 years ago one day in the day time when he
returned at his house from his private work he found same police personnel and one
police officer among the said police party asked him to put his signature for coming
to his house and accordingly he put his signature on the blank paper near his gate.
[This witness is also declared as hostile witness.] The witness was declared hostile.
Statement of P.W. No. 32:
P.W. No. 32 has deposed that about 12/13 years ago at about 11:30A.M. While he was
standing on his gate some police personnel including the K. Tomba Singh and
Sorojkumar Sharma entered to the house of Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh. After a
while a police personnel came out from the house of accused Sahajan Singh and they
asked him to put his signature on a paper and accordingly he put his signature on a
paper. He does not know for what purpose they obtained his signature on that day.
[This witness is also declared as hostile witness.] The witness was declared hostile.
[37] Statement of P.W. No. 33:
In the year 1989 I was serving as Medical Officer in the Casualty Department RMC.
Now I took voluntarily retirement from ay service. On 23.6.89 I examined one
injured person namely Pangoljam Ramanhanda Singh s/o P. Ibetombi Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai as referred by the Police of Imphal P.S. I joined my service as
Medical officer in the Casualty Department, RIMS in the year 1981. I passed my
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 114
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
MBBS Degree in Guwahati University in the year 1979 and I took my Post Degree
DID Bio Chemistry) from RIMS under the Manipur University. The above mentioned
injured person Ramanand Singh was examined by me when I was attached to the
Casualty Department RIMS, Imphal.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 134 On my examination, I found the following
injuries:-
1. Lacerated wound over the mollar eminent right face. The size of the injury is 1/3"
in length skim only.
2. Lacerated wound V shape over the right lateral side of the nose just above the
vestibule of the nose. Size is 1/3" x 1/4" in V shape.
3. Abrasion over thebridge of the nose. The size of the wound is 1/4"x 1/4" in area.
The nature of the wounds mentioned above are simple. The kind of weaponwhich inflicted the injury
was blunt object. At the time of the examination the patient is fully conscious. No history of normal.
The wound deprivement was done and the patient was discharged from the hospital on that day.
The age of the injury was 24 hours. Due to lapse of time I cannot remember whether the injured was
already examined before referring the patient to the hospital in C/w FIR No. 384(6)99 1ps u/s
326,382,34 IPC. One injury report form mentioning the name of the patient Pangambam
Ramananda Singh which was submitted to the Casualty Department and I prepared the injury
report of the injured person RamanandaSingh on the said over leaf of the injury form furnished by
the police. The injured Ramananda Singh was identified by one police personal namely Suresh
Singh of I.P.S. Ext. P/51 is the injury report from furnished by the I.O. of the Ext. P/52 is the injury
report prepared by me on the overleaf of Ext. P/51 Ext. P/52 is my signature with office seal.
Xxxxx by the ld/d.
Exhibit P. 51- INJURY REPORT FORM From The O.C. Imphal P.S. To The M.O. Incharge R.M.C.
Hospital Imphal FIR No. 384 (6) 89 IPS u/s 326/302/34 IPC.
Sir, I have the honour to request the favour of your examination of Mr./Mrs. Pangoijam Ramananda
Singh (32) s/o P. Ibotombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, Imphal sent to the Hospital, Manipur
on the 25.06.1989.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 135 Please fill up the column on the reverse of this letter and
return it to me with such remarks you may consider necessary to show clearly your opinion of cause
of hurt.
All that is presently known of the cause is as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 115
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(i) Bruise marks (around on the lower portion) of right eye (as he same has been
caused due to the assault in c/w the case).
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
The prosecution failed to prove that the injury was sustained/related with the said occurrence i.e.
the assault and subsequent death of the deceased and failed to connect with the present injury to the
said crime and failed to connect the occurrence with the accused.
[38] Statement of P.W. No. 34:
In the year 1989 I was serving as Medical Officer in the Casualty of Old District Hospital, Imphal. In
the year 1979, I joint in the Manipur Health Service and I passed my MBBS degree in the year 1979
from Sambhalpur University, Orissa. And I took my Post Degree, General Surgery from RIMS under
the Manipur University in the year 1997. Now I took voluntary retirement from my service in the
year 2000 in the month of December 2000. While I was serving as Medical Officer in the Casualty of
Old District Hospital, Imphal on 23.6.89 one person injured person namely Nongmaithem Megha
Singh S/O N. Bira Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai was brought by one police Officer namely
Heli Mao I.O of FIR Case No. 384(6)89 IPC u/s 302/326/34 IPC for medical examination of the
said person. The said SI Heli Mao also submitted an injury report form to me. I examined the said
Megha Singh as indentified by one N. Priyobarta Singh.
On my examination I found an injury of bruise over the left upper arm. The size of the injury was 2''
x2''. The nature of the injury was simple and caused by blunt object. On that day itself I cannot
prepare the injury report. On the next day i.e. 24.6.89 I prepared injury report of the said injured
person namely Megha Singh in the injury report form submitted by the I.O of this case Heli Mao.
Ext. P/53 is the injury report submitted by SI Heli Mao. Ext. P/53A is the injury report form
prepared by me on the overleaf of Ext. P/53. Ext.P/53/A/1 is my initial with office seal. The said
injury report form was collected by one police officer from my office.
XXXX by the d/c.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 136 No time for the examination of the said injured person was
mentioned in my report. I do not know the said N. Priyobarta Singh who identified the injury
person. I deny the suggestion N. Megha Singh was never brought to the District Hospital, Imphal on
23.6.89 for examination.
Exhibit P. 53:
INJURY REPORT FORM From The O.C. Imphal P.S. To The M.O. Incharge District
Hospital Imphal Case FIR No. 384 (6) 89 IPS u/s 326/302/34 IPC.
Sir, I have the honour to request the favour of your examination of Mr./Mrs.
Nongmaithem Megha Singh (37) s/o N. Bira Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 116
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Imphal sent to the Hospital, Manipur on the 23.06.1989.
Please fill up the column on the reverse of this letter and return it to me with such
remarks you may consider necessary to show clearly your opinion of cause of hurt.
All that is presently known of the cause is as follows:
Complain pain in the left upper arms.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
It is only the statement of the present witness that says the injury sustained on Shri
N. Megha Singh (P.W. No. 4) was simple and caused by blunt object.But, the
prosecution failed to prove the injury was caused during the course of the said
occurrence and caused by the accused.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 137
[39] Statement of P.W. No. 35:
Now I am working as Officer in charge of Kangpokpi P.S. In the year 1989 I was
posted to Imphal as S.I. In the year 2001 I got the promotion to the rank of inspector.
While I was attached to the Imphal P.S., I took up the investigation of FIR NO.
384(6)89 I.P.S. u/s 302/326/34 I.P.C. as endorsed the same by the O/C of Imphal
F.S. The case was registered by SI Nashir Ahamad, who was the Night officer
in-charge of Imphal P.S. as Inspector Tamba Singh the then O/C of I.P.S. was at his
residence on the night of 23.6.89.
The fact of the case was thatthe complainant P. Indrajit Singh lodged a written report
to the O/C, Imphal P.S. to the effect that on the night of 23.6.89 at about 2 a.m. to
2.30 a.m.his son Seityajit Singh was assaulted by unknown persons numbering about
8 to 12 with the weapon of heavy iron rod, sharp dagger, club etc. on the road near
the south-western side of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba at Polem Leikai,
Thangmeiband while he returned to his home from his Khola with Megha Singh, as a
result of the assault Seityajit Singh got serious bleeding injuries on face, nose
forehead, skull both legs etc. It is also stated thatMegha Singh was also beaten by the
said unknown persons and also threatened his life if shouted or struggled with them.
His son Seityajit Singh was taken to the RMC hospital now(RIMS) for treated by the
local people and there he was declared death.On receipt of the said written report SI
M.Nashir Ahamed who was the Night Officer in-charge of Imphal P.S. registered a
case being FIR No. 384(6)89 I.P.S. u/s 302/326/34 I.P.C. Ext. P/1 is the Original
Ejahar lodged by Polem Indrajit Singh.
The original ejahar was lodged on 23.6.89 at about 4.30 a.m.After endorsement of
the above mentioned FIR Case I immediatelyalong with some police personnel of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 117
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Imphal P.S. went to Thangmeiband Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal. At about
4.40 a.m. of the same day I reached at the place of the occurrence, and I found some
people were assembling near theplace of the occurrence.
I inspected the place of the occurrence and I found pool of blood on the ground of the road and
some articles near Khuyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal on the southern-western side of the said
khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and some articles i.e. 2 pieces of sticks, smeared with blood
measuring about 5 ft. long, half broken wooden stick having blood stains measuring 31/2ft, a piece
of broken wooden stick measuring about 22inches long with wooden handle of about 6inches long
were also found lying at the place of the occurrence. While insspection of the place of occurrence
was going on, one person namely Nongmaithem Megha Singh produced one half lantern/ patromax
with broken chemney at the place of the occurrence stating that the said half lantern/patromax was
carrying by him at the time of the crime by the culprits and one culprit kicked on him with a stick
and that the samehalf lantern/patromax sleeved and fell down on the ground.I seized the said half
lantern/ patromax with the broken chemney on production by Nongmaithem Megha Singh under a
seizure memo dt.23.6.89 at about 5.10 a.m. of 23.6.89 in Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 138 the
presence of witnesses namely Sorensangbam Ibomcha Singh and Chongtham Sunilkumar Singh, I
also obtained the signatures of the witnesses namely Ibomcha Singhand Sunil Kumar Singh after
read over and explained the contentsof it.I also obtained the signature of Megha Singh on the said
seizure memo.Ext.P/3 is the seizure meme for the seizure of one patromax/ half lantern. Ext. P/3/1
is the signature of N. Megha Singh and Ext.F/3/2 and P/3/3 are the signatures of S. Ibomcha Singh
and Ch. Sunil kumar Singh. Ext.P/3/4 is my signature.
Then I also seized one food stained paper, and blood stained with earth mixed with stone/pebbles
and 2 pieces of the stick smeared with blood measuring about 5 ft.  inch long, broken wooden
stick measuring about 22 inches long with wooden handle about 6 inch long, a piece of the broken
wooden piece- measuring 3  ft. with blood stain on the top from the spot in the presence of
witnesses namely Chongtham Sunilkumar Singh and Polem Meghabarna Singh under a
seizurememo dt.23.6.89 at about 5.30 a.m. I obtained the signature of witnesses namely Ch.
Sunilkumar Singh and P. Meghabarna Singh after read over and explained the contents of it.
Ext.P/12 is the seizure memo for the seizure of the above mentioned articles, Ext. P/12/3 and F/12/2
1 are the signatures of Sunilkumar and Meghabarna Singh. Ext.P/12/3 is my initial. I also prepared
sketch map of the place of occurrence with index as pointed out by the informant. Ext, P/54 is the
sketch map of the place of the occurrence, Ext, 1/54/1 is my signature. Ext.P/55 is the index of the
sketch map Ext. 1/54. Ext. 2/55/1 is my signature.
At about 8 a.m. of the same day I left the place of the occurrence for RMC hospital and I reached the
RMC hospital (RIMS), Imphal at about 8.10 a.m. of the same day. When I reached at the RMC
hospital/RIMS I found the dead body of Seityajit Singh was lying on a streture on the temporary
morgue of RMC hospital (RIMS).The dead body was identified by one Longjam Rajen Singh. I
conducted inquest over the dead body of Seityajit Singh in the presence of T. Shyamkumar Singh
and Soibam Dhaneswar Singh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 118
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
The dead body found lying on the streture morgue of RMC hospital with the head towards the east
and the leg towards the West. The dead body was covered with one reddish brown chader having
blood stain on his head, one dirty white ployster full shirt having blood stain which covered from
chest to naval and one sky blue half shirt with blood from naval to ankle. Both the hands and legs
are found stretch.
When I removed the clothes I found the face is facing me towards the north and the left eye brow is
found absent, and the injury mark is found on the nose bridge, one cut mark on the right forehead
and right eye is found swelling with disfiguration, mouth is found half opened having mostage and
bear with blood stain. The deceased is wearing one blue spot half pant with white string having
blood stain. 2 cut injury marks measuring about 4"xhalf" oval shape and about 2"x 1/2" in oval
shape, skrash mark isseen on the right knee, 2 cut injury marks is seen on the left thigh measuring
1"xe" in oval shape and about 1/4" x 1/8" and skresh mark with blooding on left knee over-the Cril
Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 139 turned of the dead body 2 abrasion mark about 5" long and 1/4"
in multiple scratch mark is seen overthe outer side of the right angle. I prepared inquest report at
the RMC temporary morgue Lamphelpat on 23.6.69 at about 8.10 a.m. inpresence of the witnesses
namely Shyamkumar Singh and Dhaneswar Singh. I obtained the signatures of the witnesses on the
said inquest report after read over and splained of the contents of the Inquest report. Ext. 1/2 is the
inquest report prepared by me. Ext.1/2/1 and P/2/2 are the signatures of witnesses Shyamkumar
and S. Dhaneswar Singh, Ext.P/2/3 is the signature of Identifier namely Longjam Rajen Singh.Ext.
P/2/4 is my initial. Then the dead body was taken to the Forensic Science medicine departmenti.e.
RIMS morgue for post mortem examination.
I submitted requisition necessary papers to the concerned Doctor of the RMC morgue for the post
mortem examination of the dead body of Seityajit Singh. The dead body of Seityajit Singh was
examined by Dr. H. Nabachandra Singh. After the post mortem examination is over I also seized one
dirty white ployster full shirttorn in the arm of the shirt having blood stain, sample of blood on filter
paper and sample of skull hair on production by Dr. H.Nabahcnara Singh Asst. Professor of Forensic
Medicine Department, RMC Imphal under a seizure memo dt.23.6.89 at about 12.15 p.m. in
presence of witnesses namely Ch. Shantikumar and N. Megha Singh, I also obtained the signatures
of the witnesses namely Ch. Shantikumar and N. Megha Singh ontheseizure memo after read over
and explained the contents of it. Dr. Nabachandra Singh also put his signature on the said seizure
memo for obtaining a copy of the said seizure memo.Ext. P/4 is the said seizure memo and Ext.
P/4/2 and P/4/1are the signatures of witnesses namely Shantikumar and N. MeghaSingh
respectively. Ext.P/4/3 is my signature. Ext. P/4/4 is the signature of Dr.Nabachandra Singh Asst.
Professor of Forensic Medicine Department, Imphal.
On 12.1.2004 (Continuation) At about 12.30 p.m. of 23.6.89 the dead body of Seityajit Singh was
handed over to the relatives of Seityajit Singh after the post mortem examination. At about 1.19 p.m.
of the same day I left the RIMS morgue, Lamphel along with Nongmaithem Megha Singh for
District Hospital. Imphal for medical examination of Nongmaithem Megha Singh as he stated that
he got injury while he intervened the occurrences on that night. At about 1.15 p.m. of the same day I
reached District Hospital, Imphal and I submitted injury report in respect of Nongmaithem Megha
Singh for his medical examination. On that that Nongmaithem Megha Singh was examined by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 119
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
doctor who was on duty at the District Hospital at the relevant time. On that day I did not collect the
medical examination report as he adivsed me to collect the medical examination after somedays.
Then I left District Hospital, Imphal for Imphal P.3. Ext. P/56 in the challan for the dead body is
sent to the doctor for Seityajit examination which is prepared by me. Ext. P/56/1 is my signature.
Ext. P/584 is the injury report for examination of Nongmaithem Megha Singh which is prepared by
me. Ext.2/53/1 is my signature. The said injury report form Ext.P/53-A was collected by my next
I.O. SI. Sorojkumar Sharma who is no more.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 140 During the course of the investigation I examined Polem
Indrajit Singh, Sorenshangbam Ibomcha Singh, Chongtham Sunilkumar Singh, Polem Meghabarna,
Polem Shyamkumar, Soibam Dhaneshwor Singh, Nongmaithem Megha Singh on the same day i.e.
23.6.89 I handed over the case record to SI Sarojkumar Sharmafor further investigation as he
endorsed the same to Sarojkumar Sharma by the then Inspector K.Tomba Singh. I can identify the
seized articles if shown to me.
Continuation of examination-in-chief of P.W. No. 35 P. Heli on fresh oath on 27.03.2004.
Ext. M.O.1 is the half lamp/patromax. The seized wooden stick are shown to me. Ex. M.0.2 is the
broken short wooden stick 5" in length. Ex. M.O.3 is the broken stick about 22 inches in length. Ex.
M.0.4. is the broken stock about 1 and half ft. in length. Ext. M.O. 12 is the blood stained paper and
blood stained earth mixed with small stones.
Xxxxxx by the d/c.
I was physically present at the police station at the time of lodging the original ejahar. I cannot now
say if the informat came alone to the police station for filing the ejahar or he was accompanied by
any other person or persons. I do not know if the original ejahar was brought prepared by the
informant or the same was prepared at the police station on that day. I examined the informant
personally at the police station just after lodging the ejahar. As per FIR form the FIR form was
forwarded to the court of C.J.M. Imphal on 24.06.89. It is true that there is an over writing in the
Memo No. of the FIR Form changing the figure '2' or '4'. It is true that time for the dispatch of the
police team from the police station to the spot is not written in the FIR form in the relevant column
though the date was noted. It is true that the date and time of the report as regards the occurrence
was entered as 23.06.89 at 4.30 p.m. in the relevant column of the FIR form. The spot of the
occurrence was identified to me by the informat himself.
It is true that in both the date and hour of the seizure in respect of the seizure of patromax under
Ext. P/3 there are overwriting changes the original writings to new ones. The said overwritings were
done by me. In respect of the seizure list at Ext. P/12 also there are overwritings substituting the
original writings by new ones as regards the time of seizure. It is also true that the original writings
'P.M.' was subsequently changed to 'A.M.'Myself and my police team reached the spot at 4:30 a.m.
on that day. As soon as myself and my police team reached the spot Megha Singh produced the
patromax to me and immediately I made the seizure of the same under Ext.P/3. The broken pieces
of the sticks and blood stained paper i.e. Ext. M.O.2, 3 and 4 were found scattered at the particular
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 120
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
place at the spot. It is true that I did not mention of indicate the spot from where the aforesaid
articles were found or scattered in the sketch map at Ext. P/54 which was prepared by me.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 141 I prepared the said sketch map Ext. P/54 after the spot was
identifried by the informant with the assistance of the other Leikai people found present there. I
used measuring device/instrument while preparing Ext. P/54. The electic lamp post which was
existed on the south-western corner of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba was inside the berbed wired
fencing erected all aroung the Pukhri. The distance betweenthe spot of the occurrence and the gate
of R.K.B. Com Sana Singh is 55 ft. exactly. I cannot now remember if there are buildings of
structures on the western side of the entrance of RK B. ComSana Singh's gate. I did not measure the
length between the southern edge of Khoyathong Polem Leikai road and the gate of RK B. Comsana
while preparing Ext. P/54. Similarly, I also did not measure the wide of the Khoyathong Polem
Leikai at the time of preparation of Ext. P/54. I also did not measure the distance between
theelectric post and the place of occurrence.
I deny the suggestion that FIR of the case was fabricated and the narrations made thereinj were
concocted subsequently. I also deny the suggestionthat the FIR formand the seizure memos
prepared by me were all fabricated by manipulating facts subsequently. I deny the suggestion that I
did not examine the informant and that I also did not visit the spot and further that I did not make
any seizures in the investigation of the case. I do not agree with the suggestion that the entire
prosecution case was fabricated and manipulated by the informant and other interested persons
without any material basis."
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
(i) The complainant P. Indrajit Singh lodged a written report to the O/C, Imphal P.S.
to the effect that on the night of 23.6.89 at about 2 a.m. to 2.30 a.m.
(ii) On receipt of the said written report SI M.Nashir Ahamed who was the Night
Officer-in-charge of Imphal P.S. registered a case being FIR No. 384(6)89 I.P.S. u/s
302/326/34 I.P.C. Ext.
P/1 is the Original Ejahar lodged by Polem Indrajit Singh.
(ii) The original ejahar was lodged on 23.6.89 at about 4.30 a.m.After endorsement of the above
mentioned FIR Case I immediatelyalong with some police personnel of Imphal P.S. went to
Thangmeiband Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal. At about 4.40 a.m. of the same day I reached at
the place of the occurrence, and I found some people were assembling near theplace of the
occurrence.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 142
(iii) I inspected the place of the occurrence and I found pool
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 121
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
of blood on the ground of the road and some articles near Khuyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal on
the southern-western side of the said khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and some articles i.e. 2
pieces of sticks, smeared with blood measuring about 5 ft. long, half broken wooden stick having
blood stains measuring 31/2ft, a piece of broken wooden stick measuring about 22inches long with
wooden handle of about 6inches long were also found lying at the place of the occurrence. While
insspection of the place of occurrence was going on, one person namely Nongmaithem Megha Singh
produced one half lantern/ patromax with broken chemney at the place of the occurrence stating
that the said half lantern/patromax was carrying by him at the time of the crime by the culprits and
one culprit kicked on him with a stick and that the samehalf lantern/patromax sleeved and fell down
on the ground. I seized the said half lantern/ patromax with the broken chemney on production by
Nongmaithem Megha Singh under a seizure memo dt.23.6.89 at about 5.10 a.m. of 23.6.89.
(iv) During the course of the investigation I examined Polem Indrajit Singh, Sorenshangbam
Ibomcha Singh, Chongtham Sunilkumar Singh, Polem Meghabarna, Polem Shyamkumar, Soibam
Dhaneshwor Singh, Nongmaithem Megha Singh on the same day i.e. 23.6.89 I handed over the case
record to SI Sarojkumar Sharmafor further investigation as he endorsed the same to Sarojkumar
Sharma by the then Inspector K.Tomba Singh. I can identify the seized articles if shown to me.
(v) I was physically present at the police station at the time of lodging the original ejahar. I cannot
now say if the informat came alone to the police station for filing the ejahar or he was accompanied
by any other person or persons. I do not know if the original ejahar was brought prepared by the
informant or the same was prepared at the police station on that day. I examined the informant
personally at the police station just after lodging the ejahar.
(vi) It is true that there is an over writing in the Memo No. of the FIR Form changing the figure '2' or
'4'. It is true that time for the dispatch of the police team from the police station to the spot is not
written in the FIR form in the relevant column though the date was noted. It is true that the date
and time of the report as regards the occurrence was entered as 23.06.89 at 4.30 p.m. in the relevant
column of the FIR form. The spot of the occurrence was identified to me by the informant himself.
(vii) It is true that in both the date and hour of the seizure in respect of the seizure of patromax
under Ext. P/3 there are overwriting changes the original writings to new ones. The said
overwritings were done by me. In respect of the seizure list at Ext. P/12 also there are overwritings
substituting the original writings by new ones as regards the time of seizure. It is also true that the
original writings 'P.M.' was subsequently changed to 'A.M.' Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 143
Contradictory to the present witness's statement which are highlighted at (i), (ii) and (iv), the
complainant P.W. No. 1, the father of the deceased in his statement as highlighted/reproduced
above, stated that he did not go to the police station to file the complaint but, he sent a person
instead to file the complaint.Inspite of this contradictory statement of P.W.No. 1, the prosecution
neither contradict nor prove that the version of the complainant is wrong.As such, the question of
meeting the complainant at the police station and recording the statement of the P.W. No. 1 by the
I.O. is doubtful and suspicious. The statement of the I.O. that original ejahar was lodged at 04:30
a.m. is contradictory to the statement of P.W. No. 1 that after the P.W. No. 4 narrated about the
assault meted to his son by unidentified person at 03:00 p.m. thereafter, he asked a boy of his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 122
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
locality to write the original ejahar on his dictation and sent a person to lodge the original ejahar to
the Imphal Polie Station. Accordingly, he lodged the complaint at 04:00 p.m. and the police
registered FIR at 04:30 p.m. It is admitted in the witness statement that some of the seized articles
mentioned in his statement were seized even before the lodging of original ejahar. Accordingly, his
version that he was phsycially present at the time of lodging the original ejahar is also
doubtful;examination of the complainant personally by him is also doubtful thereby creating
suspicion of the witness's statement. It Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 144 has also emerged that
the memo number of the FIR form was changed from the figure 2 to 4. Further, the witness stated
that it is true that time for dispatch of the police team from the police station to the spot is not
written in the FIR form. It is also stated that the time of report as regards, the occurrence was
entered as 23.06.89 at 04:30 p.m. in the relevant column of the FIR form but, later on he overwrote
as 04:30 a.m. It is also admitted by the witness that the date and hour of seizure in respect of seizure
of patromax in the original writings are changed by overwriting in the new one and the same was
done by him. Further, the seizure of Ext. P-12 (to see) was also made overwriting substituting the
original writing by a new one and futher, stated that the original writings P.M. was subsequently
changed to A.M. In the above statement, the witness stated that the complainant P. Indrajit Singh,
father of the deceased, lodged a written report to the O.C. Impal P.S. on 23.06.1989 at about 04.30
a.m. and as endorsed the case to him, he immediately along with some police personnel to
Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal. On reaching there, he found some articles i.e. two pieces of
sticks smeared with blood measuring of about 5 ft. long, half broken wooden stick having blood
stain measuring 3 and half feet, a pice of wooden stick measuring about 22 inches along with
wooden handle of about 6 inches long were found and also stated that one Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of
2018 Page 145 Nongmaithem Megha Singh produced one half lantern patromax with broken
chimney and seized the same in the presence of witnesses Sorensangbam Ibomcha Singh and
Chongtham Sunil Singh and other materials as mentioned in his statement highlighted above.He
examined some witnesses on the same day and the case record was handed over to Sarojkumar
Sharma as endorsed to him by the then Inspector K. Tomba Singh.
[40] Statement of witness of P.W. No. 36:
Now I am working as Sub-Divisional Police Officer of Moreh. In the year, 1989 I was the O/C of
Imphal P.S. and got promotion to the post of Dy. S.P., in the year 1996. FIR Case No.284(6)89 I.P.S.
u/s 302/326,34IPC was registered by SI Md. Nasir Ahamad on 23.6.89 at about 4 a.m. as he was the
night Duty Officer in-Charge of I.P.S. and he endorsed the same to SI P. HeliMao for investigation. I
am well acquainted with the factof this case. On the same day i.e. 23.6.89 in the before noon I
endorsed this FIR Case to SI H.Sarojkumar Sharma for Investigation, SI Sarojkumar is no more, I
know the hand writing and signatures of SI Sarojkumar Sharma as he was working with me in the
Imphal P. S. during his life time. As per my direction SI Heli Mao handed over case record to SI
Sarojkumar Sharma and SI Sarojkumar Sharma investigated the present case under my supervision
and he submitted charge sheet against the accused persons namely Pukhrambam Joykumar @
Shahajahan Singh s/o P. Shyamnagor of Sagolband Meino Leirak, Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh
@Lalubi s/o Kh. Ahanjao Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, Salam Bodo Singh@Somorendro Singh
s/o Achou Singh of Sagolband Meino loirak, R.K.Sanatonba @Ngoba Singh s/o RK Budhisana Singh
of Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai and Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh @Boby Singh s/o
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 123
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Ibotombi Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai, to the Court for trial through me.
During the course of the investigation sometimes I accompanied with SI Sarojkumar Sharma.
During the course of investigation I along with Sarojkumar conducted house search of the house of
accused persons as we received reliable information that the above mentioned accused persons were
involved in the present case. On 24.6.89 at about 9.30p.m.received a reliable information on
telephone from Shri S. Lakhikanta Singh, advocate, brother-in-law of the accused Pukhrambam
Joykumar@Sahajahan Singh stating that the accused person namely P. Sahajahan @Joykumar
Singh of Meino Leirak, Khangrakpam Basanta Singh of Meino Leirak, Irom Nabachandra Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai, Pangoijam Samananda Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 146 Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai, Salam Bodo Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai were ready to surrender to
police. That he had kept the above named accused persons to the house of Salam Bodo Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai but the 2 accused persons namely Moba Singh of Uripok
Ningthoukhongjam Leikai and Dhananjoy Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai did not want to
surrender to the police. On getting the said information a police party led by me and SI Sarojkumar
Sharma left I.P.S. at about 9.45 p.m. for Sagolband Salam Leikai. We reached at the house of Salam
Bodo Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai and we found the accused persons namely P. Sahajahan @
Joykumar s/o Shyamnagor Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak, Khangrakpam Basanta Singh s/o
Ahanjao Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, Pangoijam Ramananda Singh s/o Ibotombi Singh of
Sagolband Salam Leikai, Irom Nabachandra Singh s/o Ibotombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai
were found inside the house of Salam Bodo Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai but the co-accused
Salam Bodo Singh was not found in his house along with accused persons as he fled away from his
house just before the arrival of our police. But his father told us that he would produce his son Bodo
Singh to the police station as soon as possible. All the accused persons were arrested fromthe house
of Bodo Singh.One bruise mark found at the lower forehead of the right eyelid of the accused
Ramananda Singh which was found injured during the fighting with the deceased Seityajit Singh.
Then I gave instructions to SI Sarojkumar Sharma the I.O. of this case to proceed to RIMS hospital
Lamphelpat for treatment of the injured accused Ramananda Singh.
We took the precaution at the time of the arrest of the above mentioned 4 accused persons by
covering their face with clothes as they were required for conducting TI Parade. The arrested
accused persons except the injured Ramananda Singh were taken to I.P.S. by my party, and the 3
accused persons were kept in the police lock-up of I.P.S. During the course of the investigation SI
Srojkumar interrogated the accused persons one by one. During his examination of the accused
persons the accused Pukhrambam Sahajahan @Joykumar Singh admitted that he committed the
crime with other 4 accused persons and the weapon of crime used at the time of the commission of
the crime such as cane stick,iron handle of the jeep and knife were kept concealed inside a clump of
bampoo near north eastern corner of the house near the garrage of accused Sahajahan at Sagolband
Meino Leirak. He further stated that he would be able to find out the said concealing place of the
weapon of crime and will be able to hand over the said weapon to the I.O. of this case. SI Sarojkumar
Sharma recorded the statement of the accused P. Joykumar @Sahajahan in a separate sheet u/s 27
of Indian Evidence Act. The recorded statement of P. Joykumar @Sahajahan Singh is shown to me,
which was already marked as Ext.P/13. The hand writing of this Ext.P/13 is the hand writing of SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/13/4 is the initial of Ext.P/13/5 and P/13/6 are the signature of accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 124
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
P. Joykumar Singh appearing on Ext. P/13.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 147 SI Sarojkumar also recorded the statement of the accused
Dhananjoy Singh u/s 27 of the Indian Evidence Act. The recorded statement of accused Dhananjoy
Singh is shown to me. The hand writing of this statement is in the hand writing of Sarojkumar
Sharma. Ext. P/53 is the recorded statement of accused Dhananjoy Singh recorded u/s 27 Indian
Evidence Act. Ext. P/53/1 is the initial of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/53/2/& P/53/3 are the
signatures of accused Dhananjoy Singh. Ext.P/53/4 and P/53/5 are the signatures of the witnesses
namely Md. Ali of Jiribam Babupara a/p KhamnamBazar Soyam Leirak and Md. Ibrahim s/o
Maharuddin of Jiribam Bapupara a/p Khannam Soyam Leirak respectively.
SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized one iron handle of jeep length about 35" in length, one cane stick
having bold head 3  ft., one knife (Heijarang), total length about 10'1/2" including the wooden
handle seized at the instance of the accused Pukhrambam Joykumar @Sahajahan Singh, near the
north-eastern corner of the garrage from the clumb of bamboos. Ext. P/14 is the seizure memo for
the seizure of the above 3 articles. Ext.P/14/4 is the initial of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext.P/14/5 is
the signature of accused, Joykumar Singh, Ext. P/14/1 and P/14/2,P/14/3 are the signatures of the
witnesses namely Bebe Sharma, Ronikanta Sharma and S. Rajen Singh. Ext. P/15 is the post mortem
report collected by SI Sarojkumar Sarma during course of investigation. Ext.P/44 is the seizure list
for the seizure of one wooden club (Singjangkhok) at the instance of the accused Dhananjoy @ Bobi
Singh in presence of witnesses namely Ibrahim of Jiribam Babupara, Md.Ali of Jiribam Babupara
and Ibobi Singh. Ext.P/44/2 is the signature and initial of SI. Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext.P/44/1 is the
signature of Ibobi Singh. Ext.P/44/3 and P/44/4 are the signatures of witnesses namely Ibrahim
and Md. Ali. Ext.P/44/5 is the signature of the accused Dhananjoy Singh.
S.I. Sarojkumar Shama also prepared rough sketch map for the place of the discovery of
incriminating articles with index. Ext.P/54 is the sketch map of the place of the incriminating
articles at the instance of accused with index.Ext. P/54/1 is the initial of SI Sarojkumar Sharma.
During the course of investigation SI Sarojkumar seized different photographs with its negatives on
production by photographer Khamba Singh under seizure memo dt.1.7.89 at 2.40 p.m. at the photo
section, Imphal District Police, in presence of witnesses namely Md. Hifjur Rahaman and N.
Nabachandra Singh. Ext. P/21 is the seizure list for the seizure of the photographs and its
negatives.Ext.P/21/3 is the signaure of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/21/4 & P/21/2 are the
signatures of the witnesses namely Hifjur Rahaman & Nabachandra Singh. Ext.P/21/1 is the
signature of Khamba Singh.
During the course of the investigation SISarojkumar Sharma took necessary steps for conducting the
T.I. Parade of the accused persons namely Joykumar @Sahajahan, Basanta Singh, Ramananda
Singh, Bodo Singh, R. K. Moba Singh, Dhananjoy Singh and Rajen Singh. Duringhis period he
collected the result as well as necessary Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 148 documents from the
Executive Magistrate, Imphal West Central. Ext.P/5, P/6, P/7, P/8, P/9, P/10 and P/11 are the
prescribed forms used at the time of the identification parade of the accused persons namely
Joykumar Singh, Basanta Singh, Ramananda Singh, Bodo Singh, R.K. Moba Singh, Dhananjoy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 125
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Singh and Rajen Singh. As per report the accused Moba@ Sanatomba Singh was identified by the
witness Nongmaithem Megha Singh. Ext.P/36 is the memorandum prepared by the Executive
Magistrate, Imphal West Central after conducting the TI parade of the accused persons. Ext.P/37,
Ext.P/38,P/39, are the list of the UTs prisoners. Ext.P/40 is the copy of the order passed by the
Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Imphal West-I for conducting the TI parade and the same was entrusted
to the SOC, Executive Magistrate, Imphal West Central for conducting the TI Parade. Ext. P/41 is
the letter of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, I.W. sent to the O/C, Imphal P. S. enclosing with the
relevant papers and documents for conducting T.I. Parades of the accused persons. Ext. P/42 is the
seizure memo prepared by SI Sarojkumar Sharma for the seizure of the one right hand drive jeep,
dark green (Ureng colour) without registration No, from the garrage of P. Shyamnagor Singh on
production by Pukhrambem Shyamnagor Singh. SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized the said jeep in
presence of the witnesses namely Ibopishak Singh and S. Rajen Singh respectively.Ext. 1/42/3 and
F/42/2 are the signatures of witnesses Ibopishak Singh and S. Rajen Singh.Ext.P/42/4 is the Initial
of SI H.Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. /42/1 is the signature of Shyamnagor Singh. It is stated in the said
seizure list that 3 small blood stain were found on the back side of lower portion of the jeep hood.
Ext. P/43 is the search list prepared by SI Sarojkumar Sharma for conducting of the house search of
the house of Shyamnagor Singh. During the course of house search of the house of Shyamnagor
Singh SI Sarojkumar Sharma found one twelve volt battery inside the room of Smt. Akasini Devi
mother of the accused Sahajahan Singh and the same was seized under the said search list prepared
by SI H. Sarojkumar Sharma, Ext. P/ 42/4 is the initial and signature of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext.
P/43/1 is the signature of Shyamnagor Singh. Ext./43/3 and F/43/2 are the signatures of witnesses
Ibopishak Singh and S.Rajen Singh respectively.
On 7.6.2004 (Continuation) S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma seized the said jeep as it was involved in the
commission of the crime in the accused persons. At the time of the seizure of the said vehicle there
was no battery in the said jeep as it was already removed and the said battery was also seized/e
room occupied by Smt. Akashini Devi in the house of Shyamnagar Singh. The said jeep was given in
a zima of the owner and the same is not produced before the court by the zimadar of the said jeep.
One blue Zin Pant with blood stain and onegrey colour full shirt owned by the accused Bodo Singh
@Somorendro Singh were seized by SI Sarojkumar Sharma on 28.6.89 on production by Salam
Bodo @Somorendro Singh at the residence of the accused Salam Bodo Singh in presence of
witnesses namely, Wangkhemcha Shyamjai and Kh. Ranjit Singh. Ext. P/45 is the said seizure
memo prepared by SI Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 149 Sorojkumar Sharma for the seizure of
one blue zin pant and one grey colour full shirt. Ext. P/45/1 and P/45/2 are the signatures of
witnesses namely Shyamjai Singh and Ranjit Singh respectively. Ext./45/3 is the initial of SI
Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext.P/45/4 is the signature of the accused Somorendro Singh.
On 28.6.89 SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized one newly washed longpant darkgrey in colour
(terrywool), one full shirt white blue and grey mixed colour polyster shirt on production by Salam
Devendrajit Singh the elder brother of the accused Bodo & Somorendro Singh in the presence of
witnesses namely Wangkhemcha Shyamjai and A. Imocha Singh of Sagolband Meino Lelrak at the
residence of the accused S. Bodo @ Somorendro Singh. The said long pant and full shirt were worn
by the accused Joykumar Singh at the time of the commission of the crime and the same were left at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 126
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
the house of Bodo Somorendro Singh by the accused Joykumar Singh. The above articles were
seized by SI Sarojkumar Sharma at the distance of the accused Joykumar Singh on production by
Devendrajit Singh. Ext. P/46 is the seizure memo dt. 28.6.89 for the seizure of the longpant and full
shirt. Ext. P/46/1 and Ext. 246/2 are the signatures of the witnesses namely Shyamjai Singh and
Ibomcha Singh respectively. Ext. P/46/3 is the initial of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/46/4 is the
signature of Devendrajit Singh. Ext. P/46/5 is the signature of the accused Joykumar Singh.
On 27.6.89 at about 2 p.m. SI Sarojkumar Sarma seized one white cotton Paijma stained with blood
being found washed after commission of the crime by the sister of accused Moba @RK Sanatomba
Singh and one nylon T-shirt red and whitein colour on different faces onproduction by the accused
Moba@RK Sanatomba in presence of witnesses namely Moirangthem Romen Singh of Uripok
Ningthoukhongjam Leikai and Kairenpaibam Premjit Singh of do. Ext. P/47 is the seizure list
prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sharma for the seizure of one white cotton Paijma and one nylon full
shirt. Ext. P/47/2 and P/47/1 are the signatures of Romen Singh and Premjit Singh respectively.
Ext. P/47/3 is the initial of SI Sarojkumar Sharma. Ext. P/47/4 is the signature of accused RK
Sanatomba Singh.
On 28.6.89 at about 11.30 a.m. SI Sorojkumar Sharma seized one full polyster/shirt and one black
terrywool longpant on production by Pangoijam Ramananda Singh in the presence of witness
namely Salam Debendrajit Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai and Atom Inaomacha Singh of
Sagolband Meino Leirak. Ext.P/48 is the said seizure list prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sharma which
was already marked as Y. Ext. P/48/1 and P/48/2 are the signatures of witnesses namely
Debendrajit Singh and A. Ibomcha Singh respectively. Ext. P/48/3 is initial of SI Sarojkumar
Sharma. Ext. P/29/4 is the signature of the accused Ramananda Singh. On 28.6.39 at about 11.48
a.m. SI Sarojkumar Sharma seized one half T-shirt (nylon) and one terrywool longpant blue black in
colour on production by Khangjarakpam Basanta@ Lalubi in the presence of witnesses A. Ingocha
Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak and Salam Debendrajit Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai. Ext.
P/49 is the seizure list prepared by SI Sorojkumar Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 150 Sharma
for the seizure of one half T-Shirt and one Terrywool longpant which was marked Y-1. Ext.P/49/2
and P/49/1 are the signatures of witnesses namely A. Ingocha Singh and S. Debendrajit Singh. Ext.
P/49/3is the initial of SI Sorojkumar Sharma. Ext.P/49/4 is the signature of Basanta Singh. Ext.
2/50 is the search list prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext. 2/50/4 is the initial of SI Sorojkumar
Sharma. Ext. P/51 is the injury report form prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. It is the hand writing
of SI Sorojkumar Sharma.
On 28.6.89 at about 12.40 p.m. SI Sorojkumar seized one - shirt yellow incolour and oneblue colour
zin pant on production by P.Bobi @ Dhananjoy Singh under a seizure memo in presence of
witnesses namely Boyai and Rabi Singh. It is the hand writing of SISorojkumar Sharma. Ext.P/57 in
the seizure list prepared by SI Sorojkumar for the seizure of one T-shirt and one blue colour zin
pant. Ext. P/57/1 is the signature and initial of SI Sorojkumar Sarma.
A document is shown to me. It is the search list prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma for conducting
the house search of the house of accused RK Moba @ RK Sanatomba Singh, Ext. P/58 is the search
list prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext. P/58/1 is the signature of SI Sorojkumar Sarma. A rough
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 127
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
document is shown to me. It is the sketch map of the place of the recovery of the incriminating
articles prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma with index. Ext. P/59 is the sketch map of the place of the
discovery of weapon u/s 27 of Indian Evidence Act, Ext. P/59/1 is the initial of SI Sorojkumar
Sarma. Ext. P/60/ is the index of the sketch map Ext. P/89. Ext.P/60/1 is the initial of
SISarojkumar Sarma.
During the course of the investigation as mentioned in the case diary the following articles were sent
to the Director of Central Forensic Science laboratory, 30 Gorachand Road, Calcutta for
examinationin order to ascertain whether the stains of clothes blood/is human blood or not. The
articles:- 1) sample of blood of the deceased Seityajit Singh, 2) blood stained stones, earth,paper
mark containing the blood, 7 brown glasses, 2 large pieces of broken wooden stick, 3 small pieces of
wooden sticks, white Paijma, long pant, 3 small cut pieces of the hoot of the jeep marked E1, E2 and
E3 respectively other cut pieces of the hoot marked stained with blood, one iron handle of jeep
marked as F,one cane stick with tempering hole marked F2, one knife with wooden handle bearing
small areas of Faint brown stems marked F3, one wooden club stained with blood marked as G, one
photostat copy of PM examination marked as H, 2 photographs marked as 1(A) and 1(B)
respectively.And he also received the expert report with opinion from the Expert, Director, Central
Forensic Science Laboratory along with the serological examination report.As per opinion of the
Expert i.e. filter paper cutting marked A, one stone marked 8(1), stone 8(2), stone 8(3), earth 8(4),
paper cutting (5),broken wooden B(13), broken wooden piece marked B(14), broken wooden piece
marked (15), broken wood piece marked 8(16),cut piece of the hoot marked E1, cut pieces of hoot
E2,cut pieces of hoot marked E. The above articles are marked as Sl. No.7 to 20. The item No.
S1.No.7 to 13 excluding Sl. No. 14 noted above are stained with Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page
151 human blood. The blood stains on the item No.14,18,19 and 20 are disintegrated and their origin
cannot be determined.Ext. P/61 is the instruction of standardised form for forwarding the exhibits
prepared by SI Sorojkumar Sarma in 3 sheets. Ext. P/61/1 is the initial of SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext.
P/62 is the letter forwarding letter sent to the Serologist and chemical examiner, Govt. of India,
Calcutta.
I know the initial and signature of ASI Pradeep Police. Ext. P/682/1and P/62/2 are the initials of
Pradeep Singh the then SP, Imphal. Ext. P/63 is the forwarding letter forwarded by the Director,
Central Forensic Science and Laboratory, Govt. India, Calcutta to the SP, Imphal along with the
expert examination report. Ext. P/68 is the intimation given to the SP, Imphal District for
forwarding exhibits to the serologist and Chemical Examiner in a sheet. Ext.P/65 is the letter
forwarded to the Supdt. of Police, Imphal District from the Director, Central Forensic Science
Laboratory, Calcutta enclosing the report of Serologist. Ext.P/66 is the report of Serologis and
Chemical examiner in one sheet. Ext. P/67 is the letter forwarded to the SP, Imphal District from
Director, Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Govt. of India, Calcutta enclosing the examination
report for the exhibits F to 1 cane stick, Ext. marked F3 the sharp knife and Ext.marked Ga long
piece of wood. Ext.P/68 is the result for the examinationof the exhibits marked F1,F2,F3 and Fg
respectively. Ext. F1 is the one electroflacted solid iron rod commonly known as handle.
Ext. P/69 is the charge sheet. Ext.P/69/1 is my initial. Ext.P/69/2,Ext.P/69/3, Ext.P/69/4,
Ext.P/69/5, Ext. P/69/6, Ext. P/69/7 and Ext. P/69/8 are are the initials of SI H. Sorojkumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 128
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Sarma on Ext. 2/69. Ext.P/70 is the FIR form. Ext. P/70/1 is the signature of Hashif Ahamed for
registration of the case. Ext.P/70/2 is my initial for re- endorsement of this case to SI H.
Sorojkumar Sharma for Investigation. Ext. P/71 is the extract copy of the order passed by SDM, IW
for fixing the date for conducting TI Parade and copy to O/C, Imphal P.S.Ext. P/72 is the zima order
passed bytheCourt of CJM, Imphal on 21.9.89 for giving the said jeep into the custody of Akishini
Devi, Ext.P/1 in the O.E. During the course ofthe investigation SI Sorojkumar examined a large No.
of witnesses including the witnesses Romen Singh, Debendrajit, Kala Singh, Rajen Singh, Kh. Deben
Singh, S. Ibopishak Singh and Shyamnagor Singh father of theaccused, Joykumar Singh. The
statement of Khangjarakpan Deven Singh which is marked X5 to X5 is shown tome. It is hand
writing of SI Sorojkumar arms recorded the statement of khangjarakapn Devendro Singh u/s 161
Cr.P.C. Ext. P/73 is the statement of Khangjarakpan Devendro Singh. The statement of Ibopishak
Singh which to marked X6 to X6 is shown to me. It is the recorded statement of Singh recorded by
SI Sorojkumar. Ext.P/74 is the statement of S. Ibopishak Singh.
Ext. P/75 is the portion marked X3 to S3 of the statement of Kaka Singh(PW 29) recorded by SI
Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext. P/76 is the portion marked X4 to X4 of the statement of S. Rajen Singh
(P.W. 30) proceeded by SI Sorojkumar Sarma.Ext. P/77 is the portion marked X1 to X1 of the
statement of Moirangthem Romen Singh (P.W. 27) Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 152 recorded
by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext.P/78 is the portion marked X to X of the statement of Kairenpaibam
Premjit Singh (P.W.26) recorded by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ext. P/79 is the portion marked X2 to X2
of the statement of Debendrajit Singh recoded by SI Sorojkumar Sarma. Ex is the portion marked X-
to X- of the statement of Khuraijam Ranjit Singh recorded by SI Sorojkumar Sarma.
xxxxxx by the d/c.
It is true that I was not present at the time of registrationof the FIR Case No. 384 (6)89 I. P. S. On
7.6.04(Continuation) I was a football player before joining my service. It is true that the deceased
namely Seityajit Singh was also a football player of NISA. NISA is a local club of the locality of the
said Seityajit Singh. I had no any knowledge if the deceased was working as a contractor
forreppairing the roads from khoyathong upto the crossing near Jalal. This fact I came to know after
the occurrence during the investigation of the case.
I deny the suggestion that one of the listed witness of this case namely Irom Nabachandra Singh s/o
I.Ibotombi Singh of SagolbandSalam Leikai was arrested on suspicion inc/w the present case and
that he was detained in the police custody for a period of 4 or 5 days. It is true that one Khuraijam
Rajen Singh was also arrested in c/w thepresent case as one of the accused and that he was
remanded to custody. I have no any knowledge by which Court the said accused was released on
bail. The said Khuraijam Rajen was not charge sheeted apparently on not finding sufficient evidence
as against him. I have no any personal knowledge if the concerned I.O.of this case filed any
application toany court praying for discharging the said Rajen Singh.I deny the suggestion that this
case was not properly investigated by the I.O. It is true that both Heli Mao and Sarojkumar Sharma
were the Sub- Inspector of police at the time of investigation of this case but former was senior to
the latter. I have no any knowledge if the accused Ramananda Singh is a blacksmit or not. I deny the
suggestion that I never found one bruise mark at the lower forehead of the right eye lid of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 129
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
accused Ramananda Singh and that the said injury was not caused during fighting with the deceased
Seityajit Singh, I deny the suggestion that during the interrogation of the accused Pukhrambam
Sahajahan@ Joykumar Singh he never admitted the commission of the offence and that he never
gave statement about the concealment of weapons such as cane stick, ironhandle of jeep and knife
inside a clumb of bamboos near eastern corner of his house. I deny the suggestion that there was no
any garrage near the north eastern corner of the accused Sahajan at Sagolband Meino Leirak at the
relevant time. I deny the suggestion that the said jeep was not seized from the garrage of the said
Sahajahan and that it was seized from the eastern outhouse of the said accused.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 153 I deny the suggestion that here is any road /way near the
ingkhol of the said accused Sahajahan connecting Salam Leikai and Meino Leirak.
I was present at the time of seizure of cane stick iron handle of the jeep and knife at the instance of
the accused Sahajahan from his ingkhol.I deny the suggestion that no weapon of offence was sized at
the instance of the accused Sahajahan in my presence.I was not present at the time of seizure of any
articles at the instance of other accused. I have no any knowledge as to how A. Bebe Sharma and
Kshetrimayum Ronikanta were made witnesses in respect of seizure of articles at the instance of the
accused P. Joykumar Singh.I also deny the suggestion that no statement of any of the accused
persons was recorded u/s 27 of Indian Evidence Act.
I deny the suggestion that the said witnesses namely A. Bebe Sarma is a fictitious person.
I deny the suggestion that the I.O. of the case took many signatures of the accused P. Joykumar
Singh while he was in police custody and further that Ext.P/13 was manufactured by the I.O. of the
case on such a blank paper containing she signature of the accused Joykumar Singh.I was not
present when the I.O. of the case recorded the statement of accused Dhananjoy Singh u/s 27 of
Indian Evidence Act.I deny the suggestion that accused Dhananjoy Singh never gave any statement
u/s 27 of Indian Evidence Act. I also deny the suggestion that accused P. Dhananjoy Singh was made
to sign on many blank papers while he was in police custody. It is not a fact that Ext. P/53 is a
fabricated document. I deny the suggestion that there was no bamboo grow on the north-eastern
corner of any garrage in the ingkhol of P.Shyamnagor Singh. I deny the suggestion that Ext.1/14 is a
fabricated document. I deny the suggestion that no seizure of Singjangkhok was made at the
instance of accused Dhananjoy.I also deny the suggestion that the signatures of accused Dhananjoy
were obtained by the I.O. while he in police custody.
I deny the suggestion that Ext.P/44 is also a fabricated document. I deny the suggestion that sketch
map at Ext. 1/54 is not relevant to the actual location of the ingkhol compound of P.Shyamnagor
Singh.
I deny the suggestion that Ext.1/54 was prepared by the I.O. without visiting the spot. I deny the
suggestion that photographs seized under Ext.P/21 were not corresponding any place within the
ingkhol of P. Shyamnagar Singh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 130
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
I deny the suggestion that the I.O. took all the steps for conducting T.I.Parade. I deny the suggestion
that TIParade was not done properly according to law. I deny the suggestion that no jeep was seized
by the I.O. on production by P.Shyamnagor Singh. I deny the suggestion that Ext.P/42 is also a
fabricated document. I also deny the suggestion that no blood stain was found on any portion of the
jeep. I deny the suggestion that Smt. Akashini Devi was not mother of Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018
Page 154 accused, Joykumar Singh. I also deny the suggestion that no search was made by SI
Sorojkumar Sharma in the house of Shyamnagor and that no battery was seized from the room of P.
Akashini Devi. I also deny the suggestion that Ext. P/43 is a fabricated document and that all the
signatures on Ext. P/43 were all obtained at Imphal P.S. It is not a fact that SI Sorojkumar Sarma
did not seize one blue zin pant with blood stain and grey colour full shirt of accused Bodo Singh on
26.6.89 on production by Salam Bodo Singh. I also deny the suggestion that Ext. P/45 is a fabricated
document. I deny the suggestion that on 28.6.89 SI Sorojkumar Sarma did not seize one newly
washed longpant dark grey in colour (terrywool), one full shirt white blue and grey mixed colour
polyster shirt on production by Salam Devendra Singh the elder brother of accused Bodo@
Somorendro Singh in the presence of accused namely Wangkhemcha Shyamjai and A.Imocha Singh
of Sagolband Meino Leirak at the residence of the accused S. Bodo @Somerendro Singh. I also
further deny the suggestion that the said longpant and full shirt were worned by the accused
Joykumar Singh at the time of the commission of the crime, and the same were left at the house of
Bodo@Somorendro by the accused Joykumar Singh.
I also deny the suggestion that the above articles were not seized by SI Sorojkumar Sarma at the
instance of the accused Joykumar Singh on production by Devendrajit Singh. I also deny the
suggestion that Ext.P/46 is a fabricated document, and that the signature of the accused Joykumar
Singh at Ext.P/46/5 was obtained on the blank papers. It is not a fact that on 27.6.89 at about 2 p.m.
SI Sorojkumar Sarma did not seize one white cotton Paijma stained with blood being found washed
after commission of the crime by the sister of accused Moba@Sanatomba and one nylon T-Shirt red
& white in colour on different faces on prosecution by the accused Moba RK Sanatomba in presence
of witnesses namely M. Romen Singh of Uripok and Kairenphaibam Premjit Singh. I deny the
suggestion that Ext.P/47 is a fabricated document.I deny the suggestion that Ext.1/47/4 was
obtained by the I.O. of the case on the blank paper before manufacturing the said document, I deny
the suggestion on 28.6.89 at about 11.30 a.m. Sl Sorojkumar Sarma did not seize one polyster full
shirt and one black terrywool longpant on production by Pangoijam Ramananda Singh in presence
of witnesses namely Salam Debendrajti Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai and Inaomacha Singh of
Sagolband Meino Leirak. I also deny the suggestion that Ext.P/48 isa fabricated document.
I deny the suggestion that the signatures at Ext.P/45/1 and P/48/2 were obtained on the blank
papers, by the I.O. of the case. It is not a fact that the signature of P. Ranananda Singh at Ext.P/48/4
was also obtained on the blank paper by the I.O.of the case while the said accused was in police
custody. I deny the suggestion that on 28.6.89 at about 11.48 a.m. SI Sorojkumar did not seize one
half T-shirt(nylon) and one terrywool longpant blue black in colour on production by
Khangjarakpam Basanta @Lalhari in the presence of witnesses A.Ingocha Singh of Sagolband
Meino Leirak and Salam Debendrajit Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 155 Singh of Sagalband
salam Leikai. I also deny the suggestion that Ext.P/49 is also a fabricated document. I deny the
suggestion the signature of witness namely A. Ingocha Singh & S. Debendrajit Singh were obtained
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 131
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
on the blank papers of the case. I also deny the suggestion that Exihibits P/49/1 & 1/49/2
were/obtained on the blank papers.I deny the suggestion that on 28.6.89 at about 12.40 p.m. SI
Sorojkumar did not seize one T Shirt yellow in colour and one blue colour zin pant on production by
P. Bobi Dhananjoy Singh under a seizure memo in presence of witnesses namely Boyai and Rokcy
Singh. I deny the suggestion that Ext. P/57 is a fabricated document.
I deny the suggestion that SI Sorojkumar Sarma never conducted searched at the house of accused
RK. Moba@Sanatomba Singh. I deny the suggestion that Ext.1/56 is also a fabricated document. I
deny the suggestion that Ext. P/59 is not corresponding to any place within the house of accused RK
Moba @Sanatomba Singh. I deny the suggestion that the accused persons were innocent and there
was no material or prima facie case against any of them. I deny the suggestion that a portion of
statement at ext.1/73 was not given by Khangjarakpam Debendro Singh to the I.O. of the case. I also
deny the suggestion that Ext.P/74 was not stated by S. Ibopishak to the I.O.of the case. I deny the
suggestion that P.W.29 Kaka Singh did not state the portion of the statement at Ext.P/75 to the I.O.
of the case. I deny the suggestion that I.W.SO S. Rajen did not state the statement at Ext. P/76 to the
I.O. of the case. I also deny the suggestion that P.W.27 M. Romen Singh did not state the portion of
statement at Ext.P/77 to the I.O. of the case. I deny the suggestion that P.W.26 K. Premjit Singh did
not state the portion of the statement Ext.P/89 to the I.O.of the case. I also deny the suggestion that
Kh. Ranjit Singh did not state the portion of the statement at Ext.P/80 to the I.O.of the case. I deny
the suggestion I am giving false statement. I deny the suggestion that the accused persons were
wrongly implicated in the case.
To The Court:- I can identify the seized knife, cane stick having bold at the end and/handle of the
jeep is shown to me. Ext.M.O. 8 is the cane stick and Ext.M.O. 9 is the iron handle of the jeep and
Ext.M.O.10 is ta knife seized by the SI Sorojkumar Singh in the presence of accused P. Joykumar
Singh.
x x x x by the d/c.
I deny the suggestion that Exts. M.O.8,9 and 10 were not seized by the SI Sorojkumar Sarma at the
instance of accused P. Joykumar Singh.
Our analysis, observation and reasoning -
We found reliable statements contradictory to the prosecution story as well as the narration and
finding arrived at by the Ld. Trial Court, and the same are reproduced herein below:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 156
(i) On 24.6.89 at about 9.30p.m.
(ii) One bruise mark found at the lower forehead of the right eyelid of the accused Ramananda Singh
which was found injured during the fighting with the deceased Seityajit Singh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 132
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
(iii) During the course of the investigation SI Srojkumar interrogated the accused persons one by
one. During his examination of the accused persons the accused Pukhrambam Sahajahan
@Joykumar Singh admitted that he committed the crime with other 4 accused persons and the
weapon of crime used at the time of the commission of the crime such as cane stick, iron handle of
the jeep and knife were kept concealed inside a clump of bampoo near north eastern corner of the
house near the garrage of accused Sahajahan at Sagolband Meino Leirak. He further stated that he
would be able to find out the said concealing place of the weapon of crime and will be able to hand
over the said weapon to the I.O. of this case. SI Sarojkumar Sharma recorded the statement of the
accused P. Joykumar @Sahajahan in a separate sheet u/s 27 of Indian Evidence Act. The recorded
statement of P. Joykumar @Sahajahan Singh is shown to me, which was already marked as
Ext.P/13.
(iv) In order to ascertain whether the stains of clothes blood/is human blood or not. The articles:- 1)
sample of blood of the deceased Seityajit Singh, 2) blood stained stones, earth,paper mark
containing the blood, 7 brown glasses, 2 large pieces of broken wooden stick, 3 small pieces of
wooden sticks, white Paijma, long pant, 3 small cut pieces of the hoot of the jeep marked E1, E2 and
E3 respectively other cut pieces of the hoot marked stained with blood, one iron handle of jeep
marked as F,one cane stick with tempering hole marked F2, one knife with wooden handle bearing
small areas of Faint brown stems marked F3, one wooden club stained with blood marked as G, one
photostat copy of PM examination marked as H, 2 photographs marked as 1(A) and 1(B)
respectively.
(v) As per opinion of the Expert i.e. filter paper cutting marked A, one stone marked B(1), stone
B(2), stone B(3), earth B(4), paper cutting (5),broken wooden B(13), broken wooden piece marked
B(14), broken wooden piece marked (15), broken wood piece marked B(16),cut piece of the hoot
marked E1, cut pieces of hoot E2,cut pieces of hoot marked E. The above articles are marked as Sl.
No.7 to 20. The item No. Sl.No.7 to 13 excluding Sl. No. 14 noted above are stained with human
blood. The blood stains on the item No.14,18,19 and 20 are disintegrated and their origin cannot be
determined.
(vi) It is true that I was not present at the time of registration of the FIR Case No. 384 (6)89 I. P. S.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 157
(vii) I deny the suggestion that one of the listed witness of this case namely Irom Nabachandra
Singh s/o I.Ibotombi Singh of SagolbandSalam Leikai was arrested on suspicion inc/w the present
case and that he was detained in the police custody for a period of 4 or 5 days. It is true that one
Khuraijam Rajen Singh was also arrested in c/w thepresent case as one of the accused and that he
was remanded to custody. I have no any knowledge by which Court the said accused was released on
bail. The said Khuraijam Rajen was not charge sheeted apparently on not finding sufficient evidence
as against him. I have no any personal knowledge if the concerned I.O.of this case filed any
application toany court praying for discharging the said Rajen Singh.
(viii) I was not present at the time of seizure of any articles at the instance of other accused. I have
no any knowledge as to how A. Bebe Sharma and Kshetrimayum Ronikanta were made witnesses in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 133
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
respect of seizure of articles at the instance of the accused P. Joykumar Singh.
(ix) I was not present when the I.O. of the case recorded the statement of accused Dhananjoy Singh
u/s 27 of Indian Evidence Act.
In the above statement, the witness stated that the seized articles i.e. the jeep, one battery, one
polyster full shirt having blood stain, sample of blood on a paper, sample of scalp hair, 2 pieces of
stick, smeared with blood measurer 5 feet long, half broken wooden stick having blood stains
measuring 3  ft., a piece of broken wooden stick measuring about 22 inches long with wooden
handel of about 3 inches long, half lantern with broken chimneywere sent to the Central Forensic
Science Laboratory, 30 Gorachand Road, Kolkata for examination in order to ascertain whether the
stains of blood is human blood or not. But, further, it was stated that the blood stains on the Item
No. 14, 18, 19 and 20 are disintegrated and their origin cannot be determined. In his Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 158 cross examination, the witness stated that one Kh. Rajen Singh was also
arrested in connection with the present case as one of the accused and was also remanded in
custody. Furhter, it was stated that Kh. Rajen Singh was not chargesheeted due to lack of evidence
against him, and further stated that he had no knowledge if the I.O. filed any application to any
Court praying for discharging the said Kh. Rajen Singh. Further, it was stated that he had no any
knowledge as to how A. Bebe Sharma and Kh. Ronikanta Singh were made witnesses in respect of
seizure of the articles at the instance of Shri P. Joykumar Singh.
On perusal of the statement of P.W. No. 36, it is seen and ascertained that the confessional
statement under Section 27 of Evidence Act were recorded from the 2 (two) accused i.e. the accused
P. Shahajahan @ Joykumar Singh and the accused P. Dhananjoy Singh and consequent upon that,
from their pointing the following seizure were made on the pointing of accused Shahajahan, one
cane stick, one iron handle of jeep and knife were seized and from Dhananjoy Singh one wooden
club (singjangkhok) at the instance of P. Dhananjoy Singh. The witnesses for the confessional
statement as well as consequent seizure mentioned above of Shahajahan Singh were Bebe Sharma,
Ronikanta and Rajen Singh and for P. Dhananjoy Singh @ Boby Singh in the prersence of witness
namely, Ibrahim of Jiribam Babupara and Md.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 159 Ali of Jiribam Babupara and Ibobi Singh. The prosecution
examined the witnesses for the confessional statement and consequent seizure of seized articles
mentioned above for accused Shahajahan Singh were examined. However, the witnesses for the
confessional statement for P. Dhananjoy Singh were not examined and produced as witnesses in the
Court to identify the accused and to prove the confessional statement of the accused.
Further, we extracted the Exhibit P/13 as follows:
Exhibit P. 13:
Confessional statement of the accused Shri Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh @
Sahajahan Singh 32 yrs, s/o P. Shyamnagor Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak Imphal
recorded in c/w FIR case No. 384 (6) 89 IPS u/s 326/302/34 IPC recorded u/s 27 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 134
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Evidence Act.
I was born and brought up at Sagolband Meino Leirak Imphal, yesterday i.e. 23.06.89 at @ 9.50 pm
I along with my friends namely, P. Ramananda Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai, I. Nabachandra
Singh of do, Kh. Basanta Singh of Sagolband Meino Leirak were arrested by O/C IPS accompanied
with SI H. Sorojkumar Sharma of Imphal PS i/c with the Case FIR No. referred above. Also I
confessed you that in c/w the above mentioned case, the said Seityajit Singh was murdered by
..........as to revenge the previous assault by him to me on 22.6.89 at about 11.30 am at Khoyathong
in front of Star Auto Works that the said Seityajit Singh have assaulted me by slaping on my face on
22.06.89 at @ 11.30 in front of general public at Khoyathong in front of the Star Auto Works while I
request him to allow to enter on paddle upto my shop where he was working as a contractor for
repairing the road, I felt very much ashame and play to revenge to the alleged accused person. Thus
I have contracted -
(i) Khangjarakpam Basanta Singh s/o Kh. Ahanjao Singh of Sagoland Meino Leirak, Imphal.
(ii) Pangoijam Ramananda Singh (34) s/o Ibotombi Singh of Salam Leikai.
(iii) Irom Nabachandra Singh (29) s/o Tombi Singh of Sagolband Salam Leikai.
(iv) One Kh. Rajen Singh of Naransena.
(v) RK. Moba Singh s/o RK Budhisana of Uripok Ningthoujam
Leikai, Imphal.
(vi) Salam Bodo Singh s/o S. Achou Singh of Salam Leikai, Imphal.
(vii) Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh s/o Late Ibochouba Singh of Uripok Huidrom Leikai.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 160 and requested them to accompany with and thus, they were
hired and brought in my jeep without regd. No. which was taken out from our garage. Then we have
waited the said Seityajit Singh of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai (Contractor) remaining the contract
work for metalling road at Khoyathong Road, Imphal Bazar who have assaulted me) from 8 pm of
dt. 22.06.89 upto about 2 am of dt. 23.06.89 and when the said peson and one of his friends was
returning his home along with half lamp holding by his friend. We had an ambush at south western
of Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and assaulted by using sticks, jeep handle and a knife. The
knife is held by me,the jeep handle is held by RK. Moba Singh, one cane stick was held byS. Bodo
Singh of Salam Leikai, another one by Ramananda Singh (which is left at the spot). And another
stick is held by Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh of Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai. During the assault
Ramananda Singh assaulted him 1st with his stick but the person escaped the blow and held
Ramananda and gave a hard blow on his rt. eye causing bleeding injury on lower portion. Then Bodo
used his stick and hit him so hard and Seityajit release Ramananda and fell down on the floor. Then
we all gathered and hit him with our weapons. Then I stab him on both thigh 2/3 times. The said
Seityajit cried very loudly with agony. Then, we all jump to our jeep and sped away from there
towards west and then passing through Lalambung. I drop RK Mobi & his friend P. Dhananjoy at
the junction of Uripok Bachaspati Leirak. Then we four arrived at Meino Leirak at about 3 AM of
23.06.89. Basanta, Naba & Bodro went to their respective houses. Rajen and myself remain at my
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 135
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
residence. I wash my hands and the knife used in commission of the crime at my pond by using
piece of cloth from my jeep. Then, in the early morning I along with Rajen Singh went out from our
house sent Rajen upto Moirang bus parking. Before I went out from my residence, I wash the jeep
which is used in the commission of such crime and had found all the incriminating weapons of the
offence (i) the handle used by RK Moba (ii) Stick (cane stick) used by RK Moba Singh (iii) the knife
used by me were found in the jeep. I wash them all and kept in the eastern side of the garage
concealing near the bamboo plants.
I can produce the same from where I kept concealed there incriminating articles. I was allowed to go
there.
Confesstional statement of accused P. Dhananjoy Singh is reproduced herein below:
"My name is Pukhrambam Dhananjoy Singh @ Bobi Singh. I was born and brought
up at Uripok Haobam Dewan Leikai, Imphal. On 22/6/89 at about 8/9 p.m. I was
being called by R.K. Moba Singh of Uripok Ningthoukhongjam Leikai for some work
along with Pukhrambam Sahajahan @ Joykumar Siongh of Sagolband Meino Leirak
along with other 5 persons ina jeep belongs to Sahajahan without any No. Thus, I
have accompanied them and along with them I reached Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba
Mapal and then they disclosed me that we are coming to beat one person and then
Sahajahan point us Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 161 the person who wore a
Sport pant blue/black. I couldn't classify in the night who was working on the
Khoyathong road along with other publics (Koilas Thaba Kangbuga) from the corner
of Khoyathong Police (Traffic) Police point. Thus preparing ourselves by holding
sticks etc. I pick up a woden block (rounded club) and about 31/2ft. in length about
2/  inch dia, which was found lying near the BOROI plant on the South Western
corner of the Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba Mapal and waited the person along with
R.K. Moba Singh who held one iron handle of the jeep till the 2 a.m. of dt. 23/6/89.
Then the person who identified by Sahajahan along with another person holding a
half lamp came to the road situated on the Southern side of the Pukhri Achouba.
Then as plan previously one of our colleague assaulted him and the other person who
came alongwith the said person ran towards the southern gate and the person whom
who have assaulted hodl one of our colleague. Then I assaulted him with my club
which, I hodl. Then, the others also hit him with their weaons. Then, the person fell
down flat on the ground. Then, I throw my club (wooden club) towards the roadside.
I jumped up on the jeep which came towards us on the road which was driven b y
Sahajahan Singh. Then, we fled away from the spot.
[41] Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
through the materials on record, the only question that falls for our consideration is
whether the Trial Court committed any error in holding the appellants herein guilty
of the offences punishable under Section 302/149 IPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 136
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
For consideration of this and for deciding the case as to whether the prosecution
proves their case against the accused under Sectin 302/149 IPC to convict the
accused or not and the Ld. Trial Court while deciding the case commits error in facts
and in law, we rely upon the deposition of the witnesses, our analysis, assessment
and reasoning highlighted and reproduced above. We have also taken into
consideration the rival contentions and written arguments filed in support of their
cases with the citations submitted therewith.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 162
[42] To the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we
must look into the relevant findings recorded by the Ld. Trial Court.
We are now relyingon the relevant portions of the judgment of Ld. Trial Court
reproduced hereinabove.
The Ld. Trial Court after appreciation of evidences gave an opinion that the
prosecution has been able to establish the following facts:
"26. It is settled principle of law that in the circumstantial evidence the chain of
circumstance must be complete. In the light of the above appreciation of evidences, I
am of the opinion that the prosecution has able to establish the following facts:
(i) The deceased. P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh was doing a contract work of
black topping of road on the Thangal Bazar from Khuyathong crossing to crossing
point of Jallan Provision Store and while doing the said work the deceased blocked all
kinds of vehicular traffics for executing his work properly and while doing so there
were instances of quarrel between the deceased and users of the road.
(ii) There was a quarrel between the deceased and accused, P. Joykumar Singh on
22-06-1989 while the accused Joykumar was prevented by the deceased to enter to
his Tyre Retreading shop and in that quarrel the deceased slapped to the accused P.
Joykumar Singh.
(iii) On 22-06-1989 the accused. P. Joykumar Singh along with one of his friends
came to the house of P.W. No. 16. N. Sidham Singh and enquired about the
whereabouts of the deceased by narrating the story that he was slapped by the
deceased and P.W. No. 16 informed to the accused Joykumar Singh that the deceased
belonged to Thangmeiband Polem Leikai.
(iv) On 23-06-1989 at about 2.00 to 2.30 a.m. the deceased return to his home from
his work shed along with P.W No.4 who hold a half lamp and on their way some
unknown persons attacked both of them by holding deadly weapons and left the place
of occurrence in a JEEP and P. Satyajit alias Satyajit Kumar Singh succumbed to his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 137
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
injuries.
(v) On 23-06-1989, P.W. No. 16. N. Sidham Singh narrated the story of making
enquiry by accused no. 1, Joykumar Singh whereabouts of the deceased. P. Satyajit
alias Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 163 Saryajit Kumar Singh, to the I.O. of the
case and immediately the I.O. of the case along with P.W. No. 16 proceeded to the
house of accused No. 1 at Sagolband Salam Leikai.
(vi) The accused, Joykumar was not found in his house amid on enquiry a Jeep with
blood stain in its hood was found and the same was seized.
(vii) The accused persons were arrested by the Police on the night of 24-06-1989 on
surrender.
(viii) During the course of investigation the statements of the accused persons,
namely, (i) P. Joykumar Singh and (ii) P. Dhananjoy Singh were recorded in presence
of witnesses in which they disclosed about commission of the crime along with other
accused persons and the weapons of crime used by them and for production of the
same from the hiding place.
(ix) The weapons of crime were recovered from the hiding places at the instances of
the accused Joykumar Singh and Dhananjoy Singh.
(x) The clothes worn by the accused persons, namely S. Bodo Singh and P. Joykumar
Singh at the time of commission of crime were seized in presence of witnesses from
the house of accused Bodo Singh on production by the said accused Bodo Singh and
his brother, Debendrajit Singh.
(xi) In the T.I. Parade the P.W. No.4 who was the eye witness to the scene of
assaulting himself and the decensed identified one of the accused persons, namely,
R.K. Sanatomba Singh who is no more now."
The above mentioned opinion formed by the Ld. Trial Court are negated by the facts of the case,
assessment, analysis and reasonings made above of the depositions of the statements of the P.Ws.
by us and on the basis of the series of discrepancies, contradictories and unreliable in the statements
of the witnesses and the materials placed before usand the above 11 (eleven) specific facts from
which the opinion of the Ld. Trial Court are negated by the following:
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 164
a) The deceased was last accompanied by P.W. No. 4 from his khola
and the said witness withhold the information about the incident with himself for more than 14
(fourteen) hours in a most unnatural manner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 138
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
b) The deceased is quarrelsome and therefore there was a high chance of probability that the
deceased could develop enmity with many other people.
c) The P.W. No. 4 stated that he himself and the deceased shouted and raised alarms during the
assault. However, P.W. No. 17 who was taking bath nearby and any of the local residents did not
support such version.
d) The P.W. No. 16 stated that Accused/ Appellant No. 1 came to him for a peaceful settlement with
the deceased on 22/06/1989 and on being told by the said witnesses a police team along with
himself went to the house of Accused/Appellant No. 1. Inspite of this fact, the police examined P.W.
No. 16 only on 06/07/1989 i.e. a delay of 14 (fourteen) days.
e) The materials, like blood sample, clothes worn by the Accused Persons could not be related with
the alleged incident as per the FSL report.
f) The T.I. Parade is not admissible in the eyes of law as submitted in the ground No. XIV above.
Since the Ld. Trial Court convicted the accused under circumstantial evidence, we are of the view
that the prosecution failed to establish chains of circumstances to make out the guilt of the accused
and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in 2023 SCC online SC 746(paragraph No. 17) observed that :
"17. This is a case based on circumstantial evidence. It is trite law that to convict an
accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence,the prosecution must prove beyond
reasonable doubt each of the inviminating circumstances on which it proposes to
rely; the circumstance(s) relied upon must be of a definite tendency unerringly
pointing towards accused's guilt and must form a chain so far complete that there is
no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability it is the accused and
no one else who had committed the crime and they (it) must exclude all other
hypothesis inconsistent with his guilt and consistent with his innocence.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 165
[43] Further, the P.W. No. 4 in hisstatement stated thathe
was all alone in the hospital till the completion of the post mortem.But, in his earlier
statement,he stated that one Y. Jadumani Singh and some labourers came and went
to the hospital and also stated that the injured deceased was taken to RMC Hospital
in a truck belonging to Polem Kumar Singh. The volume of discrepancies shown in
the statement of the witness who is the sole eyewitness and one of the most
important prosecution witness on whose reliability of the volume of his statement the
guilt of the accused in the commission of crime can be proved, the discrepancies as
highlighted above is too much that we considered the statement of the witness not
reliable and the quality of his statement is too low. Not only the present witness, the
36 (thirty six) witnesses including the present witness produced and relied upon by
the prosecution cannot be reliable on the basis of our assessment, analysis and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 139
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
reasonings as reproduced and highlighted above and having taken these factors into
account, we do not think/consider for the interest of justice inspite of large number
of witnesses produced and relied upon by the prosecution to back its contention that
the conviction of the accused by the Ld. Trial Court is to be upheld and to set aside
the present jail appeal. In this Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 166 regard, we rely
upon the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation made in -
Quality of the evidence:
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Gulbar Sarbar Vs. State of Bihar [(2014) 3 SCC 401]at
para No. 19, observed that -
"19. In the matter of appreciation of evidence of witness, it is not the number of
witnesses but quality of their evidence which is important, as there is no requirement
under the Law of Evidence that any particular number of witness is to be examined to
prove/disprove a fact. It is a time-honoured principle that evidence must be weighed
and not counted. The test is whether the evidence has a ring of truth, is cogent,
credible and trustworthy or otherwise. The legal system has laid emphasis on value
provided by each witness, rather than the multiplicity or plurality of witnesses. It is
quality and not quality, which determines the adequacy of evidence as has been
provided by Section 134 of the Evidence Act. Even in probate cases, where the law
requires the examination of at least one attesting witness, it has been held that
production of more witnesses does not carry any weight. Thus, conviction can even
be based on the testimony of a sole eyewitness, if the same inspires confidence."
[44] The Ld. Trial Court regarding the statements recorded under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. observed as
thus-
"It is a fact that the statements recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is not admissible
under the law but it can be seen the nature of the accussed persons. The accused
Pukhrambam Joykumar Singh has admitted that he and his father were running as
tyre retreat shop at Khoyathong Road, Thangal Bazar about 21/22 years agbo from
today. The accused was examined on 9/2/2012 by the court under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
He also admitted that in front of his retreat shop one Nongmaithem Sidham Singh of
Nagamapal Phougeisangbam, Imphal (witness No. 10 was running a firewood
shop/stall along with his mother. But the accused Joykumar Singh has denied that he
had well acquainted with the said Sidham Singh. The accused had stated that he does
not know the said Sidham Singh. The accused has admitted that on or about
23.6.1989 a work of black topping between Khoyathong and Thangal Bazar was done.
On careful perusal of the statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. there is
reason to believe that he has not stated true facts regarding the acquitance with P.W.
No. 10 Sidham Singh but his statement strengthened about the work of black topping
from Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 167 Khoyathong to Thangal Bazar where he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 140
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
and his father were then running a tyre retreat shop in front of a firewood stall run by
P.W. No. 10 N. Sidham Singh and his mother."
Discharge of Section 106 of the Evidence Act by the accused The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in State of
Punjab V. Kewal Krishan [(2023) SCC online SC 746] Para No. 17 and 22 observed that -
"17. This is a case based on circumstantial evidence. It is trite law that to convict an
accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must prove beyond
reasonable doubt each of the incriminating circumstances on which it proposes to
rely; the circumstance(so relied upon must be of a definite tendency unerringly
pointing towards accused's guilt and must form a chain so far complete that there is
no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability it is the accused and
no one else who had committed the crime and they (it) must exclude all other
hypothesis inconsistent within his guilt and consistency with his innocence.
22. The argument that the accused has failed to discharge his burden under section
106 of the Evidence Act and, therefore, his conviction was justified is misconceived.
Section 106 of the Evidence Act does not absolve the prosecution of discharging its
primary burden of providng the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt. It is only
when the prosecution has led evidence which, I believed, will sustain a conviction, or
which makes out a prima facie case, the question arises of considering facts of which
the burden of proof would lie upon the accused.(See:Shivaji Chintappa Patil v. State
of Maharashtra, (2021) 5 SCC 626).Here as we have discussed above, firstly, the
incriminating circumstances were not proved beyond reasonable doubt and,
secondly, they do not form a chain so complete from which it could be inferred with a
degree of certainty that is the accused and no one else who, whichin all human
probability, committed the crime. In these circumstances, there was no occasion to
place burden on the accused with the aid of section 106 of the Evidence Acxt to prove
his innocence or to disclose that he parted company of the deceased before his
murder."
[45] So far as the issue of 302 IPC is concerned, there are two aspects i.e. direct evidence and
circumstantial evidence and whether the prosecution is applying direct evidence in their case or
circumstantial evidence.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 168 During the course of hearing, the learned State counsel
submitted that the prosecution has relied on both direct as well as circumstantial evidence. As the
P.W. No. 4 was the sole eyewitness of the occurrence,as such, the prosecution relying on P.W. No. 4
on the aspect of direct evidence as the accused No. 4 is the solitary eyewitness. The P.W. No. 4 was
with the deceased Satyajit Singh's work place to his Khola and till the assault to the deceased by
unidentified persons till his death in the hospital.
[46] Thus,from the oral evidence of the P.W. No. 4, it is seen that he is the solitary eyewitness of the
incident and did not inform or narrate about the incident till 03.00 pm to anybody while he was all
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 141
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
alone present in the hospital, at the place of occurrence and during the funeral of the deceased in the
midst of the family members, relatives and friends of the deceased and local people (unnatural and
surprising manner). It is also seen that the witness, who was with the deceased from the said Khola
of the deceased at the work place to the place of occurrence till the death of the deceased as per his
statement, stated that he was at the gate of one RK. Bicomesana while the unknown person
assaulted the deceased at the distance of 55 ft. from him and he could see the incidence with the
help of an electric bulb of 60/100W lighted on the nearby electric post. This statement is
unbelievable, as it would be humanly impossible to observe or identify the happening from that kind
of quality of light and distance.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 169
[47] The claims made by this witness that he himself as
well as the deceased shouted and raised alarms during the assault meted out to the deceased by the
unknown assailants. However, the prosecution did not produce even a single witness to support the
claims made by the present witness. His version is not even supported by P.W. No. 7 whose house is
nearby the place of occurrence that he did not hear any alarm as narrated by the P.W. No. 4 that the
deceased as well as himself raised alarm "MEE HATLE MEE HATLE".
[48] Mention is made here that FIR was lodged on 23.06.1989, chargesheet was submitted
31.07.1998, case was committed to the Sessions Court on 05.04.1999, charge framed on 14.06.1999
under Section 302/149, judgment announced on 12.01.2018.
[49] On perusal of the FIR copy as well as the statements of P.W. No. 35 and P.W. No. 36 (SDPO), it
was mentioned that the ejhar was lodged at about 4.30 a.m. of 23.06.1989 and the complaint was
made by the father of deceased (P.W. No. 1) at 4.00 a.m. But, on perusal of the statement of P.W.
No. 1, it is seen that the father of deceased (P.W. No. 1) lodged the complaint to the police at about
4.00 p.m. as narrated to him about the incident by P.W. No. 4, Shri N. Megha Singh who was the
sole eye witness and who was with his deceased son till his death at 3.00 p.m. and this Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 170 fact is also reflected in the first line of para No. 2 of the impugned
judgment.
This discrepancy is not discussed and clarified by the Ld. Trial Court as well as the I.O. (P.W. No.
35.) and the O.C. (P.W. No. 36).
[50] It is also a fact that in the instant case, there is an eyewitness i.e. P.W. No. 4, Shri N. Megha
Singh, who was with the deceased, had dinner together, went out of the Kholla after having dinner
together and the assault was made when they went together and who saw the assault meted out to
the deceased by unknown persons. The P.W. No. 4, Shri N. Megha Singh during T.I. Parade,
identified one person namely, R.K. Sanayaima Singh, but did not identify even a single accused
while giving his statement in the Court.
These facts are not considered in the judgment and order of the Ld. Trial Court while analyzing the
instant case, as it is settled principle of law that even if the eye witnesses did not go through T.I.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 142
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Parade (if T.I. Parade is not conducted). The Dock Identification, identification of the accused by the
witnesses in the Court, is more valuable, relevant and reliable. In the instant case, the P.W. No. 4
who is the sole eyewitness in his statement before the Court stated that due to lapse of time, he may
not be able to identify the said accused he identified at the T.I. Parade even if Cril Jail Appeal No. 1
of 2018 Page 171 shown to himagain due to lapse of time and further stated that the accused, who
were in the Dock, were not the one he identified during T.I. Parade and some of the portion is
reproduced herein below:
"I cannot now identify the said person whom I identified at the time of TI Parade held
at Imphal Central Jail. At the time of making the said identification I was informed
by one person inside the said jail that the person whom I identified in the TI Parade
was one Sanayaima. The person whom I identified in the TI Parade was one of the
accused who took part in the said assault made to the deceased Seitrajit Singh. I have
not seen him before the day of occurrence. I saw the said person for the 2nd time at
the time of holding the TI Parade."
[51] P.W. No. 16 is the only person who identified the accused Shahajahan, but, he is not the person
who saw the incident, not the eyewitness but, only the person who narrated to the police that the
accused Shahajahan with one unknown person came to his house by a scooter and told him that the
accused Shahajahan was assaulted by the deceased inquired whereabout the deceased and he told
the accused and his friend that the deceased is a resident of Thangmeiband Polem Leikai and the
accused and his friend told him that they came to his house for making amicable settlement between
them but, he could not bring about an amicable settlement as he did not find the deceased at his
work site. In the circumstances, his identification of the accused in the Dock is not reliable in
connection with the commission of crime.
Some of the witnesses identified the accused in the Dock are the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page
172 father, sister and relative of the accused Shahajahan who were declared hostile witnesses.
[52] The Ld. Trial Court,while convicting the accused on the circumstantial evidences at Para No. 25
of its judgment, stated that -
"Learned of the accused persons, Shri Ch. Biomol Singh, Advocate has contended
that the prosecution based their case on circumstantial evidences and thus, the chain
of circumstance must be complete but the prosecution has failed to link the chain of
circumstance for involving the accused persons in the present case. Ld. Counsel has
relied to the case laws reported in (i) 2008 (3) GLT 58, (ii) 2007 (4) GLT 905 and (iii)
2007 (3) GLT (supra)."
[53] The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the catena of cases elaborated about the Circumstantial
evidence-
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Hanumant & Ors. Vs. State of M.P. [(1952) 2 SCC 71], observed that
-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 143
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
"11. Assuming that the accused Nargundkar had taken the tenders to his house, the
prosecution, in order to bring the guilt home to the accused, has yet to prove the
other facts referred to above. No direct evidence was adduced in proof of those facts.
Reliance was placed by the prosecution and by the courts below on certain
circumstances, and intrinsic evidence contained in the impugned document, Ext.
P-3A. In dealing with circumstantial evidence the rules specially applicable to such
evidence must be borne in mind. In such c ases there is always the danger that
conjecture or suspicion may taken the place of legal proof and therefore it is right to
recall the warning addressed by B aron Alderson to jury in R. v Hodge where he said:
"The mind was apt to take a pleasure in adapting circumstances to one another, and
even in straining them a little, if need be, to force them to form parts of one
connected whole; and the more ingenious the mind of the individual, the more likely
was it, considering sucvh matter, to overreach and mislead itself, to supply some little
link that is wanting, to take for granted some fact consistent with its previous theories
and necessary to render them complete."
12. It is well to rememder that in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the
circumstanqces from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance be fully
established, Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 173 and all the facts so established should be
consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances should be of
a conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one
proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a chain of evidence so far complete as not to
leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and it
must be such as to show that within all human probalbity the act must have been done by the
accused. In spite of the forceful arguments addressed to us by the learned Advocate General on
behalf of the State we have not been able to discover any such evidence either intrinsic within Ext.
P-3A or outside and we are constrained to observe that the courts below have just fallen into the
error against which warning was uttered by Baron Alderson in the abovementined case."
Laxman Prasad Vs. State of M.P. [(2023) 6 SCC 399] "2. The present one is a case of circumstantial
evidence. The prosecutioin led evidence to establish three links of the chain: (i) motive, (ii) last seen,
and (iii) recovery of weapon of assault, at the pointing out of the appellant. The High Court, while
dealing with the evidence on record, agreed with the finding of motive and the last seen, however,
insofar as the recovgery of the weapon of assault and bloodstained clothese were concerned, the
High Court in para 18 of the judgment held the same to be invalid and also goes to extent to say that
the recovery which has been made does not indicate that the appellant has committed the offence.
Still, it observed that looking to the entire gamut and other clinching evidence against the appellant
of last seen and motive, affirmed the conviction.
3.We do not find such conclusion of the High Court to be strictly in accordance with law. In case of
circumstantial evidence, the chain has to be complete in all respects so as to indicate the guilt of the
accused and also exclude any other theory of the crime. The law is well settled on the above point."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 144
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Shailendra Rajdev Pasvan v. State of Gujarat [(2020) 14 SCC 750] "13. Thus, the entire case of the
prosecution is based on circumstantial evidence. It is well settled that in a case which rests on
circumstantial evidence, law postulates twofold requirements:
(i) Every link in the chain of the circumstances to establish the guilt of the accused
must be established by the prosecution beyond reasonable double.
(ii) All the circumstances must be consistent pointing only towards the guilt of the
accused.
14. This Court in Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra, [(2006) 8 SCC 681]has
enunciated the aforesaid principel as under: (SCC p. 689, para 12)-
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 174 "12. ...... The normal principle in a case based on
circumstantial evidence is that the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be
drawn must be cogently and firmly established; that those circumstances shold be of a definite
tendency unerringly pointing towards the guilt of the accused; that the circumstances taken
cumulatively should form a chain so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that
within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused and they should be incapable
of explanation on any hypothesis other than that of the guilt of the accused and inconsistent with his
innocence."
15. Another important aspect to be considered in a case resting on circumstantial evidence is the
lapse of time between the point when the accused and deceased were seen together and when the
deceased is found dead. It ought to be so minimal so as to exclude the possibility of any intervening
event involving the death at the hands of some other person. In Bodhraj v. State of J & K (2002) 8
SCC 45, Rambraksh v. State of Chhattisgarh, (2016) 12 SCC 251, Anjan Kuman Sarma v. State of
Assam (2017) 14 SCC 359 following principle of law, in this regard, has been enunciated:
(Shailendra Rajdev Pasvan case, SCC Online Guj 9958).
"16. ....... The last seen theory comes into play where the time gap between the point of time when
the accused and deceased were seen last alive and when the deceased is found dead is so small that
possibility of any person other than the accused being the author of crime becomes impossible. It
would be difficult in some cases to positively establish that the deceased was last seen within the
accused when there is a long gap and possibility of other persons coming in between exists. In the
absence of any other positive evidence to conclude that accused and deceased were last seen
together, it would be hazardous to come to a conclusion of guilt in those cases."
17. It is well settled by now that in a case based on circumstantial evidence the courts ought to have a
conscientious approach and conviction ought to be recorded only in case all the links of the chain
are complete pointing to the guilt of the accused. Each link unless connected together to form a
chain may suggest suspicion but the same in itself cannot take place of proof and will not be
sufficient to convict the accused."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 145
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
[54] As per the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Laxman Prasad v. State of M.P. as highlighted above, to
prove the case of circumstantial evidence, the prosecution must establish three links Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 175 of the chain i.e. (i) motive, (ii) last seen, (iii) recovery of weapon of assault.
In the instant case, the only prosecution theory pointing the guilt of the accused is derived from the
narration of the P.W. No. 16 to a police officer Shri Sarojkumar Sharma (the future I.O. of the
case)that the accused P. Sahahajahan Singh with a friend in a scooter came to his house seeking his
help for settlement of disputeof the deceased and the accused P. Shahajahan Singh and inquired
about the deceased Satyajit saying that the deceased Satyajit assaulted him and he would like to
make a amicable settlement between the deceased and the accused Shahajahan Singh previous day.
The said police officer started investigation of the case after hearing/getting this information
straightaway. On examination of the statements of the P.Ws., it emerged and is seen that the
prosecution is suspecting the accused as he was slapped by the deceased on 22.06.1989 and further,
trying to prove the case only on the ground that the accused surrendered before the police and also
that the deceased slapped the accused P. Joykumar Singh and suspicious that the accused might
have committed the crime without clear evidence in this regard. But, mention is made here that the
accused with one of his friends came to the house of Shri Sidham Singh, P.W. No. 16 was just for
amicable settlement. The prosecution failed to prove that Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 176 the
accused has that motive to assault and kill the deceased. It is the duty of the prosecution to prove
their case beyond reasonable doubt but, no one else. The prosecution also failed to prove unlawful
assembly of the 8 (eight) accused (out of the 8, only 6 were chargesheeted) for commission of the
crime. The prosecution has also failed to prove the commission of the crime by the accused except
on the statement made by the accused to the police, even the former I.O. as well as the O.C. who
gave his statement in place of the second I.O. (expired).
The Hon'ble Supreme Court inJagga Singh v. State of Punjab[1994 Supp (3) SCC 463 (supra)]at
para No. 10 observed that -
"10. The aforesaid is all that is on record which the prosecution relied upon to fasten
the guilt on the appellant. According to us, the aforesaid material only points the
needle of suspicion towards the appellant and nothing more. Suspicion, however, is
no substitute for proof, and in criminal law the prosecution has to prove the guilt
beyond reasonable doub. The offence alleged in the present case being murder, which
visits the perpetrator of the crime with the minimum sentence is imprisonment for
life, a court of law would be justified in demanding full satisfaction before the
lethality of Section 302 can be used against anyone. The materials on record in the
present case do not have so much of cutting-ege as to penetrate the fortress of
innocence built round an accused in our criminal jurisprudence."
In his statement, the P.W. No. 16 mentioned the following:
"It is true that Thangal Bazar Road which is known as Khoyathong Road, where the
deceased late Seitrajit was executing contract work for black topping, is one of the
busiest roads in Imphal town. There are rows of shops, business establishments, post
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 146
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
office, banks and other private establishments on both road sides."
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 177 The portion reproduced is corroborated by the
P.W. No. 8, 18.
[55] The narration made above by the P.W. No. 16 stating that the accused has prior
motive to commit the crime of assault cannot be taken because as per the statement
he went there for amicable settlement between the two.
Now, let us examine the statement of the other witnesses whether the narration made
above by P.W. No. 16 to take home as to whether the accused has motive to assault
the deceased or not. P.W. No. 8 who is the brother-in-law of the deceased stated in
his P.W. statement that "while the work of black topping was going on, they blocked
the road by using a rop at both ends at Khoyathong and Jalal Provision Store in order
to prevent the disturbance from the passersby and in order to work smoothly and as a
result of this several problems were created by the passersby, some persons were
trying to enter forcibly and some argumatic persons threatened him as such, he was
compelled to proceed to Khoyathong to talk with the deceased whether he was to
permit to enter the person in the area. But, on reaching the area, he saw some people
were gathering there on his inquiry about the one labourer told him that one person
was slapped on his head by the deceased but, he did not find the deceased as well as
the person who was slapped by the deceased (brother-in-law).
While he objected to the passerby to enter in the working area, some persons
threatened him and also stated that he met one Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page
178 Tomba Singh, roller driver of P.W.D. who was engaged in the work, told him that
one Sidam Singh and one person who was slapped by the deceased search for
brother-in-law (the deceased). The facts, as set out by P.W. No. 8, cannot link to the
fact that the present accused assault the deceased.
[56] P.W. No. 17 stated that about 20 years ago, one day, at about 1.00 p.m. came to
the work site for taking a sum of Rs.
400/- from the deceased for purchasing of diesel, but when he reached the work site,
the deceased went to his home to take money. Thereafter, the witness went towards a
woman vendor who was running the vendor situated at the road side of Khoyathong
for having Pan. When he reached near the said woman vendor, he found three young
persons standing near the said woman vendor in angry mood and he asked 'what
happned'; to that, the woman told him that the deceased Seitrajit Singh assaulted one
person among them and he told the said three persons not to get angry.
Further, he stated that while he was about to take bath at his courtyard, two
labourers of the contract work came and told him that the deceased was assaulted by
unknown person. In cross-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 147
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
examination, he stated that the deceased was a hot tampered person reacted to
provocations easily by his nature. Further, he stated that his house is on the road
lying to the adjacent north of the Khoyathong Pukhri Achouba. Further, he stated
that he cannot remember any of those three persons who were found standing near
the said pan shop. The prosecution failed to establish as to whether the accused was
one of the persons among the three or not.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 179
[57] P.W. No. 18, in his examination-in-chief, stated that
while he was playing Ludusaw some persons gathering on the Khoyathong bridge at
Thangal Bazar near the cremation ground and rushed towards the said place and
when reaching, they found the deceased and accused, Shahajahan. On his inquiry, he
came to know that Shahajahan was assaulted by the deceased. In his
cross-examination, he stated that he agrees that the deceased was a quarrelsome
person who came easily provoked. The prosecution failed to examine the said woman
vendor who saw the slapping a person by the deceased thereby creating doubt about
the investigation of the case.
In the facts and circumstances, the prosecution failed to establish the motive of the
accused for assaulting the deceased.
Reliable witness:
In this regard,we rely on the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anil
Phukan v. State of Assam [(1993) 3 SCC 282(supra).
Suspicion is no substitute of proof:
In this regard,we rely on the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
Jagga Singh v. State of Punjab [1994 (3) SCC 463](supra).
[58] Of the 36 (thirty six) witnesses produced as prosecution witnesses, not even a single witness
stated that the accused was with the deceased before the deceased was found Cril Jail Appeal No. 1
of 2018 Page 180 injured as assaulted by unknown rather it was the P.W. No. 4, some labourers,
roller driver and P.W. No. 17 (except in the statement of P.W. No. 18 that while he was playing Ludu
with his friends at about 11/12 a.m., he saw some persons gathering at Khoyathong bridge, they
rushed towards the said place and found Seityajit Singh and Shahajahan Singh and on enquiry, the
deceased assaulted the accused Shahajahan Singh). The witness stated that he did not see the actual
quarrel between the two and assault meted out to the accused by the deceased.
Quality of the evidence In this regard,we rely on the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Gulbar Sarbar Vs. State of Bihar [(2014) 3 SCC 401]at para No. 19 (supra).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 148
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
[59] Recovery of weapon of assaultat the pointing of the appellant:
It was stated by P.W. No. 9, who along with his friend, Ksh. Ronikanta werethe
seizure witnessesof the seizure of alleged weapons of crime at the pointing of the
accused,P. Joykumar Singh. Further, he along with his friend, Ksh. Ronikanta were
the witnesses of the recording of extrajudicial confession statement under Section 27
of Evidence Act of the accused, Joykumar Singh in the police station. In his
statement, he stated that he knows S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma who was the I.O. of the
case and resident of his next neighbouring Leikai. When he and his Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 181 friend were at Yaiskul Atheletic Club in front of the Kalimai
Hotel, the said S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma came and asked them to become a witness in
connection with a case relating to the death of Satyajit Singh the deceased. As asked,
he and his friend along with the S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma reached Imphal P.S. and
while sitting, S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma took one accused person from police lock-up
and removed the towel covered on his face by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma and examined
the said accused,later on, came to know the name of the accused was Joykumar Singh
of Sagolband as disclosed his identity to the police.Further stated that one day, in the
night he along with his friends numbering 4/5/6 persons, whose names he cannot
remember, assaulted the deceased Satyajit Singh with deadly weapons such cane
stick, iron handle of Jeep, knife near the Thangmeiband Pukhri Achouba Mapal and
left the place of occurrence by a Jeep. Further stated that the weapons of crime were
kept concealed inside the clumb of bamboo which was lying in the eastern side of his
grrage. He further stated that he would be able to point the hidden place of weapons.
The witness further stated that he along with his friends put their signatures on the
statement of the accused.
Thereafter, he along with his friend led by S.I. Sarojkumar Sharma with the accused
Joykumar went to the said place and when reached the accused Joykumar Singh
pointed his finger at the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 182 hidden place of
weapons and took out one iron handle of the vehicle, one knife and one cane stick
having bold head and handed over to SI Sarojkumar Sharma and the same was seized
and seizure memo was prepared. He and his friend put their signatures on the seizure
memo. The witness identified the said weapons before the Court and he stated that
he cannot identify the said accused Joykumar Singh due to lapse of time. (The
witness did not identify the accused in the Court.) [60] The witness stated that he is
from Moirangkhom Bokul Makhong and the said SI Sarojkumar Sharma was a
resident of Bramhapur Nahabam, his neighbouring Leikai. Further, he stated that he
knew SI Sarojkumar Sharma since childhood. Further he stated that Smt. Chaobi
Devi w/o the deceased is from Bokul Makhong. She was related to him as his
daughter, she is daughter of cousin brother. Her parental house lies on the southern
side of his house intervened by two ingkhols. Further, he stated that apart from him
and his friend, there were many other Leikai people at the said round when the SI
Sarojkumar Sharma came. Futher, he stated that the said statement of the accused,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 149
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
on which he and his friend put their signatures. The statement was not read out by
the I.O. to them and he also did not read the same on his own. He just put his
signature on the said statement as asked by the I.O.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 183
[61] The statement made above by the witnesses is
doubtful and he is not to be regarded as reliable witness as highlighted above as the
said SI Sarojkumar Sharma who was from the neighbouring Leikai and who were
known to each other since childhood, came all the way to Yaiskul Atheletic ground
and from amongst the people gathering there chosen the present witness and his
friend to be the witness of the recording of extrajudicial confession of the accused
Joykumar Singh and the seizure witness not only that the witness happened to be the
close relative of the wife of the deceased. And again, the witness who came face to
face with the accused did not identify the accused in the Court.
Further, the facts of the case, the involvement of the accused and facts of the seized
weapons of offence and said jeep surfaced for the first time in the FIR which was
registered at 4.30 p.m. of 23.06.1989 when the matter was informed by P.W. No. 4 to
P.W. No. 1 at 3.00 p.m. and the P.W. No. 1 lodging a complaint to the police at 4.00
pm and subsequent registration at 4.30 p.m.It is to mention that the said police
officer seized the jeep, one battery, one polyster full shirt having blood stain, sample
of blood on a paper, sample of scalp hair,2 pieces of stick, smeared with blood
measurer 5 feet long, half broken wooden stick having blood stains measuring 3 
ft., a piece of broken wooden stick measuring about 22 inches long with wooden
handel of about 3 inches long, half lantern with broken chimney etc.were seized in
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 184 the morning before the arrest of the accused
and before the registration of FIR.
None of the prosecution witnesses could point out the seized articles reproduced hereinabove and
seized on the pointing of accused as mentioned above, were weapons of crime nor did any of the
prosecution witnesses testify to the fact that the accused used the said weapons, assaulted and
resulted in the subsequent death of the deceased thereby.The prosecution failed to connect the
seized articles with the commission of crime and to the accused. Not only that, the prosecution sent
the following articles to the Director of Central Forensic Science laboratory, 30 Gorachand Road,
Calcutta for examination in order to ascertain whether the stains of clothes blood/is human blood or
not.
The articles:- 1) sample of blood of the deceased Seityajit Singh, 2) blood stained stones, earth,paper
mark containing the blood, 7 brown glasses, 2 large pieces of broken wooden stick, 3 small pieces of
wooden sticks, white Paijma, long pant, 3 small cut pieces of the hoot of the jeep marked E1, E2 and
E3 respectively other cut pieces of the hoot marked stained with blood, one iron handle of jeep
marked as F,one cane stick with tempering hole marked F2, one knife with wooden handle bearing
small areas of Faint Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 185 brown stems marked F3, one wooden
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 150
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
club stained with blood marked as G, one photostat copy of PM examination marked as H, 2
photographs marked as 1(A) and 1(B) respectively. However, the report of the expert opinion was as
follows:
"As per opinion of the Expert i.e. filter paper cutting marked A, one stone marked
8(1), stone 8(2), stone 8(3), earth 8(4), paper cutting (5),broken wooden B(13),
broken wooden piece marked B(14), broken wooden piece marked (15), broken wood
piece marked 8(16),cut piece of the hoot marked E1, cut pieces of hoot E2,cut pieces
of hoot marked E. The above articles are marked as Sl. No.7 to 20. The item No.
Sl.No.7 to 13 excluding Sl. No. 14 noted above are stained with human blood. The
blood stains on the item No.14,18,19 and 20 are disintegrated and their origin cannot
be determined."
Of the witnesses who participated and witnessed the recording of confessional statement of the 2
(two) accused i.e. Shahajahan and Dhananjoy, for the accused Shahajahan, Shri Bebe Singh and
Ronikanta were examined as P.Ws. in the Court, not only failed to identify the accused in the Court
but their examination before the Court are contradictory to each other(reference is made in the
above reproduced statements of the witnesses).Also, these witnesses who saw and were the
witnessesto the recording of the confessional statement of Dhananjoy and subsequent recovery of
seized articles were not produced P.Ws. to prove the said statement as well as the recovery. During
the examination of the accused under Section 313 of Criminal Proecure Code, 1973, the accused had
denied the incriminating circumstances appearing against them. Further, it is to be mentioned that
in so far as the evidence of extra judicial confession, under Section 27 of Evidence Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 186 Act, concerning the 2 (two) above mentieond accused, the confession was
made before the police i.e. the I.O.of the case and the above mentioned 2 (two) witnesses i.e. Bebe
and Ronikanta who were from Yaiskul and one of the witnesses Shri Bebe was the close relative of
the wife of the deceased and other witness was from same locality of the wife of the deceased and the
close of friend of Shri Bebe and the I.O. of the case was also from the same locality.The witnesses
failed to identify the accused in the Court and also failed to point out that the seized articles which
they were the witnesses during the seizure was the weapon used in the commission of the crime by
the accused. The I.O. of the case went all the way to Yaiskul and asked the said witnesses to be the
witnesses for the recording of 27 Evidence Act of the said 2 (two) accused. For all the reasons above,
that the view taken by the Ld. Trial Court regarding the recovery of weapons of assault at the
pointing of the appellant, we do not find the said conclusion/decision taken by the Ld. Trial Court
was in accordance with law.
[62] In the facts and circumstance as narrated above, the seizure of the weapons of offence andthe
confessional statement of the accused aredoubtful hence, not reliable.
Reliable witness:
In this regard,we rely on the observation made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Anil
Phukan v. State of Assam [(1993) 3 SCC 282], (supra).
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 187
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 151
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
[63] The P.W. No. 13, Shri Ksh. Ronikanta Singh stated
that in the morning at about 10.00 am while standing at Yaiskul Atheletic Club near
Kalimai Hotel with his friend, Bebe Sharma @ Chandrakumar Sharma (PW No. 9),
one person in civil dress came to ask them and asked his friend to go to Imphal P.S.
Accordingly, he and his friend, P.W. No. 9 with the said unknown person in civil
dress went to Imphal P.S. While sitting inside the room at Imphal P.S., the said
person who was a police officer brought one person before them. The face of the said
person was covered by towel and examined by the said police officer and the accused
disclosed that the weapons such as iron handle of the jeep, cane stick, knife etc. used
by them at the time of commission of crime were kept concealed inside the clump of
bamboos which was lying in the eastern side of his garage and the accused further
stated that he would be able to point out the hidden place of the weapons. After
recording the extrajudicial confessional statement, he and his friend (PW No. 9) put
their signatures on the statement. Thereafter, he and his friend (PW No. 9) with the
police went to the house of the said accused on the pointing of the accused. The said
accused pointed his finger at the concealing place of the weapons of crime and took
out one iron handle of vehicle, one knife and one cane stick and handed over to the
police officer. He and his friend put Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 188 their
signatures on the seizure memo prepared by the said police officer. The witness
identified the knife and cane stick. But, he stated that he cannot identify the said iron
handle of the jeep due to lapse of time.
In his examination-in-chief, the witness said that he put his signature on the seizure
memo after knowing the full contents of it. But, in his cross examination, he stated
that he was not knowing while the statements were recorded in which languagethe
said statements being recorded. However, after recording the statement, the contents
were read over in their presence and he did not read the contents of the said
statement and he put his signature without reading it. But, after hearing the contents
being read over, further, he stated that he never read the contents of the seizure
memo. The witnesses as well as the police officer who deposed before the Court failed
to state that the weapons of offence allegedly recovered at the instance of the accused
were sealed or not. In the expert opinion of the seized articles, it is opined that the
articles seized cannot be linked to the alleged crime.
[64] The prosecution failed to examine the important witnesses who came face to
face with the accused Shahajahan and who would have thrown lighton the incident in
order to identify (i) the woman vendor who saw the slapping of the Cril Jail Appeal
No. 1 of 2018 Page 189 accusedShahajahan by the deceased (ii) the labourers who
saw the slapping of the accusedShahajahan by the deceased (iii) the roller driver. PW
No. 17 who went to collect Rs. 400/- for purchasing diesel oil from the deceased and
when the deceased went to his home for taking money, he went towards the woman
vendor at the road side of Khoyathong road for having pan when he reached the
vendor, he found three young persons standing near the said woman vendor in angry
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 152
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
mood and on inquiry, the woman told him that the deceased assaulted to one person
among them. He told the said three persons not to get angry. He was also had dinner
with the deceased along with a driver of the roller, S.O. and labourers with PW No. 4,
N. Megha Singh and who saw the deceased and the said PW No. 4 remained at the
said khola when they left the said place. The witness while giving his statement before
the Court did not identify the accused who were in the Dock nor did the said three
young persons standing near the said woman vendor. (Emphasis given).
[65] PW No. 18 stated that while he was playing Ludu with his friends they saw some
persons were gathering on the Khoyathong bridge near cremation ground
immediately on seeing the said crowd they rushed towards the said place and found
the deceased Satyajit Singh and the accused Shahajahan Singhand, came to know
that the deceased assaulted the said accused Shri Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page
190 Shahajahan Singh. Further, the witness stated that he himself did not see the
actual quarreling between the deceaded the accused Shahajahan Singh. But, the
witness failed to identify the accused in the Court and the prosecution failed to
examine the said friends and did not make them witnesses in the present case.
Since the accused were not identified in the Court (Dock Identification) by the
eyewitness as well as the witnesses mentioned above, the prosecution failed to prove
their case basing on the above mentioned solitary eyewitness (direct evidence) and
the above mentioned witnesses more importantly, the above mentioned reliable
witnesses. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in catena of its judgment regarding Dock
Identificaction saying that Dock Identification is a conclusive and substantive
evidence. We rely on the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation in this regard which
were reproduced herein above.
[66] The prosecution failed to seize the wearing apparels of the PW No. 4 (sole
eyewitness) which were soaked with blood as he was with the deceased till his death.
[67] The Ld. Trial Court, at Para No. 11 of the judgment and order,discussed about
the eyewitness i.e. P.W. No. 4 N. Megha Singh and its reliability of the statement
given in the Court. For the sack of brevity and to save time, we will not reproduce the
entire statement of the P.W. No. 4 but relying on his statement narrated Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 191 and discussed above as the same is already reproduced
herein above.
The Ld. Trial Court, while relying upon the statement of the P.W. No. 4, stated that
the statement of the P.W. No. 4 are well supported by P.W. No. 8, 16, 17 and 18. The
Ld. Trial Court, while dealing with the importance of eyewitness, failed to appreciate
the Dock Identification of the eyewitness as well as those who came in contact with
the accused (including the important witnesses which were not produced as P.Ws.
which was mentioned above). But, on perusal of the statements of P.W. No. 8, 16, 17
and 18, we found no corroboration with the statement of P.W. No. 4 and do not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 153
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
support the version of P.W. No. 4 at all. We rely on the judgment and order of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court about Dock Witness as relied and reproduced above.
[68] The Ld. Trial Court, inspite of discussing the eyewitness version and thereafter,
giving opinion that the oral testimony of P.W. No. 4 has shown a clear picture for
believing such incident to exist and considers its existence so probable that a prudent
men under the circumstances of its particular case to act upon the supposition that it
exists.
(But, the Ld. Trial Court failed to give clear decision as to whether he is relying on the
instant case on the statement of the solitary eyewitness; instead of that, the Ld. Trial
Court Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 192 continued to go on discussing about the
statements made by the other witnesses and continued his elaboration of the
evidences of the case.) [69] It is an admitted fact that there was an assault meted out
to the deceased, the deceased was injured and as per the doctor's report, the death
was caused due to assault and opined that the cause of death in his opinion is due to
head injuries factures of skull bones and laceration of the brain, injury No. (viii) and
(ix) were produced by sharp weapon; injury No. (x) and (xi) were produced by
pointed weapon and the rest of the injurires were produced by blunt weapon. The
injurires are homicidal in nature and ante mortem naturee. The time since death is 4
to 12 hours. The age of the injuries i.e. survival period fresh. But, in spite of the
doctor's statement, prosecution failed to link the accused to the commission of crime
and this fact is not narrated and is missing in the judgment as the prosecution failed
to prove in this regard by their witnesses as well as material objects and the
documents. The conviction of the accused is solely on the basis of the statement of
sole eyewitness (solitary eyewitness) and basing on the reports of the P.W. No. 16
who narrated about the accused Shahajahan with a friend coming to his house for
settlement of the incident of the deceased assaulting the accused Shahajahan. The
arrest of the accused, the seizure of jeep and the seizure of some Cril Jail Appeal No. 1
of 2018 Page 193 with alleged weapons of the offence (seized in the morning) were
made in the morning prior to the registration of the FIR which was registered at 4:30
pm and before the arrest of the accused. (The P.W. No. 4 the solitary eyewitness
narrated about the incident to the father of the deceased at 3:00 pm, the father of the
deceased filed original ejahar (complaint) to the police at 4:00 pm.)The fact of
examination of the complainant (the father of the deceased) is not explained
anywhere in the judgment even though the defence counsel raised about this issue.
The justification made by the Ld. Trial Court about the registration of the FIR is not
enough in the eyes of law. This fact is to be clarified/justified by the I.O. himself not
by the Court. The former I.O. of the case Heli Mao as well as the O.C. who made over
the case to another I.O. S.I. Shri Sarojkumar Sharma stated and admitted that the
investigation of the case started after receiving the original ejahar (complaint) which
was filed by the father of the deceased (P.W. No. 1) at 04:00 p.m. Even before
registering FIR the said SI Sarojkumar after hearing the narration of the P.W. No. 16
Shri Sidham Singh to the fact that the accused Shahajahan with a friend came to his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 154
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
house to settle the issue of quarrel which occurred between the accused Shahajahan
and the deceased in which the deceased slapped the accused Shahajahan, the said SI
Sarojkumar Singh even before handing over the case to him took the said P.W. No. 16
to the Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 194 house of the accused Shahajahan and
seized a jeep which was alleged by the prosecution used in the commission of crime.
The postmortem was done before the registration of the FIR, the said half lantern
was seized in the morning on the production of the PW No. 4 before the registration
of FIR.The PW No. 4 did not narrate about the said occurrence to the Police even
though he was with the deceased from the place where they have dinner with S.O. of
P.W.D., labourers, driver of roller, the deceased and himself at the Khola till the
death of the deceased. The police also seized the following :
"i) one polyster full shirt having blood stain, ii) sample of blood on a paper, iii)
sample of scalp hair under a seizure memo prepared by the said police officer at RMC
Forensic Science and Medical Dedpartment, Lamphel.
The TI Parade was done after 15 (fifteen) days from the date of occurrence inspite of having an
eyewitness.
[70] The Ld. Trial Court in its judgment admitted that there are discrepancies in the statements of
the prosecution and observed thus:
"Sir Elijah Impey told the Jury in Nuncumar's Case (Stephen's story of Nuncumar 1 p.
168):
"You will consider on which side the weight of evidence lies, always remembering
that in criminal and more especially in capital cases, you must not weight the
evidence in golden scales; there ought to be a great difference of weight in the
opposite scale before you find Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 195 the prirsoner
guilty. In cases of property, the stake on each side is equal and the least
preponderance of evidence ought to turn the scale; but in a capital case, as there can
be nothing of equal value to life, you should thoroughly convinced that there does not
remain a possibility on innocence before you give a verdict against the prisoner."
In Dhupa Chamar and Ors. Vs. State of Bihar [2002(4) SLT 611], the Hon'ble Apex Court held that
for an offence to fall under Section 300, the following facts must be proved by the prosecution:
i) First, it must establish, quite objectively, that a bodily injury is present;
ii) Secondly, the nature of the injury must be proved. These are purely objective
investigation;
iii) Thirdly, it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that particular
bodily injury, that is to say, that it was not accidental or unintentional, or that some
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 155
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
other kind of injury was intended."
It is admitted proposition of law that if the discrepencies are blattenly wide and deep during the
course of investigation as well as during the course of trial that no such other justification could be
cured and it is settled proposition of law that benefit of doubt always goes in favour of the accused.
In the instant case, this proposition of law can be well applied.
After going through the narration and later finding given by the Ld. Trial Court and giving due
consideration to the facts and circumstances of the case and on our perusal of the evidences
collected/adducedfor the prosecution against the accused and our subsequent analysis, assessment
and reasoning made above, it is observed that the Ld. Trial Court failed to consider the evidences
adduced by the prosecution witnesses in Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 196 whole/full and
failed to consider the doubt created by the investigation authority and later during the trial the
doubt created by the prosecution and failure of the I.O. of the case and prosecutors to do their legal
duties.We also further observe that due to the Ld. Trial Court's failure to appreciate the settled
provison of law and errors committed in fact as well as in law in deciding the case on eyewitness
(direct evidence) as well as on circumstantial evidences,we found the following errors committed by
the Ld. Trial Court:
(i) The Ld. Trial Court discussed the contradictory timing of the registration of the
FIR but, the discrepancies created by the I.O. of the case that has to be narrated and
clarified only by the I.O. of the case not by the Court. However, the Court justified in
its judgment on his own motion. (We rely on the observation and narration made by
us above.)
(ii) The Ld. Trial Court failed to find out why out of 8 (eight) accused arrested and
remanded, only 6 (six) were chrgesheeted without explaining the reason for the two
accused. The Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate the evidences of the P.W. No. 4 to
the fact that inspite of the distance of 55 feet from the place of Cril Jail Appeal No. 1
of 2018 Page 197 was standing and the nature of light as mentioned by the P.W. No. 4
how the P.W. No. 4 can mention the weapons of offence i.e. knife, jeep handle, stick
and also that the some of the weapons of offence and articles were seized even before
the registration of FIR and before the arrest of the accused.
(iii) The Ld. Trial Court also failed to discuss the necessary of Dock Identification of the accused
before the Court instead relied upon the identification of T.I. Parade and the disclosure statement of
the accused under Section 27 of Evidence Act. While relying on the statement under Section 27 of
Evidence Act, the Ld. Trial Court was silent about the Dock Identification and non-production of the
witnesses who witness the recording under Section 27 Evidence Act in respect of P. Dhananjoy
Singh.
(iv) The Ld. Trial Court, while discussing the case in hand on circumstantial evidence, failed to
appreciate the statements of the witnesses in full/whole as required under the provision of law as
well as the law laid down by the Apex Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 156
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 198
(v) The Ld. Trial Court failed to connect the evidences collected in the course of trial as well as
during the investigation and with the recovery of weapons of offence with the accused. In our
opinion, the Ld. Trial Court rather comes to the conclusion solely on the suspicion which needs to be
proved without any iota of doubt as laid down in the series of laws laid down by the Apex Court.The
Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate the fact that the prosecution failed to connect the recovery of
weapons with the accused.
(vi) The Ld. Trial Court also failed to appreciate the expert opinion of the materials sent to the
Central Forensic Science Laboratory, 30 Gorachand Road, Kolkata for examination in order to
ascertain whether the stains of blood is human blood or not.
(vii) The Ld. Trial Court erred in coming to the
conclusion that the accused are guilty and
convicted under circumstantial evidence
without going into details that the prosecution failed to prove the (a) motive, (b) last seen and (c)
recovery of weapon of assault.
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 199
(viii) The Ld. Trial Court convicted the accused under Section 302/149 IPC but, as discussed above
failed to appreciate that the prosecution failed to prove their case under Section 302 as well as 149
IPC (the prosecution failed to bring home the unlawful assembly of the accused and the common
intenstion of the accused in commission of the crime.
(ix) The Ld. Trial Court, while discussing the accused examination i.e. 313 Cr.P.C., mis-
interpreated the meaning and purpose of the accused examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
(x) In the judgment, the Ld. Trial Court wrongly observed that the prosecution could establish 11
(eleven) specific facts without reasonable basis.
(xi) The Ld. Trial Court committed error in relying upon inadmissible evidences of the prosecution
thereby committing unfairness to the accused.
(xii) The Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that the prosecution failed to bring home the allegation
lebelled against the appellant, instead appreciated the evidences and the materials produced by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. The Ld. Trial Court while Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page
200 discussing about Section 313 of Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 157
Pukhrambam Joykumar @ Sahajahan Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 14 June, 2024
incorrectly gave its opinion without giving full appreciation of the law laid down by the Apex Court.
[71] As per the evidences as highlighted above and analysis made above by us, it is a fact that the
bodily injury is present and the nature of injury as per the doctor who conducted post mortem over
the body of the deceased opined that the death was homidical in nature. But, as narrated and
analysis given above, the intention and motive of the present accused could not be established as the
prosecution failed to connect with the occurrence mentioned above which caused the injury to the
body of the deceased resulting in his death.
[72] In the facts and circumstances aforesaid, in our considered view, all that is on record which the
prosecution relied upon to fasten the guilt on the appellant, according to us, the aforesaid materials
only point the needle of suspicion towards the appellant and nothing more as such, suspicion,
however, is not substitute for proof and in criminal law the prosecution has to prove the guilt
beyond reasonable doubt, the alleged offences in the present case being murder which visits the
perpetrator of the crime with the minimum sentence of imprisonment for life, a court of law would
be justified in demanding full satisfaction before the lethality of Section 302 can be used against
anyone. The materials on record in the present case do not have so much of cutting-edge Cril Jail
Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 201 as to penetrate the fortress of innocence built round an accused in
our criminal jurisprudence.
[73] Accordingly, in our opinion, the appellants are entitled to benefit of doubt and granting that
benefit, we set aside their conviction and sentence for the offnences under Section 302 and 149 of
the same Code and consequently, the judgment of the Ld. Trial Court is set aside and they are
hereby acquitted.
[74] We, therefore, allow the appeal, acquit the appellants and order for their release from custody
forthwith, if not needed in connection with any other case(s).
[75] A copy of the judgment and order be transmitted to the Jail Superintendent concerned to be
communicated to the appellants as well as for compliance therewith, forthwith.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
FR/NFR
Bipin
Cril Jail Appeal No. 1 of 2018 Page 202
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126680042/ 158
