Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. :
Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
Author: Biswanath Rath
Bench: Biswanath Rath
ORISSA HIGH COURT : C U T T A C K
W.P.(C) No.18774 of 2018
An application under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors. : Petitioners
-Versus-
State of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties
For Petitioners : M/s. S. Swain,
A. Mishra,
N.K. Behera
For Opposite Parties : Mr. S.P. Panda,
Addl. Govt. Adv.
JUDGMENT
CORAM :
JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH Date of hearing & judgment::03.01.2023
1. Heard the submission of Mr. S. Swain, learned counsel for Petitioner and the
counter submission of Mr. S.P. Panda, learned counsel appearing for the State
Government.
2. This writ petition is taken up afresh after the remand order of the Division Bench
in W.A. No.577 of 2018.
3. This writ petition involves the following prayer:-
"It is prayed, therefore, that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to:
a. Admit the writ application.
b. Call for the records.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 1
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
// 2 //
c. Issue Rule Nisi calling upon the Opp. Parties
to show cause as to why the Order
dt.24.12.16 (Annexure-5) passed by
Collector, Puri and re-delimitation of wards in respect of Chhanijanga GP made by
OP No.2 and communicated by PIO, Nimapara Block vide letter dt.9.11.16 (Ann-3)
shall not be quashed with a direction for re-
delimitation of wards in accordance with law as proposed by the petitioners in the
table above after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
d. If the Opp. Parties do not show cause or show insufficient cause the Rule may be
made absolute and a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other writ (s), order (s),
direction (s) be issued quashing the Order dt.24.12.16(Annexure-5) passed by
Collector, Puri and the re-delimitation of wards in respect of Chhanijanga G.P as
communicated by PIO Nimapara Block vide his letter dt.9.11.16 (Ann-3) with a
direction to the Opp. Parties for re-delimitation of Wards in accordance with law as
proposed by the petitioners in table above after giving an opportunity of hearing to
the petitioners. e. A further direction be given not to take any action for formation of
new Revenue Village taking any part of Chhanijanga G.P. in the district of Puri till a
final decision is taken in the matter of re-delimitation of Wards. And pass any other
order which will be deemed fit and proper for the ends of justice."
4. Background involved in this case is that earlier the Petitioner moved this Court involving an issue
of re-delimitation and re- organization of the wards in Chhanijanga Gram Panchayat. There is
already a direction to the Collector for consideration of the objection at the instance of the Petitioner
in disposal of the W.P.(C) No.20972 of 2016. It appears, in the meantime following the direction of
this Court in W.P.(C) No.20972 of 2016 there has been consideration of the representation of the
Petitioners vide Annexure-4 by the // 3 // Collector, Puri by order dated 24.12.2016 vide
Annexure-5 with an order of rejection of the claim of the Petitioners.
5. In the first attempt in disposal of the Writ Petition vide W.P.(C) No.18774 of 2018 this Court vide
order dated 14.12.2018 passed the following:-
"14.12.2018 Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner.
For the completion of election and Grama Panchayat is already in sitting, no decision
involving delimitation matter can be taken up. In such view of the matter, this Court
dispose the writ petition as not entertainable at this stage but, however, granted
liberty to the petitioner, in the event any cause of action still survives, to move the
competent authority before the next election of the Grama Panchayat."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 2
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
6. Petitioners moved Division Bench against the above order through W.A. No.577 of 2018 and the
Division Bench in its order dated 20.10.2022 passed the following order:-
"1. The Gram Panchayat elections have already concluded. Therefore, the legal bar to
entertaining the writ petition challenging the de-limitation exercise does not hold any
longer. Consequently, while setting aside the impugned Order of the learned Single
Judge, this Court restores W.P.(C) No.18774 of 2018 to the file of the roster Bench of
the learned Single Judge where it will be listed on 3rd January, 2023.
2. The respective Respondents (Opposite Parties in the writ petition) will file their
replies to the said petition on or before 19th December, 2022 and rejoinder thereto, if
any, be filed before the next date before the learned Single Judge i.e. 3rd January,
2023. No further time will be granted for this purpose.
3. The learned Single Judge is requested to proceed with hearing the petition on
merits and dispose of it as expeditiously as possible.
// 4 //
4. The writ appeal is disposed of in the above terms."
7. Matter is thus freshly heard following the direction of the Division Bench. On the issue of filing of
counter affidavit as directed by the Division Bench, learned State Counsel submitted that they fully
support the findings given by the Collector in the impugned order and there is no necessity to file
any counter as otherwise in filing counter there is no scope to bring anything else than the
observation of the Collector in the impugned order nor there is any scope to give any improvement
in the situation. Learned State Counsel in his opposition, however, submits that after the de-
limitation taking place there has been at least two Gram Panchayat elections in the particular Gram
Panchayat and there is no objection by any of the candidates in these elections nor there is any
election dispute indicating suffering of any candidate on account of de- limitation decision involved
herein. Learned State Counsel also submitted that in a Gram Panchayat consisting of several
hundred of voters, merely because 12 persons without disclosing as to how they have suffered, the
writ petition on such disputed issue should not be entertained.
In the above submission learned State Counsel objected entertainability of the writ petition and
submitted that otherwise it will disturb a settled position in the reconstitution of wards that too after
two Gram Panchayat elections already held peacefully in the meantime and particularly keeping in
view that hardly some of the villagers oppose the delimitation move, whereas a larger section of such
ward remains satisfied with the decision of the competent authority, Sri Panda, learned State
Counsel further also in reference to the provision at Section 8 of the Orissa Grama Panchayat Act, //
5 // 1964 hereinafter in short be reflected as "the Act, 1964" under Chapter-III therein contended
that for there is no disclosure in the writ petition as to if the Petitioners had availed the scope of
objection in exercise of power U/s.8 of the Act, 1964, the submission of representation was not to be
attended to after the delimitation order is passed in terms of Section 8 of the Act, 1964 and further is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 3
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
worked out.
8. Keeping in view the rival contentions and disclosure through materials available this Court here
finds, there is one clear distinguishing feature i.e. there is almost completely different in Petitioners
in both round of litigations. This Court takes note of position of Petitioners in 1st round of litigation
vide W.P.(C) No.20972 of 2016 disposed of on 2.12.2016 and in the 2nd round of litigation vide
W.P.(C) No.18774 of 2018 which reads as follows:-
1. Purna Chandra Nayak, aged about 44 years, S/o-Bhagaban Nayak, Vill-Amphor,
Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
2. Sibabrata Nayak, aged about 42 years, S/o-Bansidhar Nayak, Vill-Amphor,
Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
3. Bhagyadhar Mohanty, aged about 60 years, S/o-Dhruba Charana Mohanty,
Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
4. Jambeswara Kumar Mohapatra, aged about 58 years, S/o-Sarbeswar Mohapatra,
Vill-
Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
5. Rohit Nayak, aged about 55 years, S/o-Parashu Nayak, Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P.,
P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
6. Smt. Sakuntala Sethi, aged about 40 years, Ward Member of Ward No.1 Vill-Amphor,
Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
7. Smt. Sakuntala Barik, aged about 47 years, Ward Member of Ward No.2, Chhanijanga G.P.,
W/o-Sri Sarat Barik, Vill-
// 6 // Amphor,Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
8. Smt. Namita Sahu, aged about 37 years, Ward Member of Ward No.3, W/o-Sri Alekha Sahu,
Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-
Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
9. Lokanath Dash, aged about 31 years, S/o-Chittaranjan Dash, Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P.,
P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
10. Tofan Mohapatra, aged about 39 years, S/o-Surendra Mohapatra, Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga
G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 4
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
1. Purna Chandra Nayak, aged about 46 years, S/o-Bhagaban Nayak,
2. Jaganath Ojha, aged about 42 years, S/o-Late Gandharba Ojha
3. Bijay Kumar Swain, aged about 52 years, S/o-Late Iswar Swain
4. Antaryami Nayak, aged about 55 years, S/o-Late Nalu Nayak
5. Prasanna Nayak, aged about 48 years, S/o-Late Ananda Nayak
6. Jambes Kumar Mohapatra, aged about 61 years, S/o-Late Sarbeswar Mohapatra,
7. Narendra Parida, aged about 48 years, S/o-Late Bimbadhar Parida
8. Pradip Kumar Mohanty, aged about 48 years, S/o-Late Balaram Mohanty
9. Debendra Nayak, aged about 62 years, S/o-Late Bansidhar Nayak
10. Pradipta Kumar Dash, aged about 47 years, S/o-Late Panchu Dash
11. Pursottam Mohapatra, aged about 50 years, S/o.-Late Paramananda Mohapatra
12. Sarat Barik, aged about 53 years, S/o.-Late Balaram Barik.
All are of Vill-Amphor, Chhanijanga G.P., P.S.-Nimapara, Dist.-Puri
9. Here it is observed that out of 10 Petitioners pressing the 1st litigation at least 8 of them did not
choose to pursue the litigation and accordingly dropped themselves in the 2nd round of litigation
and this Court from the 2nd round of litigation finds, there are 10 new // 7 // Petitioners joining this
time in addition to the two earlier Petitioners continuing. On perusal of the original representation
dated 18.11.2016 copy of which is available at Annexure-4 to the Writ Petition, on the production of
case record, it is observed that the Petitioner Nos.1 & 6 are only the signatories therein. This Court
finds, rest of the Petitioners had not involved themselves in the objection submitted after the
delimitation is completed. None of these Petitioners have submitted objection to the draft
delimitation notice. In such event if afterward representation i.e. after completion of delimitation
exercise is entertained, there will be no end to the delimitation aspect. It appears, Petitioners were
fence-seater and agitating such issues after completion of the delimitation issue involving ward no.2
and remain silent spectator in the Section 8 of the Act, 1964 stage.
10. Further perusal of objection at Annexure-4 undisputedly submitted after the delimitation order
is given effect to, does not disclose, if at all it was representation involving any of these petitioners.
On perusal of original, it appears, two of these Petitioners remain objectors in the representation
admittedly submitted after the exercise is over. The ward number-2 of Amphor village consists of
240 numbers of voters. Present Writ Petition is at the instance of 12 numbers of villagers of Amphor
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 5
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
village. There is even no majority in the Petitioners' side.
11. Coming back to the provision of law applicable in the present scenario, this Court finds,
Section-8 of the Act, 1964 reads as follows:-
"8. Constitution and delimitation of Wards :- (1) As soon as may be after the
Constitution of a Grama the Collector // 8 // shall for the purpose of Constitution of
the Grama Panchayat determine the number of Wards into which the Grama is to be
divided and the extent of each such Ward and shall prepare a statement showing the
number of Wards and the extent of each Ward which shall be published by him in the
prescribed manner for the prescribed period inviting objections from the persons
interested to be filed within the said period : [Provided that -
(i) the determination of the number of such Wards shall be subject to the provisions
in Article 243-C of the Constitution;
(ii) the total number of Wards in any Grama shall not be less than eleven and more
than [twenty-five; and]
(iii) the population of every Ward shall, as far as practicable, be equal.] (2) The
Collector shall after considering all such objections and making such further inquiry
as he may deem necessary cause such alteration as may be necessary to be made in
the statement shall finally publish the statement so as altered in the prescribed
manner and thereupon the division of the Grama into Wards as shown in the
statement shall become final.
(3) In cases where the population of any Grama according to the relevant figures of a
Census has exceeded its Population, as recorded in the preceding Census, the
Collector may re-delimit the Wards of the Grama and form new Wards wherever
necessary and in doing so he shall follow the same procedure as is provided in respect
of division of Wards under Sub-Sections (1) and (2)."
This provision prescribes specific procedure to be followed before the delimitation aspect is
finalized.
Above provisions clearly prescribe calling for objection on preparation of draft delimitation order.
Reading entire writ petition this Court finds, entire writ petition nowhere discloses, if all or any of
the Petitioners submitted objection in the Section 8 stage of the matter. Records disclose, none of
these Petitioners submitted objection to such draft decision in the Section-8 stage. In the
circumstance, this Court finds, subsequent representation considered pursuant to disposal of
previous writ petition is of no benefit. On their own submission Petitioners rise to the occasion only
after the delimitation issue is finalized.
// 9 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 6
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
12. Further such questions also have been tested in Hon'ble apex Court and Hon'ble apex Court in
similar situation in deciding the case in between the State of U.P. & Ors. Vrs. Pradhan Sangh
Kshettra Samiti as reported in 1995 Supp. (2) SCC 305 in para 30 to 35 deciding on the scope of
review in such decision came to observe as follows:-
"30. 'Village' has been defined in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (1993 Edn.)
to mean "a self-contained group of houses and associated buildings, usu. in a country
area; an inhabited place larger than a hamlet and smaller than a town; ... a small
self-contained district or community within a city or town, regarded as having
features characteristic of a village". The Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar (1987
Edn.) states that 'village' includes -- (a) a village community; (b) village lands; (c)
rivers passing through or by village lands; and (d) a group of villages. The expression
'village' connotes ordinarily an area occupied by a body of men mainly dependent
upon agriculture or occupations subservient thereto. When the area is occupied by
persons who are engaged mainly in commercial pursuits, rural areas in the vicinity of
a town grow into a suburb of the town.
31. The Encyclopaedia Americana (1983 Edn., Vol. 28) states that village is --"a type
of community, generally small but without exact or commonly accepted size limits.
Generally, in the United States, the village is thought to be intermediate between the
hamlet (a settlement with several families and some form of commerce but no more
than 50 people) and the town (generally over 1000 people)."
Dealing with the origin and evolution of village, it states that --
"the village is the typical form of rural settlement in most of the world -- in Europe
(except for Great Britain) in Asia, in Africa, and in much of South America.... It often
seems to be the result of the settlement of lands that previously were only thinly
occupied by indigenous populations, but probably also derives from the emergence of
clear-cut private proprietorship of land. In much of Europe and in many other areas
of the world, communal land ownership prevailed in the past, and this property
arrangement was one basis for the village form of rural settlement, the community
being set amid the tillage and grazing lands. Growing awareness of the nearly
universal appearance of the agricultural village prompted many social theorists in the
19th century to suggest that such communities represented a universal stage in
human evolution. Such simplifying theories lost support as evidence of the great
diversity of human cultures and the paths of change was accumulated. The
interpretation of the village // 10 // pattern is now more nearly a functional one.
With settled agriculture, village orientation provides mutual protection, sociability, a
measure of economic specialisation (such as handicrafts), and at least the rudiments
of local government. Since size-limits will not precisely distinguish villages from
other types of communities, the question arises as to whether the term has a precise
meaning. All communities or settlements called villages in popular language or
technical studies cannot be brought within a common definition.... Generally,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 7
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
however, a village is a residential and trading centre for a predominantly agricultural
economy. Its social controls are predominantly traditional and informal; more formal
administration and government are typical of cities and towns. Its self-sufficiency
may be nearly complete, as in some parts of the Far East and Latin America, or
seriously impaired by modern transportation, communication, and agencies of
central government. The population of the village, unlike that of most cities and
many towns, is self-recruited rather than immigrant. This, and the traditional
informality of social standards and controls, lends a distinct quality of homogeneity
that the more cosmopolitan centre does not have.The collapse of the theory that the
village is the basic community of all civilizations did not end the idealisation of the
village. Yet even the informal and traditional social controls of the village can be
extremely restrictive, certainly more so than the formal tolerance of difference that
the cultural heterogeneity of the city encourages or requires. And it cannot be
assumed that villages are democratic. European villages are often dominated by one
or a few families, some of which may claim descent from feudal rulers. The village in
India is often ruled by a council (panchayat) of the leading caste or by a few principal
landlords. Even in the United States, with its short history and absence of an officially
recognized aristocracy, leading families are more likely to receive deference in
villages than in larger and more impersonal communities. The integration of village
life, or lack of social problems and tensions, has also been exaggerated. Conflicts may
smoulder or burn brightly, all the more because the parties know each other and
personalise the antipathy. In Europe and Asia, the village has exhibited a remarkable
power of survival amidst currents of rapid social change. Rural America has been
much more profoundly affected by the encroachments of an urban- industrial
civilization. Many small towns, technically villages, have virtually disappeared as
their economic and other social functions have been absorbed by nearby cities.
Village life may endure a while longer in the United States, but the sense of continuity
and communal integrity are difficult to maintain with high rates of residential
mobility and in the face of steady inroads of an essentially urban civilization. The
village community may be defined as a group of people who live in permanent
dwellings in a defined territory which includes arable land, sometimes held // 11 // in
common. If cattle is kept, as is often the case, it is pastured on non-cultivated
meadow land over which the community claims right. Further characteristics include
a predominance of agricultural occupations, a close relationship to the natural
environment, strong internal cohesion, and a relative absence of internal
stratification and of occupational, territorial, and vertical social mobility. As such, the
village is a specific type of rural settlement, but not the only one. The scientific study
of the village community did not start until the middle of the 19th century. ... Sir
Henry Maine (1822-1888), one of the first English writers on this topic, held the
theory that the village community was originally founded by a group of kin related
people who settled independently in a specified spot. In time, the original households
branched out into many separate ones, clearing more land as the need arose.
Occasionally they included strangers, who were sometimes adopted but more often
relegated to second-class membership, tolerated rather than accepted. If one family
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 8
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
became extinct, its share of land was returned to the common stock. Only in later
times, under pressure of more highly developed political structures, did the village
community become feudalistic. The land was then owned by a ruler who received
tribute in kind and promised protection in return. Often the responsibilities of
supervision and collection were transferred to other members of the aristocracy.
Maine based his case for this presumed development upon analysis of Roman law
(Ancient Law, 1861) and upon practices in Russia, south-east European countries,
and specifically India, where he had carried out extensive field research (Village
communities in the East and West, 1871). Several other scholars criticised Maine's
theoretical reconstructions -- modern anthropologists and sociologists take the
position that both developments took place. They recognize that the evolution and
structure of human settlements in general, and of village communities in particular,
are closely connected with specific historical developments and ecological, socio-
political, economic and religious circumstances which are different from place to
place. With this recognition, questions of absolute origins have generally been
replaced by an increased interest in the structure and function of village
communities, in an attempt to gain a basic understanding of the essential nature of
living arrangements therein. As their characteristic features, peasant villagers show
strong internal cohesion and tendencies to restrict membership to those born within
the community. Rules of local endogamy sometimes reinforce this trend.
Membership in the community is demonstrated by participation in religious rituals,
which frequently stress the power of the community to deal with the supernatural
rather than reliance upon individual piety. Economically, a peasant produces mainly
for his own household's consumption, although he also uses part of his product to
exchange in a market for other goods and services.
// 12 // These markets are often local and differ in structure from those in the cities.
Although some city-produced goods reach the peasant level, there is a tendency to
limit the flow of city goods into the community. Politically, peasant villages are now
usually parts of national states and theoretically possess the rights and duties
involved in such membership. But the village community has frequently retained
mechanisms of internal control, whether through Government-approved local
leaders or through informal leadership and community sanctions. Emotional
attachments face inward. The individual's first loyalty is to his family, then to his
community, and only then to whatever is beyond. The various elements of this
characterization may be developed more strongly in some villages than in others, but
as a type they are recognisable and clearly distinct from tribal groups, farming
settlements, and city formations."
32. It is common knowledge that the needs of the people change with the development in the
economic, scientific and technological fields as also with the developments in transport and
communication. With them, the concept of self-sufficiency and the means, mode and range of
self-governance also change. What is more, the units of self-governance at the lower level being
interrelated and integrated with those at the higher levels as parts of the whole scheme of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 9
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
administration and development in the State, have to respond to and fall in line with the growth in
the size and operation of the units at the higher level to form a coordinated democratic polity and
administrative machinery. The concept of grassroot or lowest level administration must, therefore,
necessarily change with the advance and progress at other levels. The governing units at all levels
have to fit in in a pattern and a scheme for administration both for law and order and economic
growth. They have to act as vehicles of overall stability and progress. For that purpose, their
constitution and functioning have to be in conformity with the larger social, political and economic
goals.
33. Hence there cannot be any immutable social, political, economic or organisational concept of
village as a self-governing unit. In a developing country like ours, where the population is growing
fast, where the society is in ferment on all fronts, where divisive forces of all kinds abound, where
the vast majority of population is illiterate and is the victim of ignorance, superstition, blind faith,
biases and prejudices and is shackled by tradition, and irrational customs and practices, there is an
urgent need to evolve means to unite and integrate the society, to expose the populace to larger and
higher goals, to imbibe in them the wider perspectives and to forge a socially cohesive front for
breaking the barriers of race, caste, class, religion and region rather than to pander to the age-old,
self-centred physical and mental barriers. As stated earlier, Article 40 not only does not define
'village' but also does not require that the village panchayats should be organised on the // 13 //
basis of any particular concept of village much less the vintage concept which appears to have
appealed to the High Court. There is further nothing in Mahatma Gandhi's advocacy of "village
panchayat raj" from which the High Court has taken support to suggest that the village that
Mahatmaji had in mind was of a particular description or dimension. It is amusing in this respect to
note that the High Court in support of its concept of village has even gone to the extent of observing
that "it must be remembered that in considering the aspirations of the people, more so at the first
level of democracy, the phenomena of a case of identity of the people, their sentiments, feelings and
chauvinism, cannot be forgotten" -- the considerations which were, with respect, farthest from the
mind of Mahatmaji and against which he fought throughout his life. If separate identities,
chauvinism, divisible sentiments and feelings are nurtured from the grassroot level, they are bound
to erode the foundation of the unity and integrity of the country and should be the last thing on the
social and political agenda of the country. On the other hand, the need of the day is to create social,
political and economic entities crossing all barriers and wedded to the nationhood as the ultimate
goal. Anthropological and sociological entities may be natural so far as the blood and familial
relationships and attachments go and have their place in certain limited spheres. But they have no
place while shaping democratic, political and administrative units. Nor are they necessarily
conducive to social and economic progress. On the other hand, they may prove and have in the past
proved a positive hindrance to them. Although, therefore, it is true that most of the villages have
developed with the initial settlement of a family or a group of families belonging to either the same
tribe or ethnic group and in that sense have their historical and sociological identity, these identities
are not necessarily healthy or desirable for promoting wider and diverse interests and attaining
larger goals. On the other hand, they often prove insurmountable blockades to promoting the ideals
enshrined in the Preamble of our Constitution, viz., social, political and economic justice; liberty of
thought and expression, belief, faith and worship; equality of status and of opportunity; and
fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 10
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
Sometimes, smaller the social, political and administrative entities, the greater the dominance of
one section or the other and deeper the prejudices. The need is to organise viable social, political,
economic and administrative units of optimum size at the lowest level on a rational basis keeping in
mind the size of population, the needs of social and economic development, availability of resources,
transport and communication facilities, convenience of administration and other relevant factors.
Old is not always gold and mere historic accidents through which the villages of the concept of High
Court have developed, cannot justify their perpetuation as political and administrative units to // 14
// attain the modern goals of social and economic progress or furnish the rationale for their survival
as basic democratic entities. What is further forgotten is that over the years, not only the population
in the rural areas has grown enormously but the complexion of the rural areas has also undergone a
change. With the increasing pressure on land, there has been a steady migration from the rural to
the urban and semi-urban areas. Some villages are almost deserted while others survive much below
the poverty line. At the same time, some have emerged as small pockets of comparative prosperity,
thanks to marginal industrial and commercial activities around them and the nearness to the urban
and semi-urban areas. There is further a limit to the number of village panchayats which may be
constituted with all the overhead expenses involved in the exercise which must have a rational
relation to the result sought to be achieved. In the State of U.P., there are 1,20,000 villages. Before
the present exercise of constituting the village panchayats under the Act, there were 74,000 gram
sabhas which are now reduced to 55,000. With the nature and range of functions entrusted to the
new village panchayats under the Act, and the expenditure that may have to be incurred in
constituting and running them, it can hardly be said that their number, structure and organisation
militate in any way against the concept of democracy and the principle of self- governance. Section
11-F(1) by laying down for non-hilly areas a norm of a village panchayat for every 1000 population
as far as practicable and for hilly areas, for every 5 kilometres radius- distance, has in fact tried to
observe the principle of self- governance as closely as possible.
34. The first premise of the High Court's reasoning is, therefore, faulty and it has led it to build an
edifice which is equally defective. It is for this reason that we are unable to appreciate the portions of
the impugned judgment dealing with the sentiments, feelings, chauvinism and will of the people
(pp. 16-20); holding that power to specify villages vests with the people and not with the State
Government and that the villages cannot simply be a revenue village (pp. 21-25); holding that the
Governor is obliged to specify a village giving due regard to the wishes of the people (pp. 26-27);
holding that provisions of the Act referring to establishment of gram sabha for a group of villages
are ultra vires, and beyond the intention of the Constitution (pp. 32-33); that status of gram sabha
has been compromised and belittled in the Act itself (pp. 37-38); holding that the Act in explaining
the expression "gram sabha" offends the Constitution and negates the concept of local
self-government (p. 40); and stating that Section 11-F gives rise to misunderstanding as it has scope
for overlapping and duplication in notifying and declaring areas comprising a village or group of
villages into panchayat area (p.
59).
// 15 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 11
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
35. As pointed out above, Article 243(g) of the Constitution defines village to mean "a village
specified by the Governor to be a village and includes a group of villages so specified". In other
words, according to this definition, any existing village or a group of the existing villages may be
specified by the Governor as a village for the purposes of organising a village panchayat. The
definition begs the question as to what is a village which the Governor can specify as a village for the
purposes of constituting the "village panchayat". It is not disputed that almost all villages in the
State have been recorded in the revenue records of the respective districts in which they are situate.
No material has been placed on record to show that villages have been recorded as such in any other
record. There may be some villages and new settlements which are not so recorded. There is,
therefore, nothing wrong if the Governor specifies the revenue villages as villages and in addition
also those villages and settlements which are not so recorded in the revenue records as villages for
the purpose of constituting village panchayats. The "revenue village" is, therefore, a documented
ready-made concept of village and the Governor while acting under Article 243(g) for specifying the
village may adopt the same as village. No restriction has been placed by Article 243(g) on the
Governor for accepting the revenue village as a village for the purposes of constituting village
panchayat. In fact, the Governor has been empowered by the said constitutional provision to declare
even a group of villages as a village. If this is so, we are unable to appreciate as to why the definition
of village in Section 2(t) will fall foul of the provisions of Article 243(g). Section 2(t) not only speaks
of villages recorded in the revenue records as such but also includes in the definition, any area which
the State Government may by general or special order declare to be a village for the purposes of the
Act. The concept of village is not foreign either to the Constitution or to the State legislation. Apart
from the U.P. Land Revenue Act, the concept of village finds place in other State enactments such as
U.P. Village and Road Police Act, 1873 and U.P. Village Sanitation Act, 1892, U.P. Village Courts Act,
1892, U.P. Village Panchayats Act, 1920 which was replaced by the unamended U.P. Panchayat Raj
Act, 1947, U.P. District Boards Act, 1922, U.P. Local Rates Act, 1914 which latter two Acts were
replaced by the U.P. Kshettra Samitis and Zila Parishads Adhiniyam, 1961. If, therefore, there is no
restriction placed by the Constitution on the Governor in accepting any inhabited rural area as a
village, it is difficult to appreciate how the Act is violative of the Constitution when the State
Government declares any area including a revenue village as a village. In any case, the court cannot
substitute its concept of village for that of the State Government.
// 16 // From the above this Court finds, law on the subject also does not support the Petitioners. At
the same time it is also kept in mind that after the delimitation decision on the particular work there
has been two Gram Panchayat Elections already taken place and there is no difficulty faced by the
contested candidate involving such decision. Entertainment of such writ petition at this stage will be
amounting to unsettle a settled position for nearly 7 years.
13. This Court finds, attempt of the Petitioners involved herein appears to have been made before
the Gram Panchayat Election taking place in the year 2016. It appears, in the meantime there has
been further Election in 2022 dependent on the delimitation of the wards already taken place. Two
Elections have already been held in the meantime. This Court observes, if this Court attempts to
interfere in the delimitation aspect at this stage, there will be disturbance of the ward members
already elected dependent on framing of such wards.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 12
Purna Chandra Nayak & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. : Opposite Parties on 3 January, 2023
14. The writ petition stands dismissed, but in the circumstance, no order as to costs.
(Biswanath Rath) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 3rd day of January, 2023// Ayaskanta Jena, Sr. Stenographer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127234448/ 13
