Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on :- 10.07.2023.
Pronounced on :- 04.08.2023.
WP(Crl) No. 5/2023
Qadir Khan .....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Gagan Oswal, Advocate
Vs
UT of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
01. Personal liberty of a person known and recognized as a fundamental right is self-inhering right
the enjoyment of which a person is guaranteed and guarded by none other than the Constitution of
India. Thus, something which the Constitution of India itself guarantees and guards cannot be
allowed to be fiddled with by an entity i.e. the State and its authorities which function under the
aegis of the Constitution of India, except by following the strict regime of law under which such a
fundamental right of a person can be impinged, curtailed or restricted. Preventive detention
jurisdiction is one of such laws.
02. Preventive detention jurisdiction is, thus, a subject to be handled with care and caution
envisaging and expecting legal maturity of the trustees entrusted with the authority to exercise the
jurisdiction which is eventually meant to end in depriving a citizen of his personal liberty by
reference to his potentiality rather than actuality for acts endangering the society and the State.
Stakes of far reaching effects are envisaged and involved in each and every case of preventive
detention both from the point of view of the State and the society and also the person
facing/suffering preventive detention.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 1
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
03. The preventive detention of a person is a safety serving for the State and the society but to carry
out a preventive detention there are non-negotiable procedural checkmates and check-points which
if ignored, by design or default, by a public authority/officials acting on behalf of the State to detain
a person under preventive detention jurisdiction, then there is no scope for expecting a judicial
diplomacy from a Constitutional Court to provide a let off to the wrong attending preventive
detention of a person. Lost personal liberty of such a person to be restored even if the subjective
satisfaction to tender a person in itself may be justifiable. The present case is one where the
check-points have been punctured in effecting the preventive detention of the petitioner who has
come asking to restore the snatched personal liberty.
04. The Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Udhampur (in short "SSP, Udhampur"), upon the
basis of fact that the petitioner was found involved on two occasions at different points of time in his
alleged commission of offences under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (in
short "NDPS Act, 1985"), had considered the petitioner to be a fit case to suffer deprivation of his
personal liberty in order to check his further indulgences in activities as may amount to offences
under the NDPS Act, 1985.
05. The SSP, Udhampur compiled a dossier with respect to the petitioner bearing alleged facts upon
the basis of which the case for preventive detention of the petitioner curtailing his personal liberty
under the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (in
short "PIT NDPS Act, 1988") was allegedly made out to be presented before the authority vested
with the power to order preventive detention. It is this act of the SSP, Udhampur which resulted in
preventive detention of the petitioner who has now come forward to impugn his preventive
detention order terming it to be illegal and unconstitutional.
06. The chronology of the case relates back to booking of the petitioner in FIR no. 63/2021 dated
30.06.2021 with the Police Station Majalta that being the first of two FIRs for alleged acts of
commission of offences under the NDPS Act, 1985 on the part of the petitioner and the second being
FIR no. 412/2021 dated 29.10.2021 with the Police Station Udhampur under the NDPS Act, 1985.
07. The SSP, Udhampur came to compile and submit a Dossier no.Conf./Dossier/445-48 dated
20.12.2022 to the respondent no. 2
-Divisional Commissioner, Jammu urging thereby that the petitioner is a notorious criminal/drug
peddler who is involved in number of criminal acts and transportation of drug consignments in
district Udhampur for which there is no other way to prevent him from indulging in such activities
and to curb the circulation of drug menace in the society other than getting the petitioner under
preventive detention. The dossier so submitted by the SSP, Udhampur to the respondent no. 2 - the
Divisional Commissioner, Jammu was comprised of 30 leaves as mentioned in the dossier
forwarding communication no.Conf./Dossier/445-48 dated 20.12.2022.
08. A perusal of the dossier so submitted would reveal that in the name of factual content, the SSP,
Udhampur cited two FIRs involving the petitioner with respect to alleged commission of offences
under the NDPS Act of 1985 and rest is opinion filled amounting to characterization of the petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 2
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
in bad description.
09. First FIR no. 63/2021 dated 30.06.2021 cited against the petitioner is under section 8/21/22 of
the NDPS Act 1985 registered with the Police Station Majalta on 30.06.2021 in which case the
petitioner, while he was walking towards Majalta from Satrari road upon his personal search was
found possessing alleged contraband in the form of Diacetyl Morphine (Heroine). In this FIR, a final
Police Report no. 65/2021 dated 16.07.2021 under section 173 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
is said to have been presented by the Police Station concerned before a competent court of law. In
this case, the petitioner is said to have been granted bail by the Principal Sessions Judge,
Udhampur.
10. Second FIR referred by the SSP, Udhampur in his dossier is FIR no. 412/2021 dated 29.10.2021
under section 8/21/22 of the NDPS Act 1985 registered with the Police Station Udhampur in which
the petitioner along with one Sushil Sharma came to be implicated while they were riding a
Mahindra Bolero and upon being stopped by the Police at the Nakka Point Jakhani at about 1130
hours, alleged recovery of contraband was effected from them. In this regard, final Police Report
(Challan) no. 02/2022 dated 04.01.2022 is said to have been presented and now under trial before a
competent criminal court of law against the petitioner. The contraband allegedly recovered is
Diacetyl Morphine (Heroine) which is not of a commercial quantity and the two accused are said to
be on bail from the stage of investigation itself.
11. In addition to these two FIRs, the petitioner has been named in four Daily Diaries no. 12 dated
02.11.2022, no. 14 dated 15.11.2022, no. 6 dated 22.11.2022 and no. 13 dated 09.12.2022 by the
Police Station Majalta on account of the suspicious movement alleged against the petitioner with
regard to sale and purchase of illegal drugs. Details of these Daily Diaries against the petitioner have
not been spelled out in the Dossier by the SSP, Udhampur, though copies enclosed with the Dossier.
12. It is upon the basis of the aforesaid two FIRs and four Daily Dairies, the SSP, Udhampur came to
characterize the petitioner as a notorious/hardcore habitual criminal, desperate character and a
drug peddler who being a habitual offender is involved in many criminal offences and blatantly
violating the rule of law include drug addiction and thereby horrifying the innocent citizens. The
petitioner is branded to be a history sheeter whose activities were highly prejudicial to the
maintenance of public order as well as to the security of the society/public peace and tranquility.
13. The respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu upon getting seized of the dossier so
submitted by the SSP, Udhampur came to pass a detention order no. PITNDPS 42 of 2022 dated
21.12.2022 upon purported satisfaction that the petitioner is engaged in repeated illicit traffic in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances which poses a serious threat to the health and welfare of
the people and with a view to prevent him from committing any of the acts amounting to offences
and to save the younger generation from use and occupation of drugs the case of the petitioner's
preventive detention was made out.
14. In terms of this detention order, the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu came
to order preventive detention of the petitioner for a period to be specified by the Government. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 3
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
order of detention so passed by the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu is based
upon the grounds of detention accompanying the said order of detention and is a verbatim repeat of
the SSP, Jammu submitted dossier bearing ritual sake reference of satisfaction of the respondent no.
2- Divisional Commissioner, Jammu.
15. The respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu came to address a communication no.
601/RA/Detention/23 (7091318) dated 21.12.2022 to the petitioner thereby informing him about
the passing of the detention order no. PITNDPS 42 of 2022 dated 21.12.2022 against him further
informing the petitioner about the grounds of detention accompanying the detention order and also
about the right of the petitioner to make a representation to the Government against the detention
order.
16. This aforementioned communication of the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu
is comprised of four leaves, that being two page detention order and two page grounds of detention.
This fact is clearly reflected in the communication no. 601/RA/Detention/23(7091318) dated
21.12.2022 of the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu.
17. The respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu came to submit vide communication
no. 601/RA/Detention/ 23(7091318) dated 21.12.2022, the detention case of the petitioner to the
Financial Commissioner (Additional Chief Secretary), Home Department, J&K for seeking approval
of the Government to the detention order and for determination of the period of detention.
18. The detention order against the petitioner came to be executed by PSI Jaipal Singh, PID no.
EXJ-196633 of the Police Station Majalta, the fact about which the Superintendent District Jail
Amphalla, Jammu came to notify the Deputy Secretary to Govt. Home Department, UT of J&K,
Jammu vide communication no. DJJ/DET/22/8139-48 dated 22.12.2022 by referring to the
petitioner as a PSA detenue.
19. Upon the basis of the execution of the said detention warrant, the petitioner came to be lodged in
the District Jail Amphalla, Jammu against execution of a PSA warrant relating to the petitioner and
his handing over the District Jail Amphalla, Jammu. There is an Execution Report bearing the
signatures of the petitioner as well as the detention order executing officer PSI Jaipal Singh, and
also of the Assistant Superintendent District Jail Amphalla, Jammu, but which bears the signatures
of Assistant Superintendent District Jail Amphalla, Jammu to be of 22.12.2022 but without any
number wherein the fact of PSI Jaipal Singh taking the custody of the petitioner on 21.12.2022 in
village Satrari in execution of the detention warrant and the execution of the warrant at village
Satrari on 21.12.2022 stands registered.
20. This Execution Report further states that notice of the detention order was given to the
petitioner by reading over and explained to him in Urdu/Hindi/Dogri language understood fully by
the petitioner, in acknowledgement of which the petitioner's signatures came to be obtained on the
execution report as mark A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 4
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
21. Interestingly, it is in the Receipt of Grounds of Detention a fact is mentioned that the petitioner
came to be handed over detention warrant (02 leaves), grounds of detention (02 leaves), copy of
dossier (04 leaves), DDR no. 12 dated 02.11.2022 of P/S Majalta (01 leaf), DDR no. 14 dated
15.11.2022 of P/S Majalta (01 leaf), DDR no. 06 dated 22.11.2022 of P/S Majalta (01 leaf), DDR no.
13 dated 09.12.2022 P/S Majalta (01 leaf), copy of FIR no. 63/2021 P/S Majalta (04 leaves), Final
Report of case FIR no. 63/2021 (06 leaves), Seizure memo of case FIR no. 63/2021 (01 leaf), FSL
report of case FIR no. 63/2021 (01 leaf), copy of case FIR no. 412/2021 of P/S Udhampur (03
leaves), Final report of case FIR no. 412/2021 P/S Udhampur (05 leaves), Seizure memo of case FIR
no. 412/2021 of P/S Udhampur (02 leaves) and FSL report of case FIR no. 412/2021 of P/S
Udhampur (02 leaves) in the District Jail Amphalla, Jammu on an unmentioned date against proper
receipt and that the petitioner was informed that he could make a representation to the Government
as well as to the Detaining Authority against the detention order, if he so desired.
22. The detention case so submitted by the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu
along with the purported representation of the petitioner came to be referred by the Govt. of UT of
Jammu & Kashmir acting through its Home Department vide its communication
no.Home/PB-V/1008/2022/7092371 dated 18.01.2023 to the Advisory Board for its opinion which
came to be tendered in terms of report dated 23.01.2023 with the remarks about sufficiency of the
cause for detention of the petitioner.
23. This opinion enabled the Govt. of UT of Jammu & Kashmir, acting through the Home
Department, to exercise its power under section 9(f) read with section 11 of the PIT NDPS Act, 1988
thereby confirming the detention order of the petitioner no. PITNDPS 42 of 2022 dated 21.12.2022
passed by the respondent no. 2 - Divisional Commissioner, Jammu and thereby directing the
detention of the petitioner for a period of one year with the place of lodgement being District Jail
Amphalla, Jammu. This confirmation came to be effected vide Govt. Order no. Home/PB-V/256 of
2023 dated 07.02.2023 issued by the Financial Commissioner (Additional Chief Secretary), Home
Department, UT of J&K.
24. It is in the backdrop of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner has
sought quashment of his preventive detention by filing the writ petition inter alia on the grounds
that his detention order was misconceived and that he was not supplied with all the requisite
documents on the basis of which the respondent no. 2-the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu had
proceeded to pass the detention order against the petitioner on account of which the petitioner has
been prejudiced in defending his position against the said preventive detention. The petitioner has
averred that the routine procedure of law is in action against him with respect to the accusation
against him as framed with respect to two FIRS and as such resort to preventive detention was only
to serve as beforehand punishment to the petitioner without a before judgement from the criminal
court of law seized of the cases.
25. This Court has heard the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the
learned counsel for the respondents. This Court has perused the record of detention produced from
the end of the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 5
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
26. The detention record produced from the end of the respondent no. 2- the Divisional
Commissioner, Jammu bears a puzzling point as to when the respondent no. 2- the Divisional
Commissioner, Jammu in addressing his communication no. 601/RA/Detention/23 (7091318)
dated 21.12.2022 addressed to the petitioner meaning to apprise the petitioner about the fact of his
preventive detention, has himself recorded that his said communication has only four (04) leaves as
accompaniment which comprised of two (02) leaves of the detention order and two (02) leaves of
the grounds of detention, then how come at the time of execution of detention order so passed by
the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu, the executing office PSI Jaipal Singh
came to have at his disposal the entire set of dossier of 30 leaves available with him so as to be
delivered along with the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu's two leaves
detention order no. PITNDPS 42 of 2022 dated 21.12.2022 read with two leaves grounds of
detention to the petitioner. It is a matter of wild guess to be avoided by this Court particularly when
the respondents have not explained it at their own. This Court has no basis and reason to accept that
it is the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu who had actually forwarded the
complete set of documents accompanying the communication no.Conf./Dossier/445-48 dated
20.12.2022 addressed to the petitioner whereby the petitioner was informed about his detention
order and the grounds of detention therewith as with this communication of the respondent no. 2-
the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu, the petitioner was meant to be served only with four leaves of
enclosures accompanying the said communication.
27. This glaring gap between what the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu was
meaning to do and direct and what PSI Jaipal Singh came to carry out is a matter not to be ignored
by a Constitutional Court by taking it as a casual coincidence or slip of application of mind on the
part of the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu only getting rectified by PSI
Jaipal Singh while executing the detention order.
28. It is very obvious that there was an extra legal exercise which was at play which resulted in
purportedly handing over the complete set of 30 leaves dossier to PSI Jaipal Singh to be delivered
along with the communication no. 601/RA/Detention/23 (7091318) dated 21.12.2022 of the
respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu bearing the order of detention along with
the grounds of detention which was meant to be delivered to the petitioner.
29. It was incumbent upon the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu to have
explained in his counter affidavit to the writ petition as to how come the petitioner came to be
delivered with a complete set of dossier by PSI Jaipal Singh when the respondent no. 2- the
Divisional Commissioner, Jammu had not forwarded the same along with his communication no.
601/RA/Detention/23 (7091318) dated 21.12.2022. This misstep at end of the respondent no. 2- the
Divisional Commissioner, Jammu invites and casts a serious doubt about the genuineness of the rest
of the proceedings purportedly carried out by PSI Jaipal Singh in the context of arresting the
petitioner by taking the person of the petitioner under custody, the place of execution of the
detention order and the manner of informing/apprising the petitioner about the order of detention
so passed by the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu and the reading and
explaining of the grounds of detention to the petitioner by PSI Jaipal Singh. All seems to be word
play at the end of PSI Jaipal Singh for the sake of paper work in which the petitioner was left
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 6
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
clueless about what was being intended by the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner,
Jammu and what was actually done by PSI Jaipal Singh at his own.
30. The very fact that there was an extra legal exercise in play in carrying out the detention of the
petitioner is exhibited from the fact that in his communication no. 601/RA/Detention/23 (7091318)
dated 21.12.2022 the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu is meaning to
apprise/inform the petitioner about his right to make a representation to the Government but when
it comes to the matter of execution of the order of detention, PSI Jaipal Singh in the execution
report endorses a fact that the petitioner has been apprised of his right to make representation
against his detention not only to the Government but even to the detaining authority.
31. Thus, what was not being afforded by the respondent no. 2- the Divisional Commissioner,
Jammu as being the detaining authority to the petitioner was being extended by PSI Jaipal Singh in
the context of making of a representation by the petitioner against his detention to the detaining
authority. All this exposes the very shamness of the exercise with respect to the detention of the
petitioner.
32. The detention record perused by this Court while confirming the fact that the petitioner came to
be detained on 22.11.2022 but the Home Department of UT of Jammu & Kashmir in its
communication no. Home/PB-V/1008/2022 (7092371) dated 23.12.2022 addressed to the
Additional Secretary, IAS-II Division, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi and the Under Secretary
to the Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance was stating a position that the detention warrant with
respect to the petitioner had not been executed yet i.e. by 23.12.2022 whereas the fact is that the
detention order had come to be executed as per the record on 22.12.2022.
33. Thus, the Home Department, Govt. of UT of Jammu & Kashmir was found acting in ignorance of
the actual state of affairs pertaining to the very date of detention of the petitioner and is a reflective
of the fact that the detention of a person is taken with all callousness at the end of the
officials/authorities who are supposed to act to the best of their application of mind in the matter of
handling the preventive detention of a person.
34. Lapse in procedure on the part of the public authority/official in dealing with the preventive
detention of a person is not excusable because the person suffering detention supposed to have
acquiesced to any such lapse on the part of the public authority/official.
35. Preventive detention jurisprudence is served in letter and spirit only by reference to the
procedural safeguard and fairness which if compromised, even by an iota, at the end of the detaining
authority or the sponsoring authority in all consequences results in erosion of the very exercise of
preventive detention jurisdiction against a detenu.
36. This Court needs to be take notice of the seriousness of preventive detention jurisdiction as
discerned by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in its judgements delivered from time to time
without any repose.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 7
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
37. In the case of "Pramod Singla Vs Union of India and others," reported in 2023 SCC Online SC
374, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed in para 21 as under:-
"21. Before we deal with the issues framed, we find it important to note that
preventive detention laws in India are a colonial legacy, and have a great potential to
be abused and misused. Laws that have the ability to confer arbitrary powers to the
state, must in all circumstances, be very critically examined, and must be used only in
the rarest of rare cases. In cases of preventive detention, where the detenue is held in
arrest not for a crime he has committed, but for a potential crime he may commit, the
Courts must always give every benefit of doubt in favour of the detenue, and even the
slightest of errors in procedural compliances must result in favour of the detenue."
38. In the case of "Rekha Vs State of Tamil Nadu through Secretary to Government and another,"
reported in (2011) 5 SCC 244, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has stated the position as under:-
21. It is all very well to say that preventive detention is preventive not punitive. The
truth of the matter, though, is that in substance a detention order of one year (or any
other period) is a punishment of one year's imprisonment. What difference is it to the
detenu whether his imprisonment is called preventive or punitive?
29. Prevention detention is, by nature, repugnant to democratic ideas and an
anathema to the rule of law. No such law exists in the USA and in England (except
during war time).
Since, however, Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution of India permits preventive detention, we
cannot hold it illegal but we must confine the power of preventive detention within very narrow
limits, otherwise we will be taking away the great right to liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the
Constitution of India which was won after long, arduous and historic struggles. It follows, therefore,
that if the ordinary law of the land (Indian Penal Code and other penal statutes) can deal with a
situation, recourse to a preventive detention law will be illegal.
35. It must be remembered that in cases of preventive detention no offence is proved and the
justification of such detention is suspicion or reasonable probability, and there is no conviction
which can only be warranted by legal evidence. Preventive detention is often described as a
'jurisdiction of suspicion', (Vide State of Maharashtra Vs. Bhaurao Punjabrao Gawande. The
detaining authority passes the order of detention on subjective satisfaction. Since clause (3) of
Article 22 specifically excludes the applicability of clauses (1) and (2), the detenu is not entitled to a
lawyer or the right to be produced before a Magistrate within 24 hours of arrest. To prevent misuse
of this potentially dangerous power the law of preventive detention has to be strictly construed and
meticulous compliance with the procedural safeguards, however, technical, is, in our opinion,
mandatory and vital.
36. It has been held that the history of liberty is the history of procedural safeguards.
(See:Kamleshkumar Ishwardas Patel Vs. Union of India and others). These procedural safeguards
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 8
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
are required to be zealously watched and enforced by the court and their rigour cannot be allowed to
be diluted on the basis of the nature of the alleged activities of the detenu. As observed in Rattan
Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1981) 4 SCC 1981 :-
"4 ... May be that the detenu is a smuggler whose tribe (and how their numbers
increase!) deserves no sympathy since its activities have paralysed the Indian
economy. But the laws of preventive detention afford only a modicum of safeguards
to persons detained under them, and if freedom and liberty are to have any meaning
in our democratic set-up, it is essential that at least those safeguards are not denied
to the detenus."
39. Personal liberty protected under Article 21 is so sacrosanct and so high in the scale of
constitutional values that it is the obligation of the detaining authority to show that the impugned
detention meticulously accords with the procedure established by law. The stringency and concern
of judicial vigilance that is needed was aptly described in the following words in Thomas Pelham
Dale's case, (1881) 6 QBD 376 :
"Then comes the question upon the habeas corpus. It is a general rule, which has
always been acted upon by the Courts of England, that if any person procures the
imprisonment of another he must take care to do so by steps, all of which are entirely
regular, and that if he fails to follow every step in the process with extreme regularity
the court will not allow the imprisonment to continue."
39. In the case of "Francis Coralie Mullin Vs Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and others,"
reported in (1981) SCC 608:-
"4. Now it is necessary to bear in mind the distinction between 'preventive detention'
and punitive detention', when we are considering the question of validity of
conditions of detention. There is a vital distinction between these two kinds of
detention. 'Punitive detention' is intended to inflict punishment on a person, who is
found by the judicial process to have committed an offence, while 'preventive
detention' is not by way of punishment at all, but it is intended to pre-empt a person
from indulging in conduct injurious to the society. The power of preventive detention
has been recognised as a necessary evil and is tolerated in a free society in the larger
interest of security of the State and maintenance of public order. It is a drastic power
to detain a person without trial and there are many countries where it is not allowed
to be exercised except in times of war or aggression. Our Constitution does recognise
the existence of this power, but it is hedged-in by various safeguards set out in
Articles 21 and 22. Art. 22 in clauses (4) to (7), deals specifically with safeguards
against preventive detention and any law of preventive detention or action by way of
preventive detention taken under such law must be in conformity with the
restrictions laid down by those clauses on pain of invalidation. But apart from Art.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 9
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
22, there is also Art. 21 which lays down restrictions on the power of preventive detention. Until the
decision of this Court in Maneka Gandhi. v. Union of India, a very narrow and constricted meaning
was given to the guarantee embodied in Art. 21 and that article was understood to embody only that
aspect of the rule of law, which requires that no one shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
without the authority of law. It was construed only as a guarantee against executive action
unsupported by law. So long as there was some law, which prescribed a procedure authorising
deprivation of life or personal liberty, it was supposed to meet the requirement of Art. 21. But in
Maneka Gandhi's case (supra), this Court for the first time opened-up a new dimension of Art. 21
and laid down that Art. 21 is not only a guarantee against executive action unsupported by law, but
is also a restriction on law making. It is not enough to secure compliance with the prescription of
Article 21 that there should be a law prescribing some semblance of a procedure for depriving a
person of his life or personal liberty, but the procedure prescribed by the law must be reasonable,
fair and just and if it is not so, the law would be void as violating the guarantee of Art. 21. This Court
expanded the scope and ambit of the right to life and personal liberty enshrined in Art. 21 and sowed
the seed for future development of the law enlarging this most fundamental of Fundamental Rights.
This decision in Maneka Gandhi's case became the starting point-the-spring- board-for a most
spectacular evolution the law culminating in the decisions in M. H. Hoscot v. State of Maharashtra,,
Hussainara Khatoon's case, the first Sunil Batra's case and the second Sunil Batra's case. The
position now is that Art. 21 as interpreted in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra) requires that no one
shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except by procedure established by law and this
procedure must be reasonable, fair and just and not arbitrary, whimsical or fanciful and it is for the
Court to decide in the exercise of its constitutional power of judicial review whether the deprivation
of life or personal liberty in a given case is by procedure, which is reasonable, fair and just or it is
otherwise. The law of preventive detention has therefore now to pass the test not only of Art. 22, but
also of Art. 21 and if the constitutional validity of any such law is challenged, the Court would have
to decide whether the procedure laid down by such law for depriving a person of his personal liberty
is reasonable, fair and just. But despite these safeguards laid down by the Constitution and
creatively evolved by the Courts, the power of preventive detention is a frightful and awesome power
with drastic consequences affecting personal liberty, which is the most cherished and prized
possession of man in a civilised society. It is a power to be exercised with the greatest care and
caution and the courts have to be ever vigilant to see that this power is not abused or misused. It
must always be remembered that preventive detention is qualitatively different from punitive
detention and their purposes are different. In case of punitive detention, the person concerned is
detained by way of punishment after he is found guilty of wrong doing as a result of trial where he
has the fullest opportunity to defend himself, while in case of preventive detention, he is detained
merely on suspicion with a view to preventing him from doing harm in future and the opportunity
that he has for contesting the action of the Executive is very limited. Having regard to this
distinctive character of preventive detention, which aims not at punishing an individual for a wrong
done by him, but at curtailing his liberty with a view to pre-empting his injurious activities in future,
it has been laid down by this Court in Sampat Prakash v. State of Jammu and Kashmir "that the
restrictions placed on a person preventively detained must, consistently with the effectiveness of
detention, be minimal."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 10
Qadir Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
40. In the case of "Nand Lal Bajaj Vs State of Punjab and another," reported in (1981) 4 SCC 327, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has stated the position as under:-
"9. Among the concurring opinions, Krishna Iyer, J., although he generally agreed
with Bhagwati, J., goes a step forward by observing:
Procedural safeguards are the indispensable essence of liberty. In fact, the history of
procedural safeguards and the right to a hearing has a human-right ring. In India,
because of poverty and illiteracy, the people are unable to protect and defend their
rights: observance of fundamental rights is not regarded as good politics and their
transgression as bad politics.
In short, the history of personal liberty is largely the history of procedural safeguards.
The need for observance of procedural safeguards, particularly in cases of deprivation
of life and liberty is, therefore, of prime importance to the body politic."
41. In the backdrop of the facts and circumstances of the case and bearing in mind the sacrosanct
declarations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as reproduced herein before by reference to the
judgements cited, this Court is led to an inviting conclusion that the procedural aspect attending the
preventive detention of the petitioner was seriously compromised on account of acts of commission
and omission at the end of the Detaining Authority that being the respondent no. 2- the Divisional
Commissioner, Jammu followed by the Govt. of UT of Jammu & Kashmir and, therefore, the
preventive detention of the petitioner cannot be allowed to sustain.
Thus, the detention order no. PITNDPS 42 of 2022 dated 21.12.2022 read with Govt. Order no.
Home/PB-V/256 of 2023 dated 07.02.2023 passed by the Home Department, UT of J&K are hereby
quashed and the petitioner is directed to be restored to his personal liberty. The respondent no. 2-
the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu to ensure the release of the petitioner from the confines of
District Jail Amphalla, Jammu. Writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
42. Record produced by Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, learned GA be returned back.
(Rahul Bharti) Judge Jammu 04.08.2023 Muneesh Whether the order is speaking : Yes Whether
the order is reportable : Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132552521/ 11
