R.K Herojit Singh vs The Principal Secretary/Commissioner ... on 23 February, 2023
R.K Herojit Singh vs The Principal Secretary/Commissioner ...
on 23 February, 2023
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
CHONGNUNKI Digitally signed by CHONGNUNKIM
GANGTE
M GANGTE Date: 2023.02.23 14:29:44 +05'30'
Item No. 21
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 320 of 2021
R.K Herojit Singh ....Petitioner(s)
-Versus-
The Principal Secretary/Commissioner (Home) & 4 Ors
....Respondent(s)
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 23.02.2023 Heard Mr. S.
Rajeetchandra, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. S. Niranjan, learned GA
appearing for the respondents.
[2] The simple case of the petitioner is that a Departmental Enquiry was initiated against the
petitioner and after the conclusion of the said Departmental Enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted
a report to the Disciplinary Authority stating that charges against the petitioner are not held prove.
On receiving the said enquiry report, the Disciplinary Authority issued the impugned order dated
01-03-2019 to the effect that he was not satisfied with the finding of the Enquiry Officer and
accordingly he appointed a new Enquiry Officer for conducting a fresh enquiry to the charges made
against the petitioner. [3] Relying on the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case
of Vijay Shankar Pandey Vs Union of India & Anr reported in (2014) 10 SCC 589, it has been
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Disciplinary Authority has no power for
ordering a re-enquiry against the petitioner only on the ground that he was not satisfied with the
findings submitted by the earlier Enquiry Officer and accordingly, the learned counsel submitted
that the impugned order is not sustainable in the eye of law and the same is liable to be quashed and
set aside. The relevant portion of the judgment rendered in the case of "Vijay Shankar Pandey"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186786508/ 1
R.K Herojit Singh vs The Principal Secretary/Commissioner ... on 23 February, 2023
(supra) is reproduced herein below:-
"25. The Court in K.R. Deb held that:
"12 It seems to us that Rule 15, on the face of it, really provides for one inquiry but it
may be possible if in a particular case there has been no proper enquiry because some
serious defect has crept into the inquiry or some important witnesses were not
available at the time of the inquiry or for some other reason, the Disciplinary
Authority may ask the Inquiry Officer to record further evidence. But there is no
provision in Rule 15 for completely setting aside previous inquiries on the ground
that the report of the Inquiring Officer or Officers does not appeal to the Disciplinary
Authority. The Disciplinary Authority has enough powers to reconsider the evidence
itself and come to its own conclusion under Rule 9.
13. In our view the rules do not contemplate an action such as was taken by the
Collector on February 13, 1962. It seems to us that the Collector, instead of taking
responsibility himself, was determined to get some officer to report against the
appellant. The procedure adopted was not only not warranted by the rules but was
harassing to the appellant." (Emphasis supplied) and allowed the appeal of K.R. Deb.
" 26. It can be seen from the above that the normal rule is that there can be only one
Enquiry. This Court has also recognized the possibility of a further Enquiry in certain
circumstances enumerated therein. The decision however makes it clear that the fact
that the Report submitted by the Enquiring Authority is not acceptable to the
disciplinary authority, is not a ground for completely setting aside the enquiry report
and ordering a second Enquiry."
[4] Despite giving ample opportunities to the respondents to file their counter affidavit, the
respondents have failed to file their counter affidavit till today.
After hearing the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner and after perusal of the case
laws cited by him, the learned GA fairly submitted that the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the case of K.R Dev Vs Collector of Central Excise, Shillong reported in (1971) 2 SCC 102
and in the case of Vijay Shankar Pandey Vs Union of India & Anr reported in (2014) 10 SCC 589, are
applicable in the present case and that any appropriate order may be passed by this Court as
deemed just and proper. [5] I have heard the submission of the learned counsel appearing for the
parties at length and also examine carefully the materials available on record.
[6] In the present case, the Departmental Enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and after
completion of the said Departmental Enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted a report to the effect
that the charges made against the petitioner are not held prove. On receiving the said enquiry
report, the Disciplinary Authority issued the impugned order dated 01-03-2019 stating that he is not
satisfied with the finding of the Enquiry Officer and accordingly, the Disciplinary Authority
appointed another Enquiry Officer for holding a fresh enquiry against the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186786508/ 2
R.K Herojit Singh vs The Principal Secretary/Commissioner ... on 23 February, 2023
[7] In the case of Vijay Shankar Pandey (supra) it has been categorically held by the Hon'ble Apex
Court that the Disciplinary Authority being not satisfied with the enquiry report is not a ground for
completely setting aside the enquiry report and ordering a second enquiry. In my considered view,
the said principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court squarely covers the issue raised in the
present case and this Court is satisfied that the impugned order dated 01-03- 2019 is not sustainable
in the eye of law and the same is liable to be quashed and set aside.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed by quashing and setting aside the impugned order
dated 01-03-2019.
Parties are to bear their own cost.
JUDGE kim
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186786508/ 3
