R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
SHAMURAILATPAM SUSHIL SHARMA Digitally signed by SHAMURAILATPAM SUSHIL SHARMA
Date: 2024.04.22 11:55:28 +05'30' Page |1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
Cril. Rev. P. No. 2 of 2017
R. Maringchan Maring, 25 years, S/o R. James
Maring, Koijam Village, P.O. Pallel & P.S. Kakching,
Chandel District, Manipur.
...Accused No. 1/Petitioner
-Versus-
The State of Manipur
.... Respondent
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
For the Petitioner :: Mr. N. Mahendra, Adv.
For the Respondent :: Mr. RK Umakanta, PP
.
Date of Hearing and reserving Judgment & Order :: 21.12.2023 Date of Judgment & Order ::
22.04.2024 JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
1. The present criminal revision petition, instituted by R. Maringchan Maring (hereinafter referred
to as Revisionist), under the provision of Section 397 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(hereinafter referred to as Cr.P.C.), seeks to assail the order dated 12.02.2016 rendered by the
learned Sessions Judge, Thoubal, Manipur, in Sessions Trial Case No. 4/2015 arising out of Page |2
FIR No. 34(3) 2014 Kakching Police Station under Section 306/498- A/34 IPC whereby the charges
under the aforementioned sections were directed to be framed against him.
2. The facts, as are necessary for the adjudication of the controversy in the present case in the proper
perspective are briefly encapsulated as follows :
a) that admittedly, Smt. Salam Ichal Devi (hereinafter referred to as the deceased) who was the
daughter of Sapam Tomba Singh (hereinafter referred to as the complainant) was married to the
Revisionist in the month of December, 2013; who allegedly, received a sum of Rs. 30,000/- (rupees
thirty thousand) as dowry;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 1
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
b) that on the 7th of March, 2014, at about 7:30 p.m., the complainant filed a petition with the O.C.,
PS Kakching, to the effect that, on the same day, at about 6:30 p.m., his daughter (the deceased wife
of the Revisionist) had committed suicide by hanging with a rope inside her bedroom of her
husband's house at Koijam Village;
Page |3
c) that the complainant clearly and unequivocally asserted that, immediately after his son-in-law,
the Revisionist, gave him the news that the deceased had died by hanging in her bedroom, he went
there and inspected the same and found that his daughter had in fact died by hanging;
d) the complainant thereupon, made a report to Kakching Police Station, in connection with the
death of his daughter, seeking further enquiry in to the matter, as above stated;
e) A U.D. Case No. 2/2014 KCG PS dated 7th March, 2014 was taken up and investigated by the I.O.
of the case Sub-Inspector S. Rishikanta Singh of Kakching Police Station;
f) During the investigation, it was revealed that the dead body of the victim, was found lying on her
bed having been taken down by the revisionist along with his family members;
g) In view of the circumstances, since foul play was suspected, a regular case, FIR No. 34(3)2014
KCG PS u/s 306/498-A/34 IPC was registered Page |4 and endorsed to the said I.O. for further
investigation;
h) The said I.O. examined 21 witnesses;
i) Subsequently, the case was transferred to the SDPO P. Tenden Singh, the second I.O., and he
examined 3 (three) more witnesses;
j) It is the Prosecution's case that during their interrogation, the Revisionist and his co-
accused R. James Maring, the former's father, allegedly admitted to their involvement in the crime;
k) It is further the Prosecution's case that there was sufficient circumstantial evidence to link the
accused persons to the aforesaid stated crime;
l) In this behalf, it is asseverated on behalf of the
Prosecution that, the statements of the
neighbours clearly revealed that they heard
frequent quarrels between the deceased and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 2
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
the accused persons;
Page |5
m) The neighbours collectively interalia stated that,
after quarrelling with her husband, the
Revisionist, the victim left for her parental home and narrated the whole story of her torture by her
husband, after consuming intoxicating drugs as well as by her father-in-law;
n) The victim also narrated to her parents and neighbouring villagers that, she was beaten by her
husband causing injury on her abdomen and resulting in miscarriage of her pregnancy and profuse
bleeding;
o) The statements further more reflected that when the victim was at her parental home, the
Revisionist, came and forcibly took her away assuring her mother that the victim would be medically
examined at Jivanlata Hospital;
p) The mother of the deceased, however, stated that neither the Revisionist nor the victim were
found at the Hospital by her and she came back home after waiting for them at the said Hospital;
Page |6
q) The mother of the victim further stated that on the same day i.e. 7th March, 2014 at about 6:30
pm, she was informed that her daughter had committed suicide in her bedroom whereupon she
along with her family members visited the spot and found that the same was, in fact, unfortunately
true;
r) The postmortem report relied upon by the Prosecution indicates that, death of the deceased was
caused by asphyxia from hanging and further opined to be suicidal in nature;
s) Since the Prosecution found prima facie material against the accused persons including the
Revisionist, charge sheet under Section 306/498/498-A/34 IPC was caused to be filed.
3. The learned trial Court having considered the material on the record, including the statements of
the witnesses and having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties, framed charges
for the commission of offences under Sections 306 and Page |7 498-A IPC against the Revisionist
vide the impugned order dated 12th February, 2016.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 3
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
4. Aggrieved by the said order framing charges against the Revisionist, the latter has assailed the
same before this Court as above mentioned.
5. Learned counsel assails the impugned order by contending that, there is no material/evidence to
show a prima facie case for framing charges and proceeding further against the Revisionist; as the
material attracting charges under Section 306/498-A IPC against him are conspicuous by their
absence in the present case.
6. In support of his submissions, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Revisionist places
reliance on the following decisions :-
(i) R. Mohan v. State [Criminal Appeal No. 611 of 2011];
(ii) (2002) 5 SCC 371, Sohan Raj Sharma v. State of Haryana [Criminal Appeal No.
1464 of 2007] and Kishori Lal v. State of MP [Criminal Appeal No. 1115 of 1999];
(iii) Dilawa Babu Kurane v. State of Maharastra : (2002) 2 SCC 135;
Page |8
(iv) Suresh v. State of Maharastra: AIR 2001 SC 1375;
(v) State of MP v. Mohanlal Soni : AIR 2000 SC 2583
(vi) Shyam Sunder Sharma v. State : 2002 CrLJ 517 (Del)
7. Per contra, learned PP, appearing on behalf of the State would submit that there is sufficient
material/evidence for proceeding against the Revisionist, for abetting the suicide of his wife, the
deceased. The learned PP would also submit that the Revisionist had treated the deceased with
cruelty, immediately prior to the sad occurrence of the latter having committed suicide by hanging
with a rope in her own bedroom.
8. In order to buttress his contentions, the learned PP has drawn attention of this Court to the
statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. of the witnesses and particularly those of the father
and mother of the deceased to the effect that, the Revisionist and the deceased quarreled frequently
with each other subsequent upon the former consuming intoxicating drugs. In addition, attention is
invited to the statements of the mother to assert that the deceased told the former on the morning of
the fateful day that she had not eaten food the previous night and that the Revisionist also Page |9
beat her resulting in bleeding and suspected miscarriage of their unborn child.
9. In addition, the statement of the mother revealed that a month after the deceased married the
Revisionist, the latter consumed SP intoxicating tablets and that her in-laws ill-treated her and
further said that she could not stay at her in-laws' house.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 4
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
10. Lastly, the statement of the mother of the deceased is relied upon to the effect that ten days after
the deceased eloped with the Revisionist and married him, there was a feast and dowry was given to
the latter.
11. The learned PP also relies upon the statement of the complainant; the father of the deceased; to
asseverate that the deceased was not happy living with the Revisionist who consumed SP tablets and
had taken away from the deceased two pieces of phanek (mekhala), to sell off for buying drugs. The
complainant's statement is further pressed into service to show how the Revisionist physically beat
the deceased leading to profuse bleeding and termination of her pregnancy.
12. The PP would also rely on the statement of one S. Latanthoi Devi -- a childhood friend of the
deceased -- to urge that she was informed in confidence repeatedly by the victim that she P a g e | 10
had been tortured by the Revisionist due to his habit of drug addiction and that she had suffered
miscarriage because of the physical assault on her belly by the Revisionist on the fateful day.
13. The learned Sessions Judge having considered the materials on record and heard learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the parties, observed as follows :-
"7. In order to frame charge against the accused, the prosecution should establish the
presence of the essential ingredients of the offence. If such materials are not present,
it would be proper for the Court to discharge the accused. In Amit Kapoor vs. Ramesh
Chander : (2012) 9 SCC 460, the Apex Court laid down the principles and procedures
to be followed while framing of charge and held as below :
"17. Framing of a charge is an exercise of jurisdiction by the trial court in terms of
Section 228 of the Code, unless the accused is discharged under Section 227 of the
Code. Under both these provisions, the court is required to consider the 'record of the
case' and documents submitted therewith and, after hearing the parties, may either
discharge the accused or where it appears to the court and in its opinion there is
ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, it shall frame the
charge. Once the facts and ingredients of the Section exists, then the Court would be
right in presuming that there is ground to proceed against the accused and frame the
charge accordingly. This presumption is not a presumption of law as such. The
satisfaction of the court P a g e | 11 in relation to the existence of constituents of an
offence and the facts leading to that offence is a sine qua non for exercise of such
jurisdiction. It may even be weaker than a prima facie case. There is a fine distinction
between the language of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code. There is a fine distinction
between the language of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code. Section 227 is expression
of a definite opinion and judgment of the Court while Section 228 is tentative. Thus,
to say that at the stage of framing of charge, the Court should form an opinion that
the accused is certainly guilty of committing an offence, is an approach which is
impermissible in terms of Section 228 of the Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 5
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
19. At the initial stage of framing of a charge, the court is concerned not with proof
but with a strong suspicion that the accused has committed an offence, which, if put
to trial, could prove him guilty. All that the court has to see is that the material on
record and the facts would be compatible with the innocence of the accused or not.
The final test of guilt is not to be applied at that stage.
8. In Sonu Gupta vs. Deepak Gupta: (2016) 3 SCC 424, the Apex Court held as below:
"9. It is also well settled that cognizance is taken of the offence and not the offender.
Hence at the stage of framing of charge an individual accused may seek discharge if
he or she can show that the materials are absolutely insufficient for framing of charge
against that particular accused. But such exercise is required only at a later stage, as
indicated above and not at the stage of taking cognizance and summoning the
accused on the P a g e | 12 basis of prima facie case. Even at the stage of framing of
charge, the sufficiency of materials for the purpose of conviction is not the
requirement and a prayer for discharge can be allowed only if the court finds that the
materials are wholly insufficient for the purpose of trial. It is also a settled
proposition of law that even when there are materials raising strong suspicion against
an accused, the court will be justified in rejecting a prayer for discharge and in
granting an opportunity to the prosecution to bring on record the entire evidence in
accordance with law so that case of both the sides may be considered appropriately
on conclusion of trial."
9. From the above case laws, it is seen that the necessary ingredients of the offences charged have to
be present and only then it would be proper for the Court to proceed further by framing charge
against the accused as held in the case of Amit Kapoor (supra), the materials may be even weaker
than the prima face. However, presence of all ingredients is sin qua non for framing charge.
Whether the materials would lead to conv cuon or not and the possibility of alternate version are to
be examined minutely during the trial and not at the stage of framing of charge. In view of the above
mentioned principle, framing of charge to be considered and the materials can be examined for a
limited purpose.
10. In the present case, there is no .... against the accused No 2 for proceeding further except for a
mere mentioning of his name by the mother of the deceased. Hence, he is discharged from all
charges and his bail bonds are discharged.
P a g e | 13
11. The statements of the witnesses specially the parents and friends of the deceased clearly suggest
that the accused No.1. treated the deceased with cruelty. He would beat her often and she was
compelled to leave for her matrimonial home frequently. He used to steal the cloths and other things
of the deceased for her consumption for drug. It cannot be termed as mere neglect as projected by
the Id. counsel for the accused. The harassment and frequent assault caused the miscarriage to the
deceased and even after assuring to the parents of the deceased for treatment in hospital, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 6
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
accused No.1 did not keep his words. Subsequently, the deceased committed suicide by hanging
unable to bear the torture any longer. The chains of incidents are so closely related to drive the
deceased for committing suicide. It would be all together a different aspect that these materials
would be sufficient for conviction or not, as long as the ingredients of the offences are made out.
This is principle laid down in the decisions of Amit Kapoor (supra) and Sonu Gupta (supra). As
there are materials for the offences u/s 306 and 498-A IPC, charge has to be framed against the
accused No.1 under these two heads. However, no materials are found for the offence u/s 498 IPC
and Section 34 IPC is not attracted against single accused.
12. In result, accused No.2 is discharged from all offences and charges u/s 306/498-A IPC are to be
framed against accused No.1.
Announced in open court."
14. In order to appreciate the submissions made on behalf of the Revisionist as well as for the
effective adjudication of the P a g e | 14 issue that arises for consideration in the present case to the
effect whether there exists a prima facie case for framing charges; it would be appropriate to refer to
the case law qua the framing of charges as well as the revisional jurisdiction of the Court while
dealing with the framing of charges.
15. In Superintendent & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal v. Anil Kumar Bhunja (supra),
the Hon'ble Supreme Court whilst relying on the dictum in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh reported
as (1977) 2 SCC 194, upheld the order on charges; and observed that the positive and negative facts,
in conjunction with other subsidiary facts, appearing, expressly or by implication, from the
materials which were before the Magistrate at that initial stage, were sufficient to show that there
were grounds for presuming that the accused-respondents had committed offences under the
relevant provisions of the Arms Act, 1959.
16. In Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court adverting to the
conditions enumerated in Sections 227 and 228 of the CrPC, enunciated the following principles:
"(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out P a g e | 15 whether or not a prima facie case
against the accused has been made out.
(2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 7
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. (4) That
in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under
the present Code is a senior and experienced court cannot act merely as a Post Office
or a mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the
case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the Court,
any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean
that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial."
17. In State of Maharashtra v. Som Nath Thapa, (supra) it has been observed as follows:
P a g e | 16 "30. In Antulay case [R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay, (1986) 2 SCC 716 :
1986 SCC (Cri) 256] Bhagwati, C.J., opined, after noting the difference in the
language of the three pairs of sections, that despite the difference there is no scope
for doubt that at the stage at which the court is required to consider the question of
framing of charge, the test of 'prima facie' case has to be applied. According to Shri
Jethmalani, a prima facie case can be said to have been made out when the evidence,
unless rebutted, would make the accused liable to conviction. In our view, a better
and clearer statement of law would be that if there is ground for presuming that the
accused has committed the offence, a court can justifiably say that a prima facie case
against him exists, and so, frame a charge against him for committing that offence.
31. Let us note the meaning of the word 'presume'. In Black's Law Dictionary it has
been defined to mean 'to believe or accept upon probable evidence'. In Shorter
Oxford English Dictionary it has been mentioned that in law 'presume' means 'to take
as proved until evidence to the contrary is forthcoming', Stroud's Legal Dictionary
has quoted in this context a certain judgment according to which 'A presumption is a
probable consequence drawn from facts (either certain, or proved by direct
testimony) as to the truth of a fact alleged.' In Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar
the same quotation finds place at p. 1007 of 1987 Edn.
32. The aforesaid shows that if on the basis of materials on record, a court could
come to the conclusion that commission of the offence is a probable consequence, a
case for framing of charge exists. To put it differently, if the court were to think that
the accused might have committed the offence it can frame the P a g e | 17 charge,
though for conviction the conclusion is required to be that the accused has committed
the offence. It is apparent that at the stage of framing of a charge, probative value of
the materials on record cannot be gone into; the materials brought on record by the
prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage."
(emphasis in original. Emphasis also supplied herein by underlining.) CRL.REV.P. 262/2016,
CRL.REV.P. 263/2016, CRL.REV.P. 264/2016 & CRL.REV.P. 265/2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 8
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
18. In State of M.P. v. S.B. Johari (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered the following
observations:
"4. In our view, it is apparent that the entire approach of the High Court is illegal and
erroneous. From the reasons recorded by the High Court, it appears that instead of
considering the prima facie case, the High Court has appreciated and weighed the
materials on record for coming to the conclusion that charge against the respondents
could not have been framed. It is settled law that at the stage of framing the charge,
the court has to prima facie consider whether there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused. The court is not required to appreciate the evidence
and arrive at the conclusion that the materials produced are sufficient or not for
convicting the accused. If the court is satisfied that a prima facie case is made out for
proceeding further then a charge has to be framed. The charge can be quashed if the
evidence which the prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt P a g e | 18 of the
accused, even if fully accepted before it is challenged by cross- examination or
rebutted by defence evidence, if any, cannot show that the accused committed the
particular offence. In such case, there would be no sufficient ground for proceeding
with the trial. In Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj
Bijjayya[(1990) 4 SCC 76 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 47] after considering the provisions of
Sections 227 and 228 CrPC, the Court posed a question, whether at the stage of
framing the charge, the trial court should marshal the materials on the record of the
case as he would do on the conclusion of the trial. The Court held that at the stage of
framing the charge inquiry must necessarily be limited to deciding if the facts
emerging from such materials constitute the offence with which the accused could be
charged. The court may peruse the records for that limited purpose, but it is not
required to marshal it with a view to decide the reliability thereof. The Court referred
to earlier decisions in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh [(1977) 4 SCC 39 : 1977 SCC
(Cri) 533] , Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal [(1979) 3 SCC 4 : 1979 SCC (Cri)
609] and Supdt. & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, W.B. v. Anil Kumar Bhunja
[(1979) 4 SCC 274 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 1038] and held thus: (SCC p. 85, para 7) "From
the above discussion it seems well settled that at the Sections 227-228 stage the court
is required to evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to finding
out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of
all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. The court may for P a g e | 19 this
limited purpose sift the evidence as it cannot be expected even at the initial stage to
accept all that the prosecution states as gospel truth even if it is opposed to common
sense or the broad probabilities of the case."
(emphasis supplied)
6. In our view the aforesaid exercise of appreciating the materials produced by the prosecution at
the stage of framing of the charge is wholly unjustified. The entire approach of the High Court
appears to be as if the Court was deciding the case as to whether the accused are guilty or not. It was
done without considering the allegations of conspiracy relating to the charge under Section 120-B.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 9
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
In most of the cases, it is only from the available circumstantial evidence an inference of conspiracy
is to be drawn. Further, the High Court failed to consider that medicines are normally sold at a fixed
price and in any set of circumstances, it was for the prosecution to lead necessary evidence at the
time of trial to establish its case that purchase of medicines for the Cancer Hospital at Indore was at
a much higher price than the prevailing market rate. Further again non-joining of the two remaining
members to the Purchase Committee cannot be a ground for quashing the charge. After framing the
charge and recording the evidence, if the Court finds that other members of the Purchase Committee
were also involved, it is open to the Court to exercise its power under Section P a g e | 20 319 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. Not only that, the Court erroneously considered the alleged statement of
the manufacturing company that quotations given by M/s Allied Medicine Agency, Indore were
genuine without there being any cross-examination. The High Court ignored the allegation that
many of the items have not been purchased and the amount is paid on bogus vouchers. Hence, there
was no justifiable reason for the High Court to quash the charge framed by the trial court."
(emphasis supplied.)
19. In Om Wati v. State thr. Delhi Administration (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court, whilst
placing reliance on the decisions in Anil Kumar Bhunja (supra), State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh
(supra) and Kanti Bhadra Shah (supra), upheld the order of the Trial Court for framing charges and
rendered the following observations:
"7. Section 227 of the Code provides that if upon consideration of record of the case
and the documents submitted therewith, the Judge considers that there is no
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused
for which he is required to record his reasons for so doing. No reasons are required to
be recorded when the charges are framed against the accused persons. This Court in
Kanti Bhadra Shah v. State of W.B. [(2000) 1 SCC 722 :
2000 SCC (Cri) 303] held that there is no legal requirement that the trial court
should write an order showing the reasons for framing a charge. Taking note of the
burden of the pending cases on the courts, P a g e | 21 it was held: (SCC pp. 725-26,
paras 11-12) "11. Even in cases instituted otherwise than on a police report the
Magistrate is required to write an order showing the reasons only if he is to discharge
the accused. This is clear from Section 245. As per the first sub-section of Section
245, if a Magistrate, after taking all the evidence considers that no case against the
accused has been made out which if unrebutted would warrant his conviction, he
shall discharge the accused. As per sub- section (2) the Magistrate is empowered to
discharge the accused at any previous stage of the case if he considers the charge to
be groundless. Under both sub-sections he is obliged to record his reasons for doing
so. In this context it is pertinent to point out that even in a trial before a Court of
Session, the Judge is required to record reasons only if he decides to discharge the
accused (vide Section 227 of the Code). But if he is to frame the charge he may do so
without recording his reasons for showing why he framed the charge.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 10
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
12. If there is no legal requirement that the trial court should write an order showing
the reasons for framing a charge, why should the already burdened trial courts be
further burdened with such an extra work. The time has reached to adopt all possible
measures to expedite the court procedures and to chalk out measures to avert all
roadblocks causing avoidable delays. If a Magistrate is to write detailed orders at
different stages merely because the counsel would address arguments at all stages,
the snail-paced progress of proceedings in trial courts would further be slowed down.
We are coming across P a g e | 22 interlocutory orders of Magistrates and Sessions
Judges running into several pages. We can appreciate if such a detailed order has
been passed for culminating the proceedings before them. But it is quite unnecessary
to write detailed orders at this stage, such as issuing process, remanding the accused
to custody, framing of charges, passing over to next stages in the trial. It is a salutary
guideline that when orders rejecting or granting bail are passed, the court should
avoid expressing one way or the other on contentious issues, except in cases such as
those falling within Section 37 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985."
8. At the stage of passing the order in terms of Section 227 of the Code, the court has merely to
peruse the evidence in order to find out whether or not there is a sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused. If upon consideration, the court is satisfied that a prima facie case is made out
against the accused, the Judge must proceed to frame charge in terms of Section 228 of the Code.
Only in a case where it is shown that the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce to
prove the guilt of the accused, even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or
rebutted by defence evidence cannot show that the accused committed the crime, then and then
alone the court can discharge the accused. The court is not required to enter into meticulous
consideration of evidence and material placed before it at this stage. This Court in Stree Atyachar
Virodhi Parishad v.
P a g e | 23 Dilip Nathumal Chordia [(1989) 1 SCC 715 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 285] cautioned the High
Courts to be loath in interfering at the stage of framing the charges against the accused.
Self-restraint on the part of the High Court should be the rule unless there is a glaring injustice
staring the court in the face. The opinion on many matters can differ depending upon the person
who views it. There may be as many opinions on a particular point, as there are courts but that
would not justify the High Court to interdict the trial. Generally, it would be appropriate for the
High Court to allow the trial to proceed.
9. Dealing with the scope of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code and the limitations imposed upon the
court at the initial stage of framing the charge, this Court in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh [(1977) 4
SCC 39 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 533 : AIR 1977 SC 2018] held: (SCC pp. 41-42, para 4) "Reading the two
provisions together in juxtaposition, as they have got to be, it would be clear that at the beginning
and the initial stage of the trial the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the Prosecutor
proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the
probable defence of the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial to
consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 11
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is
to be finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is P a
g e | 24 not exactly to be applied at the stage of deciding the matter under Section 227 or Section
228 of the Code. At that stage the court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground for conviction
of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end in his conviction. Strong suspicion against the
accused, if the matter remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at
the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads the court
to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is not
open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
presumption of the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the sense of
the law governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to be guilty
unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the court
should proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce to
prove the guilt of the accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross- examination or
rebutted by the defence, if any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then there will
be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial. An exhaustive list of the circumstances to
indicate as to what will lead to one conclusion or the other is neither possible nor advisable. We may
just illustrate the difference of the law by one more example. If the scales of pan as to the guilt or
innocence of the accused are something like even at the conclusion of the trial, P a g e | 25 then, on
the theory of benefit of doubt the case is to end in his acquittal. But if, on the other hand, it is so at
the initial stage of making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then in such a situation
ordinarily and generally the order which will have to be made will be one under Section 228 and not
under Section 227."
10. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Supdt. & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, W.B. v. Anil
Kumar Bhunja [(1979) 4 SCC 274 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 1038 : AIR 1980 SC 52] reminded the courts that
at the initial stage of framing of charges, the prosecution evidence does not commence. The court
has, therefore, to consider the question of framing the charges on general considerations of the
material placed before it by the investigating agency. At this stage, the truth, veracity and effect of
the judgment which the prosecution proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged. The
standard of test, proof and judgment which is to be applied finally before finding an accused guilty
or otherwise is not exactly to be applied at the stage of framing the charge. Even on the basis of a
strong suspicion founded on materials before it, the court can form a presumptive opinion regarding
the existence of factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged and in that event be justified in
framing the charges against the accused in respect of the commission of the offence alleged to have
been committed by them. Relying upon its earlier judgments in Ramesh Singh [(1977) 4 SCC 39 :
1977 SCC (Cri) 533 : AIR 1977 SC 2018] P a g e | 26 and Anil Kumar Bhunja cases [(1979) 4 SCC 274
: 1979 SCC (Cri) 1038 : AIR 1980 SC 52] this Court again in Satish CRL.REV.P. 262/2016, Mehra v.
Delhi Admn. [(1996) 9 SCC 766 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 1104] reiterated: (SCC pp. 769-70, para 9) "9.
Considerations which should weigh with the Sessions Court at this stage have been well designed by
Parliament through Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short 'the Code') which reads
thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 12
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
'227. Discharge.--If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents
submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the
prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons
for so doing.' Section 228 contemplates the stage after the case survives the stage
envisaged in the former section. When the court is of opinion that there is ground to
presume that the accused has committed an offence the procedure laid down therein
has to be adopted. When those two sections are put in juxtaposition with each other
the test to be adopted becomes discernible: Is there sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused? It is axiomatic that the standard of proof normally adhered to at
the final stage is not to be applied at the stage where the scope of consideration is
where there is 'sufficient ground for proceeding'."
P a g e | 27
12. We allow this appeal by setting aside the order of the High Court and upholding
the order of the trial court. We would again remind the High Courts of their statutory
obligation to not to interfere at the initial stage of framing the charges merely on
hypothesis, imagination and far-fetched reasons which in law amount to interdicting
the trial against the accused persons. Unscrupulous litigants should be discouraged
from protracting the trial and preventing culmination of the criminal cases by having
resort to uncalled-for and unjustified litigation under the cloak of technicalities of
law."
(emphasis supplied.)
20. Whilst dealing with an order on charge, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Soma Chakravarty v.
State through CBI, reported as (2007) 5 SCC 403, relied upon the principles laid down in Union of
India v. Major J.S. Khanna, reported as (1972) 3 SCC 873; State of Maharashtra v. Som Nath Thapa,
(supra); and L. Chandraiah v. State of A.P., reported as (2003) 12 SCC 670 and held as follows on
the scope of powers of the Court whilst framing charges:
"10. The settled legal position is that if on the basis of material on record the Court
could form an opinion that the accused might have committed offence it can frame
the charge, though for conviction the conclusion is required to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused has committed the offence. At the time of framing
of the P a g e | 28 charges the probative value of the material on record cannot be
gone into, and the material brought on record by the prosecution has to be accepted
as true... Before framing a charge the court must apply its judicial mind on the
material placed on record and must be satisfied that the commission of offence by the
accused was possible. Whether, in fact, the accused committed the offence, can only
be decided in the trial. *****
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 13
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
19. Charge may although be directed to be framed when there exists a strong
suspicion but it is also trite that the Court must come to a prima facie finding that
there exist some materials therefor. Suspicion alone, without anything more, cannot
form the basis therefor or held to be sufficient for framing charge."
(emphasis supplied.)
21. In Sheoraj Singh Ahlawat & ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh reported as (2013) 11 SCC 476, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court discussed the legal position with respect to framing of charges as
hereunder:
"15. ...This Court explained the legal position and the approach to be adopted by the
Court at the stage of framing of charges or directing discharge in the following words:
(Onkar Nath Mishra v. State (NCT) of Delhi, (2008) 2 SCC 561) "11. It is trite that at
the stage of framing of charge the court is required to evaluate the material and
documents on record with a view to finding out if the facts emerging therefrom, P a g
e | 29 taken at their face value, disclosed the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. At that stage, the court is not expected to go deep
into the probative value of the material on record. What needs to be considered is
whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence has been committed and not
a ground for convicting the accused has been made out. At that stage, even strong
suspicion founded on material which leads the court to form a presumptive opinion
as to the existence of the factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged would
justify the framing of charge against the accused in respect of the commission of that
offence."
(emphasis supplied)
16. Support for the above view was drawn by this Court from earlier decisions rendered in State of
Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy 1977 Cri.LJ 1125, State of Maharashtra & Ors. v. Som Nath Thapa and
Ors. 1996 Cri.LJ 2448 and State of M.P. v. Mohanlal Soni 2000 Cri.LJ 3504. In Som Nath's case
(supra) the legal position was summed up as under:
"32. ...if on the basis of materials on record, a court could come to the conclusion that
commission of the offence is a probable consequence, a case for framing of charge
exists. To put it differently, if the court were to think that the accused might have*
committed the offence it can frame the charge, though for conviction the conclusion
is required P a g e | 30 to be that the accused has* committed the offence. It is
apparent that at the stage of framing of a charge, probative value of the materials on
record cannot be gone into; the materials brought on record by the prosecution has to
be accepted as true at that stage." (emphasis supplied)
17. So also in Mohanlal case (supra) this Court referred to several previous decisions and held that
the judicial opinion regarding the approach to be adopted for framing of charge is that such charges
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 14
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
should be framed if the Court prima facie finds that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against
the accused. The Court is not required to appreciate evidence as if to determine whether the
material produced was sufficient to convict the accused. The following passage from the decision in
Mohanlal case (supra) is in this regard apposite:
"8. The crystallized judicial view is that at the stage of framing charge, the court has
to prima facie consider whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused. The court is not required to appreciate evidence to conclude whether the
materials produced are sufficient or not for convicting the accused.""
(emphasis supplied.)
22. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Duli Chand v. Delhi Administration reported as (1975) 4 SCC
649, observed as hereunder:
P a g e | 31 "4. ... Now the jurisdiction of the High Court in a criminal revision
application is severely restricted and it cannot embark upon a reappreciation of the
evidence, but even so, the learned Single Judge of the High Court who heard the
revision application, examined the evidence afresh at the instance of the appellant.
This was, however, of no avail, as the learned Single Judge found that the conclusion
reached by the lower courts that the appellant was guilty of gross negligence, was
correct and there was no reason to interfere with the conviction of the appellant. The
learned Single Judge accordingly confirmed the conviction and sentence recorded
against the appellant and dismissed the revision application. Hence the present
appeal by special leave obtained from this Court.
5. Now it is obvious that the question of whether the appellant was guilty of
negligence in driving the bus and the death of the deceased was caused on account of
his negligent driving is a question of fact which depends for its determination on an
appreciation of the evidence. Both the learned Magistrate trying the case at the
original stage and the learned Additional Sessions Judge hearing the appeal arrived,
on an assessment of the evidence, at a concurrent finding of fact that the death of the
deceased was caused by negligent driving of the bus by the appellant. The High Court
in revision was exercising supervisory jurisdiction of a restricted nature and,
therefore, it would have been justified in refusing to reappreciate the evidence for the
purposes of determining whether the concurrent finding of fact P a g e | 32 reached
by the learned Magistrate and the learned Additional Sessions Judge was correct. But
even so, the High Court reviewed the evidence presumably for the purpose of
satisfying itself that there was evidence in support of the finding of fact reached by
the two subordinate courts and that the finding of fact was not unreasonable or
perverse. The High Court came to the conclusion that the evidence clearly established
that the death of the deceased was caused on account of the negligent driving of the
bus by the appellant. When three courts have, on an appreciation of the evidence,
arrived at a concurrent finding of fact in regard to the guilt of the appellant, it is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 15
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
difficult to see how this Court can, in the exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction
under Article 136 of the Constitution, interfere with such finding of fact. We have had
occasion to say before and we may emphasise it once again, that this Court is not a
regular court of appeal to which every judgment of the High Court in criminal case
may be brought up for scrutinising its correctness. It is not the practice of this Court
to reappreciate the evidence for the purpose of examining whether the finding of fact
concurrently arrived at by the High Court and the subordinate courts is correct or
not. It is only in rare and exceptional cases where there is some manifest illegality or
grave and serious miscarriage of justice that this Court would interfere with such
finding of fact. Here, not only is the appreciation of the oral evidence by the learned
Magistrate, the learned Additional Sessions Judge and the High Court eminently
correct, but there are certain tell-tale P a g e | 33 circumstances which clearly support
the finding of fact reached by them."
(emphasis supplied.)
23. In Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar, (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court opined that the
provisions of section 397 of the CrPC give the High Court jurisdiction to consider the correctness,
legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order and as to the regularity of the proceedings of
any inferior court. This jurisdiction ought to be exercised, normally, CRL.REV.P. 262/2016,
CRL.REV.P. 263/2016, CRL.REV.P. 264/2016 & CRL.REV.P. 265/2016 without dwelling at length
upon the facts and evidence of the case. The Court in revision ought to consider the materials only to
satisfy itself about the correctness, legality and propriety of the findings, sentence or order and
refrain from substituting its own conclusion on an elaborate consideration of evidence.
24. The Delhi High Court, in an unreported decision in Veena Ajmani v. State & ors. rendered in
Criminal Revision Petition No. 281 of 2012; and Criminal Revision Petition No. 282 of 2012, where
final orders on charge had been assailed, observed as hereunder:
"28. The Supreme Court in P. Vijayan vs State of Kerala and Another, reported at
(2010) 2 SCC 398 has held that the consideration of the P a g e | 34 court at the stage
of framing of charges is for the limited purpose of ascertaining whether or not there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. Whether the material in the
hands of the prosecution is sufficient or not are matters of trial. Moreover, the issue
whether the trial will end in conviction or acquittal is also immaterial. The relevant
portion of the decision is as reproduced below:
12. ...This Court has thus held that whereas strong suspicion may not take the place of
the proof at the trial stage, yet it may be sufficient for the satisfaction of the Trial
Judge in order to frame a charge against the accused.
25. As discussed earlier, Section 227 in the new Code confers special power on the Judge to
discharge an accused at the threshold if upon consideration of the records and documents, he find
that "there is not sufficient ground" for proceeding against the accused. In other words, his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 16
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
consideration of the record and document at that stage is for the limited purpose of ascertaining
whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. If the Judge comes to a
conclusion that there is sufficient ground to proceed, he will frame a charge under Section 228, if
not, he will discharge the accused. This provision was introduced in the Code to avoid wastage of
public time when a prima facie case was not disclosed and to save the accused from avoidable
harassment and expenditure.
P a g e | 35
26. In the case on hand, though, the learned Trial Judge has not assigned detailed reasons for
dismissing the discharge petition filed under Section 227, it is clear from his order that after
consideration of the relevant materials charge had been framed for offence under Section 302 read
with Section 34 IPC and because of the same, he dismissed the discharge petition. After evaluating
the materials produced by the prosecution and after considering the probability of the case, the
Judge being satisfied by the existence of sufficient grounds against the appellant and another
accused framed a charge. Whether the materials at the hands of the prosecution are sufficient or not
are matters for trial. At this stage, it cannot be claimed that there is no sufficient ground for
proceeding against the appellant and discharge is the only remedy. Further, whether the trial will
end in conviction or acquittal is also immaterial. All these relevant aspects have been carefully
considered by the High Court and it rightly affirmed the order passed by the Trial Judge dismissing
the discharge petition filed by A3-appellant herein. We fully agree with the said conclusion.""
(Emphasis supplied.)
25. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ashish Chadha v. Asha Kumari (supra) upheld the
order on charge; and held that the High Court overstepped its revisional jurisdiction
by appraising the evidence in the case. In this regard, it was further observed as
follows:
P a g e | 36 "20. ... It is the trial court which has to decide whether evidence on record
is sufficient to make out a prima facie case against the accused so as to frame charge
against him. Pertinently, even the trial court cannot conduct roving and fishing
inquiry into the evidence. It has only to consider whether the evidence collected by
the prosecution discloses prima facie case against the accused or not."
26. In State of Tamil Nadu v. Mariya Anton Vijay (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court, whilst setting
aside the order of the High Court, observed that the approach of the High Court, in exercise of its
inherent powers and under section 397 of CrPC, was wholly unwarranted and illegal. It was further
observed that the order had been rendered by overlooking the principles laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. S.B. Johari (supra), inasmuch as by way of its order, the High
Court went into the questions of fact, appreciated the materials produced in support of the
charge-sheet, drew inference on reading the statements of the accused, and applied the law, which
according to the High Court, had application to the facts of the case; and then came to a conclusion
that no prima facie case had been made out against any of the accused for their prosecution.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 17
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
27. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Palwinder Singh v. Balwinder Singh (supra), dealt with the
decision of the High Court in a revision application, observed that, (i) the High Court committed a
serious error in rendering the decision, insofar as it entered into the P a g e | 37 realm of
appreciation of evidence at the stage of the framing of the charges itself; (ii) the jurisdiction of the
learned Sessions Judge while exercising power under Section 227 of the CrPC is limited; (iii) charges
can be framed on the basis of strong suspicion; and (iv) marshalling and appreciation of evidence is
not in the domain of the Court at that point of time.
28. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander & anr. (supra), on the question
of the powers of the High Court in exercise of its revisional and inherent jurisdiction, whilst dealing
with a challenge to an order framing charges, was pleased to lay down the following legal principles:
"25. Having examined the interrelationship of these two very significant provisions of
the Code, let us now examine the scope of interference under any of these provisions
in relation to quashing the charge. We have already indicated above that framing of
charge is the first major step in a criminal trial where the court is expected to apply
its mind to the entire record and documents placed therewith before the court.
Taking cognizance of an offence has been stated to necessitate an application of mind
by the court but framing of charge is a major event where the court considers the
possibility of discharging the accused of the offence with which he is charged or
requiring the accused to face trial. There are different categories of cases where the
court may not proceed with the trial and may discharge the accused or pass such P a g
e | 38 other orders as may be necessary keeping in view the facts of a given case. In a
case where, upon considering the record of the case and documents submitted before
it, the court finds that no offence is made out or there is a legal bar to such
prosecution under the provisions of the Code or any other law for the time being in
force and there is a bar and there exists no ground to proceed against the accused, the
court may discharge the accused. There can be cases where such record reveals the
matter to be so predominantly of a civil nature that it neither leaves any scope for an
element of criminality nor does it satisfy the ingredients of a criminal offence with
which the accused is charged. In such cases, the court may discharge him or quash
the proceedings in exercise of its powers under these two provisions.
26. This further raises a question as to the wrongs which become actionable in
accordance with law. It may be purely a civil wrong or purely a criminal offence or a
civil wrong as also a criminal offence constituting both on the same set of facts. But if
the records disclose commission of a criminal offence and the ingredients of the
offence are satisfied, then such criminal proceedings cannot be quashed merely
because a civil wrong has also been committed. The power cannot be invoked to stifle
or scuttle a legitimate prosecution. The factual foundation and ingredients of an
offence being satisfied, the court will not either dismiss a complaint or quash such
proceedings in exercise of its inherent or original jurisdiction. In Indian Oil Corpn. v.
NEPC India Ltd. [(2006) 6 SCC 736 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 188] this P a g e | 39 Court
took the similar view and upheld the order of the High Court declining to quash the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 18
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
criminal proceedings because a civil contract between the parties was pending.
27. Having discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions i.e. Section
397 and Section 482 of the Code and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction, now it
will be appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to which the courts
should exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not only difficult but is inherently
impossible to state with precision such principles. At best and upon objective analysis
of various judgments of this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to be
considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of
charge either in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code
or together, as the case may be:
27.1. Though there are no limits of the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings, particularly, the
charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases. 27.2.
The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made from the
record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie establish the offence or not. If
the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable that no P a g e | 40 prudent person
can ever reach such a conclusion and where the basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not
satisfied then the Court may interfere.
27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the evidence is
needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at the stage of framing of
charge or quashing of charge.
27.4. Where the exercise of such power is absolutely essential to prevent patent miscarriage of
justice and for correcting some grave error that might be committed by the subordinate courts even
in such cases, the High Court should be loath to interfere, at the threshold, to throttle the
prosecution in exercise of its inherent powers. 27.5. Where there is an express legal bar enacted in
any of the provisions of the Code or any specific law in force to the very initiation or institution and
continuance of such criminal proceedings, such a bar is intended to provide specific protection to an
accused. 27.6. The Court has a duty to balance the freedom of a person and the right of the
complainant or prosecution to investigate and prosecute the offender.
27.7. The process of the court cannot be permitted to be used for an oblique or ultimate/ulterior
purpose.
27.8. Where the allegations made and as they appeared from the record and documents annexed
therewith to predominantly give rise P a g e | 41 and constitute a "civil wrong" with no "element of
criminality" and does not satisfy the basic ingredients of a criminal offence, the court may be
justified in quashing the charge. Even in such cases, the court would not embark upon the critical
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 19
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
analysis of the evidence. 27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that
it cannot examine the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is
sufficient material on the basis of which the case would end in a conviction; the court is concerned
primarily with the allegations taken as a whole whether they will constitute an offence and, if so, is it
an abuse of the process of court leading to injustice. 27.10. It is neither necessary nor is the court
called upon to hold a full- fledged enquiry or to appreciate evidence collected by the investigating
agencies to find out whether it is a case of acquittal or conviction.
27.11. Where allegations give rise to a civil claim and also amount to an offence, merely because a
civil claim is maintainable, does not mean that a criminal complaint cannot be maintained. 27.12. In
exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 228 and/or under Section 482, the Court cannot take into
consideration external materials given by an accused for reaching the conclusion that no offence was
disclosed or that there was possibility of his acquittal. The Court has to consider the record and
documents annexed therewith by the prosecution. 27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the
P a g e | 42 rule of continuous prosecution. Where the offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court
should be more inclined to permit continuation of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial
stage. The Court is not expected to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility and
reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed prima facie. 27.14. Where the
charge-sheet, report under Section 173(2) of the Code, suffers from fundamental legal defects, the
Court may be well within its jurisdiction to frame a charge. 27.15. Coupled with any or all of the
above, where the Court finds that it would amount to abuse of process of the Code or that the
interest of justice favours, otherwise it may quash the charge. The power is to be exercised ex debito
justitiae i.e. to do real and substantial justice for administration of which alone, the courts exist.
[Ref. State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha [(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 283 : AIR 1982 SC
949] ; Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre [(1988) 1 SCC 692 : 1988
SCC (Cri) 234] ; Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary [(1992) 4 SCC 305 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 36 : AIR 1993 SC
892] ; Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill [(1995) 6 SCC 194 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 1059] ; G.
Sagar Suri v. State of U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 513] ; Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P.
[(2003) 3 SCC 11 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 703] ; Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate [(1998) 5
SCC 749 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1400 : AIR 1998 SC 128] ; State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma [(1996) 7 SCC 705
P a g e | 43 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 497] ; Ganesh Narayan Hegde v. S. Bangarappa [(1995) 4 SCC 41 : 1995
SCC (Cri) 634] ; Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque [(2005) 1 SCC 122 :
2005 SCC (Cri) 283] ; Medchl Chemicals & Pharma (P) Ltd. v. Biological E. Ltd. [(2000) 3 SCC 269 :
2000 SCC (Cri) 615 : AIR 2000 SC 1869] ; Shakson Belthissor v. State of Kerala [(2009) 14 SCC 466
: (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 1412] ; V.V.S. Rama Sharma v. State of U.P. [(2009) 7 SCC 234 : (2009) 3 SCC
(Cri) 356] ; Chunduru Siva Ram Krishna v. Peddi Ravindra Babu [(2009) 11 SCC 203 : (2009) 3 SCC
(Cri) 1297] ; Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar [(1987) 1 SCC 288 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 82] ; State of
Bihar v. P.P. Sharma [1992 Supp (1) SCC 222 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 192 : AIR 1991 SC 1260] ; Lalmuni
Devi v. State of Bihar [(2001) 2 SCC 17 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 275] ; M. Krishnan v. Vijay Singh[(2001) 8
SCC 645 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 19] ; Savita v. State of Rajasthan [(2005) 12 SCC 338 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri)
571] and S.M. Datta v. State of Gujarat [(2001) 7 SCC 659 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 1361 : 2001 SCC (L&S)
1201] .] 27.16. These are the principles which individually and preferably cumulatively (one or more)
be taken into consideration as precepts to exercise of extraordinary and wide plenitude and
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code by the High Court. Where the factual foundation for an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 20
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
offence has been laid down, the courts should be reluctant and should not hasten to quash the
proceedings even on the premise that one or two ingredients have not P a g e | 44 been stated or do
not appear to be satisfied if there is substantial compliance with the requirements of the offence."
(Emphasis supplied.)
29. Considering the conspectus of the decisions discussed hereinabove, the following legal position
emerges with regard to the law on charge; the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court; and the
powers exercisable by the High Court in revisional jurisdiction whilst dealing with an order on
charge:
(i) The jurisdiction of the Trial Court whilst exercising power under Section 397 of
the CrPC is limited.
(ii) At the stage of charge, the Trial Court has to merely peruse the evidence in order
to find out whether there is a sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused or
not.
(iii) If upon consideration of the material placed before it, the Trial Court is satisfied
that a prima facie case is made out against the accused, it must proceed to frame
charge in terms of Section 228 of the CrPC.
(iv) The Trial Court cannot conduct a roving and fishing inquiry into the evidence or
a meticulous consideration thereof at this stage.
Marshalling and appreciation of evidence, and going into the probative value of the material on
record, is not in the domain of the Court at the time of framing of charges.
P a g e | 45
(v) In other words, at the beginning and the initial stage of the trial, the truth, veracity and effect of
the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged, and nor is
any weight to be attached to the probable defence of the accused. Thus, a 'mini trial' is not to be
conducted.
(vi) It is not obligatory for the Trial Court at the time of framing of charges, to consider in any detail
and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be incompatible with the
innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is to be finally applied
before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be applied
at the stage of deciding the matter under Section 227 or Section 228 of the CrPC.
(vii) Thus, it is axiomatic that at the initial stage if there is a strong/grave suspicion which leads the
Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, then it
is not open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 21
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
(viii) The Trial Court may sift the evidence to determine whether the facts emerging therefrom taken
at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence or not.
P a g e | 46
(ix) Detailed orders are not necessary whilst framing charges and contentious issues are not
required to be answered by the Trial Court at the stage of framing of charges.
(x) Only in a case where it is shown that the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce to
prove the guilt of the accused, even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or
rebutted by defence evidence cannot show that the accused committed the crime, then and then
alone the Court can discharge the accused.
(xi) Further, if the scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the accused are something like even at
the initial stage of making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then, in such a situation,
ordinarily and generally, the order which will have to be made will be one under Section 228 and not
under Section 227 of the CrPC.
(xii) The provisions of section 397 of the CrPC empower the High Court with supervisory
jurisdiction to consider the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order and as
to the regularity of the proceedings of any inferior court.
(xiii) Revisional jurisdiction is severely restricted, and ought not to be exercised in a routine and
casual manner. It has to be exercised, normally, without dwelling at length upon the facts and
appraising the evidence of the case.
P a g e | 47
(xiv) Further, the Court in revision ought to refrain from substituting its own conclusion on an
elaborate consideration of evidence.
(xv) Whilst in revisional jurisdiction, the High Court cannot enter into the realm of appreciation of
evidence at the stage of the framing of the charges itself.
(xvi) The High Court, under statutory obligation, ought to be loath in interfering at the stage of
framing the charges against the accused, merely on hypothesis, imagination and far-fetched reasons
which in law amount to interdicting the trial against the accused person. Thus, self-restraint on the
part of the High Court should be the rule unless there is a glaring injustice staring the Court in the
face. (xvii) Revisional powers could be exercised only when it is shown that,
(a) there is a legal bar against the continuance of the criminal proceedings; (b) the framing of charge
or the facts as stated in the first information report even if they are taken at the face value and
accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence for which the accused has been charged;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 22
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
(c) where the exercise of revisional power is absolutely essential to prevent patent miscarriage of
justice and for correcting some grave error that might be committed by the subordinate courts.
P a g e | 48 (xviii)Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution. Where
the offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to permit continuation of
prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The Court is not expected to marshal the
records with a view to decide admissibility and reliability of the documents or records but is an
opinion formed prima facie.
30. Further, there are two branches of evidence in a criminal case, direct evidence and
circumstantial evidence. In relation to the often-reviled circumstantial evidence, the American
philosopher and author, Mr. Henry David Thoreau, [Journal, November 11, 1850] wrote as follows:
'Some circumstantial evidence is very strong, as when you find trout in the milk.'
31. If we had lived in Thoreau's time, when there were no health department regulations and
consumer protection agencies to oversee the contents of milk and when it was a common practice by
milk suppliers to increase the volume of the milk by adding water, we would have well understood
that a trout in our milk would strongly suggest that our milk supplier had added water from a
nearby stream. These are the natural inferences which Courts are called upon to draw on the basis of
circumstantial evidence. Cases of direct evidence, on the other hand, are as plain as the nose on
one's face. Whatever one P a g e | 49 perceives with any of his physical senses is direct evidence and
every other piece of evidence is circumstantial.
32. On the basis of the above discussion and in view of the statements of the witnesses specially the
parents and friends of the deceased, in my view, prima facie, there was sufficient ground for
proceeding against the Revisionist. Further, there is adequate material for presuming that the
Revisionist had committed the offences for which he has been charged. Therefore, the Ld. Trial
Court cannot be faulted for forming a presumptive opinion regarding the existence of the factual
ingredients constituting the offences alleged, and for the framing of charges on the basis of a strong
suspicion founded on the material hereinbefore elaborated.
33. In view of the foregoing; the decisions relied upon by the Revisionists in (1) R. Mohan v. State
[Criminal Appeal No. 611 of 2011]; (2) (2002) 5 SCC 371, Sohan Raj Sharma v. State of Haryana
[Criminal Appeal No. 1464 of 2007] and Kishori Lal v. State of MP [Criminal Appeal No. 1115 of
1999]; (3)Dilawa Babu Kurane v. State of Maharastra : (2002) 2 SCC 135; (4) Suresh v. State of
Maharastra: AIR 2001 SC 1375; (5) State of MP v. Mohanlal Soni : AIR 2000 SC 2583 and (6)
Shyam Sunder Sharma v. State : 2002 CrLJ 517 (Del) do not advance the case of the Revisionist or
come to his aid, in as much as, the revisional P a g e | 50 powers may be exercised only when it is
considered absolutely essential so to do, in order to prevent patent miscarriage of justice or to
correct some grave error. In Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court
clearly postulated that the High Court, whilst exercising revisional jurisdiction should be loath to
interfere at the threshold to throttle the prosecution in exercise of its powers. The High Courts were
directed not to interfere unduly, or to determine whether there was sufficient material to conclude
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 23
R. Maringchan Maring vs The State Of Manipur on 22 April, 2024
that the case would end in a conviction. The Courts were further directed, at the stage of framing of
charges, to be concerned primarily with, whether the allegations taken as a whole would constitute
the commission of an offence. The Courts were also instructed to be more inclined to permit the
continuation of prosecution, rather than venture into the realm of a full- fledged appreciation of
evidence.
34. For the reasons aforesaid, I am of the opinion that the learned Trial Court proceeded correctly,
in exercise of its powers, to frame charges against the Revisionist. The materials on record give rise
to strong suspicion that the Revisionist committed the offences for which the charges were framed
against him by way of the impugned order.
35. Consequently, there exist no circumstances to warrant interference with the impugned order by
this Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction.
P a g e | 51
36. The present Criminal Revision Petition is accordingly dismissed, with no order as to costs.
37. The learned Trial Court is directed to proceed further with the trial, in accordance with law.
38. The Trial Court Records be sent back, forthwith.
CHIEF JUSTICE FR/NFR Sushil
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64530329/ 24
