R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July,
2020
Author: R.Suresh Kumar
Bench: R.Suresh Kumar
W.P.(MD)No.7472 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 27.07.2020
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE R.SURESH KUMAR
W.P.(MD)No.7472 of 2020
R.Paul Murugan ... Petitioner
-Vs-
1.The District Educational Officer,
Vallioor, Tirunelveli District.
2.The Block Educational Officer II,
Vallioor, Tirunelveli District. ...Respondents
Prayer: Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of Constitution of India,
to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to call for the records
relating to impugned proceedings of second respondent herein in
Na.Ka.No.90/2020 dated 16.06.2020 and quash the same and
consequently direct the respondents herein to step up the pay of the
petitioner on par with petitioner's junior with effect from 05.12.2016
with all monetary benefits.
For Petitioner : Mr.T.Pon Ramkumar
For Respondents : Mr.A.Thiyagarajan
Government Advocate
1/12
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 1
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.7472 of 2020
ORDER
Prayer sought for herein is for a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the records relating to
impugned proceedings of the second respondent herein in Na.Ka.No.90/2020, dated 16.06.2020
and quash the same and consequently, direct the respondents herein, to step up the pay of the
petitioner on par with petitioner's junior with effect from 05.12.2016 with all monetary benefits.
2.The short facts leading to file this writ petition are that, the petitioner was initially appointed as
Secondary Grade Teacher on 01.08.1995, subsequently, his service was regularized with effect from
01.08.1995. He has completed the probation period on 31.07.1997 and he has been brought to the
Valliyoor Panchayat Union on 22.07.1998, subsequently, he reached the selection grade on
01.08.2005 and has been promoted as Primary School Head Master on 01.06.2013. However, one
M.kanagaraj, who was appointed as Secondary Grade Teacher on 14.08.1995 and his service was
regularized on 14.08.1995 and he completed the probation period on 13.08.1997, he was brought to
the same Valliyoor Union on 07.07.1999 and he reached the selection grade http://www.judis.nic.in
in Secondary Grade post on 14.08.2005 and Special Grade on 14.08.2015 and he was promoted as
Primary School Headmaster on 08.08.2016. Therefore, the grade for both the petitioner and his
junior if is compared, in all aspects he travelled only behind the petitioner. However, the said
individual Kanagaraj is getting a higher pay, whereas the petitioner is getting a lower pay. Therefore,
this pay disparity has to be removed and the correct pay has to be paid to the petitioner and in this
regard, when the petitioner approached the respondents, the respondents passed the impugned
order dated 16.06.2020 stating the following:
“jpUney;Ntyp khtl;lk; ts;spa+h; xd;wpak; nrl;bFsk; GJkid Cuhl;rp xd;wpa Muk;gg;
gs;sp jiyikahrphpah; jpU.R.ghy; KUfd;
vd;ghh; khwd; Fsk; Cuhl;rp xd;wpa Muk;gg; gs;sp jiyikahrphpah; jpU.M.fdfuhi[
xg;gpl;L %j;Njhh; ,isNahh; fzfpl;L Cjpa Kuz;ghLfisa Ntz;b tpz;zg;gk;
nra;Js;shh;.
ghh;it nray; Kiwfspd;gb xNu
xd;wpaj;jpy; epakdk; ngw;wth;fSf;F
kl;LNk ,isNahh; %j;Njhh; Cjpa
Kuz;ghLfis rhp nra;a ,aYk; vd;gjdhy;
fUj;JU ,j;Jld; jpUg;gg;gLfpwJ.
tl;lhuf; fy;tp mYtyh;
ts;spa+h;”
Challenging the same, the present writ petition has been filed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 2
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
3.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that, the reason
cited in the impugned order stating that, for those who have been appointed in the
same Panchayat Union alone the comparison of junior-senior pay disparity can be
made and for those, who are appointed in various Unions, such comparison cannot
be made.
4.The said reason, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner, may not be
justifiable and sustainable as this issue has engaged before this Court in several writ
petitions, where number of orders have been passed.
5.In this regard, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner relied upon the
judgments made in the following writ petitions:
(i) W.P(MD).No.742 of 2018, dated 07.02.2018
(ii) W.P(MD).No.8046 of 2018, dated 24.4.2018
(iii) W.P(MD).No.9647 of 2018, dated 26.04.2018
6.By relying upon these judgments, the learned counsel for the petitioner would
submit that, the issue is already covered in those judgments and the number of other
judgments. Therefore, the reasons cited in the impugned order cannot be sustained.
http://www.judis.nic.in
7.Heard the learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents, who would submit that,
the said impugned order stating the reason that those who have been appointed in different places
and have been brought into the same Union cannot be compared for the purpose of pay parity and
therefore, the said reason cited in the impugned order would very well be sustainable. Hence, the
impugned order does not require any interference from this Court.
8.I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for both sides and have perused
the materials placed before this Court.
9.In order to appreciate the earlier order passed by this Court, where, in the aforesaid cited
judgments, I had an occasion to consider the similar issue, especially in W.P(MD).No.9647 of 2018
in the matter of V.Helon Baby Vs., The District Elementary Educational Officer, Nagercoil and
another, dated 26.04.2018, where I have passed the following order:
“5.I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner as well as the learned
Special Government Pleader.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 3
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
6. Both the learned counsel for the parties would submit that the issue raised in this
writ petition is covered by a number of decisions already passed in this regard. As in
those cases, the similar reason given by the respective authorities for rejecting the
pay parity had been found to be unlawful and unjustifiable and accordingly, the
reliefs were given to the individual employees.
7. In this regard, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner relied upon the
judgment of this Court in W.P(MD).No.742 of 2018 dated 07.02.2018 in the matter
of K.Vijayarani Vs. The District Elementary Educational Officer, Thoothukudi and
another, where the following order was passed:
“5.The first respondent has proceeded on the footing that since the petitioner got
transferred from Pudukkottai to Kayathar Union, it is not possible to set right the pay
anomaly. The reason assigned by the first respondent in the impugned order is
un-sustainable in law. Even though the writ petitioner came to Kayathar Union by
way of transfer and has to be placed at the bottom of the seniority list, the fact
remains that the Shanthi got appointment as Secondary Grade Teacher at Kayatharu
Union only later in point of time. Therefore, by no stretch of imagination the said
Shanthi could have stolen a march over the petitioner. The order impugned in this
writ petition is quashed. The respondents are directed to set right the pay anomaly
and step-up the pay of the petitioner on par with said Shanthi. Such an order shall be
issued by the respondents within a period of eight weeks.”
8.Following the similar orders passed by this Court, I had an occasion to consider this
issue in W.P.(MD) No. 8046 of 2018 and I have passed an order in the following
terms:-
“9.Therefore, it became obvious that the petitioner all along from the date of selection
and appointment has been senior and has been marching ahead of the said
Ms.R.Vijayalakshmi. Therefore, the pay disparity if anything found between the
petitioner and the third party, http://www.judis.nic.in who is admittedly junior to
the petitioner, the same shall be set right by the respondent and the anomaly must be
redressed. In this regard, the only reason cited by the second respondent in the
impugned order is that if both the petitioner and the third party, who is junior to the
petitioner, are appointed in the same Panchayat Union, then only the pay disparity
can be redressed and as a result pay can be stepped up to the senior person. These
reasons cannot be accepted as the seniority will not get changed, unless, the person
gives up such right of seniority, if he is transferred from one Union to other Union by
losing the right of seniority. It was in the case on hand, the petitioner all along has
been senior and thereafter, would have been available to the respondents for
promotion. Moreover, as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner
that the issue is no more res integra, as the learned single Judge of this Court in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 4
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
case of Vijayarani, cited supra, had an occasion to consider the similar issue and
ultimately, the learned Single Judge has given findings, which reads thus:
“.....5.The first respondent has proceeded on the footing that since the petitioner got
transferred from Pudukottai to Kayathar Union, it is not possible to set right the pay
anomaly. The reason assigned by the first respondent in the impugned order is
un-sustainable in law. Even though the writ petitioner came to Kayathar Union by
way of transfer and has to be placed at the bottom of the seniority list, the fact
remains that the Shanthi got appointment as Secondary Grade Teacher at Kayatharu
Union only later in point of time. Therefore, by no stretch of imagination the said
Shanthi could have stolen a march over the petitioner. The order impugned in this
writ petition is quashed. The respondents are directed to set right the pay anomaly
and step-up the pay of the petitioner on par with said Shanthi. Such an order shall be
issued by the respondents within a period of eight weeks.
6.This Writ petition is allowed accordingly. No costs.”
10.In view of the legal position and factual matrix of this case, I am of the considered view that the
petitioner shall be entitled to seek pay parity on par with his junior, http://www.judis.nic.in namely,
one, Ms.R.Vijayalakshmi, who according to the petitioner gets a higher pay, who is junior to the
petitioner all along. Therefore, the said grievance of the petitioner shall be redressed and his pay
shall be stepped up on par with his junior. “
9.In view of the above said orders, it is clear that the issue raised in this writ petition is covered by
the number of decisions, as the reason given in the impugned order was no more be a valid one and
therefore, on that ground, this impugned order is liable to be quashed. Accordingly, it is quashed.
10.In the result, the respondent, especially, the first respondent is directed to rectify the pay
anomaly in respect of the petitioner and accordingly, step-up her pay on a par with her junior, who
is getting higher pay irrespective of the place of joining office at the first instance, after selection to
the post of Teacher and after calculating the same, the difference of pay shall be paid to the
petitioner and the needful shall be done, within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of a
copy of this order.
11.With the above directions, the Writ Petition stands allowed. No costs. “
10.Similar order has been passed in number of cases.
11.More over, as per the dates, which have been referred to above, from the date of joining till the
date of getting promotion as Primary School Headmaster, the petitioner has travelled ahead of the
individual, who has admittedly travelled behind him. Therefore, once the other individual namely,
Kanagaraj is getting higher pay, certainly the pay disparity between these two i.e., the senior and
junior have to be rectified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 5
R.Paul Murugan vs The District Educational Officer on 27 July, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
12.The said reason cited in the impugned order that, those who have not been appointed in one
single Union, are not entitled for pay parity, is palpably wrong, because, in the case of the petitioner,
on 22.07.1998, the petitioner was brought to the Valliyoor Panchyat Union and in the case of the
other individual, he was brought to the said union on 07.07.1999. Therefore, before the other
individual comes to the present Union, the petitioner came to the Union and has been working.
Therefore, the said reason cited in the impugned order, in the considered opinion of this Court,
would not be sustained. Hence, this Court is inclined to interfere with the impugned order.
13.Resultantly, the impugned order is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the respondents
for reconsideration. By making such reconsideration, the respondents shall borne in mind that from
the date of appointment till the date the petitioner reached the position of Primary School
Headmaster, the petitioner is ahead of the individual one Kanagaraj. However, the latter is getting
higher pay than the petitioner. It should be considered and rectified by removing the disparity of
pay between these two. Necessary order to that effect shall be passed by the http://www.judis.nic.in
respondents within a period of eight(8) weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
14.With the above direction, this Writ petition is disposed of. No costs.
27.07.2020 Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes/No rmk Note:In view of the present lock down owing to
COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that
the copy of the order that is presented is the correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the
Advocate/litigant concerned.
To
1.The District Educational Officer, Vallioor, Tirunelveli District.
2.The Block Educational Officer II, Vallioor, Tirunelveli District.
http://www.judis.nic.in http://www.judis.nic.in R.SURESH KUMAR ,J.
rmk 27.07.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194566899/ 6
