R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party
on 30 April, 2025
Author: G. Satapathy
Bench: G. Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLREV No.568 of 2024
(An application U/Ss 401/397 of CrPC, corresponding to
Section 442 of BNSS, 2023).
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R. .... Petitioner
Vanket Ramanan
-versus-
State of Odisha .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Ramani. K., Advocate
For Opposite Party : Mr. R.B. Mishra, Addl.PP
CORAM:
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY
DATE OF HEARING : 15.04.2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT: 30.04.2025
G. Satapathy, J.
1. This criminal revision is directed against the impugned order dated 29.08.2024 passed by the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ganjam at Berhampur in G.R. Case No. 225 of 2012(B) refusing to
discharge the petitioner from the criminal case for commission of offences punishable
U/Ss.120(B)/420/ 468/471/34 of IPC r/w. Sections 4/5/6 of Prize Chits & Money Circulation
Scheme (Banning) Act, 1978 (in short, "the Act").
2. Briefly stated, the allegations against the petitioner are that the petitioner and others by entering
into conspiracy allured the informant/complainant to deposit/invest money in Right Max Techno
Trade Company on the assurance of giving high returns @ Rs.1600/- per month on deposit of
Rs.10,000/- up to 33 months and accordingly, received investment/deposit from the
complainant/informant and other gullible investors, who invested certain amounts in the company
which issued some bonds in their favour, but when the complainant/informant and other investors
approached the company personnel at Berhampur Office for return of their money, no money was
returned to them. On this fact, the informant and villagers approached the Police, but in vain and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 1
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
thereafter, one G. Chakrapani Reddy filed a complaint in the Court against the employees of the
company and such complaint being registered as 1CC No. 25 of 2012 was sent to the Police U/S.
156(3) of the CrPC which eventually led to registration of Chamakhandi P.S. Case No. 75 of 2012
resulting in commencement of investigation in this case which ultimately ended in submission of
charge sheet against the petitioner and others for commission of offence punishable U/Ss. 120(B)/
420/ 468/471/34 of IPC r/w. Sections 4/5/6 of the Act.
3. On the basis of materials collected in the course of investigation, cognizance of offences was taken
and out of charge sheeted accused persons, four accused persons facing the trial in the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ganjam at Berhampur in G.R. Case No. 225 of 2012 got acquitted in this
case on conclusion of trial. Since the petitioner and five others did not appear, the case against them
was separated and split up by the learned trial Court vide an order dated 11.05.2018 passed in the
original case which gives rise to split up case in G.R. Case No. 225 of 2012(B), but subsequently the
petitioner and four others appeared in the split up case, however, the petitioner filed a discharge
petition to discharge him from this criminal case for commission of offences punishable U/Ss.
120(B)/ 420/ 468/ 471/ 34 of IPC r/w. Sections 4/5/6 of the Act mainly on two grounds that their
names do not find place in the FIR with no overt act being attributed to them and acquittal of
co-accused person in the original trial. The learned trial Court, however, by the impugned order
rejected such discharge petition of the petitioner giving rise to the present revision.
4. In the course of hearing of the revision, Mr. Ramani. K., learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner submits that co-accused standing on similar footing has already been acquitted by the
learned trial Court in G.R. Case No. 225 of 2012 and the name of the petitioner being conspicuously
absent in the FIR and no overt act having been attributed against the petitioner, the petitioner
should have been discharged from this case, however, the learned trial Court erroneously applied
the law and rejected the discharge petition of the petitioner which can be rectified by allowing this
revision. Accordingly, Mr. Ramani. K., learned counsel for the petitioner prays to allow the revision
by setting aside the impugned order and discharging the petitioner from the criminal case.
4.1. On the other hand, Mr. R.B. Mishra, learned Addl. Public Prosecutor, however, strongly opposes
such prayer of the petitioner by inter alia contending that not only the learned trial Court has passed
the order rightly refusing to discharge the petitioner, but also there is a prima facie case against the
petitioner for proceeding against him in this case and, therefore, this revision petition by the
petitioner merits no consideration. Accordingly, Mr. Mishra prays to dismiss this revision.
5. After having considered the rival submissions upon perusal of record, since the petitioner assails
the impugned order refusing to discharge him from the criminal case mainly on the two grounds;
such as, absence of his name in the FIR; and acquittal of co-accused persons, this Court considers it
apposite to reiterate the provisions under which an accused can be discharged in a case upon Police
report which has been apparently provided in Section 239 of the CrPC/262(2) of the BNSS which
reads that if, upon considering the Police report and the documents sent with it under Section 173 of
the CrPC/193 of the BNSS and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate
thinks necessary and after giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the
Magistrate considers the charge against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 2
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
accused, and record his reasons for so doing. The aforesaid provision, if read together with Sec. 240
of the CrPC/263 of the BNSS makes it ample clear that while dealing with a discharge petition and
considering charge, the Court has to consider the Police report U/S. 173 of the CrPC/193 of the
BNSS and the documents submitted therewith and after giving the parties an opportunity of being
heard, the Magistrate has to pass an order to say whether the charge is groundless or there is/are
ground(s) for proceeding further against the accused person.
6. It is, however, claimed by the revision petitioner that he had filed a discharge petition U/S. 227 of
CrPC., but since the offence alleged is triable by Magistrate 1st Class and the proceeding arising out
of upon a police report involving trial of warrant cases, the revision petitioner can maintain an
application U/S. 239 of CrPC till 31.06.2024 or maintain a similar application U/S. 262(2) of the
BNSS w.e.f. 01.07.2024 on which date the BNSS came into force, but it is not clarified by the
revision petitioner as to when he filed the discharge petition which is in fact very important because
Sec. 262(1) of the BNSS prescribes that a discharge petition U/S. 262(2) of the BNSS can be filed by
the accused within a period of sixty days from the date of supply of copies of documents U/S. 230 of
BNSS which cannot be taken lightly since the statutes provides a thing to be done in a particular
way, the same has to be done in that way or not at all. In this case, the revision petitioner has not
made it clear when the copies of documents were supplied to him and when he filed the discharge
petition which assumes significance in this case and thereby, the challenge of the revision petitioner
to the impugned order refusing to discharge him shall fall on that score.
7. Be that as it may, this Court also considers it apt to remind that this Court in exercise of revisional
jurisdiction is not justified to re-appreciate the facts and documents to substitute its own view,
unless the Court passing the order on discharge petition in fact has not considered the Police report
and the documents annexed therewith in accordance with provision governing discharge of the
accused or improperly considered the same to an extent which is unacceptable by the prescribed
yardsticks of considering the discharge petition of the accused. Further, it is to be reminded, once
charges are framed, the revisional Court should go slow to rely upon the documents other than those
referred to in Section 239 of the CrPC/ 262(2) of the BNSS to disturb the order on discharge of the
accused person. From a studied scrutiny of provision of Section 239 CrPC/ 262(2) of the BNSS, it is
apparently clear that the Court shall not in a normal case consider any new document/material
beyond the Police report and documents submitted therewith U/S. 173 of CrPC/193 of the BNSS.
8. In this case, the petitioner in order to secure his discharge from the criminal case harps on two
grounds; firstly, absence of his name in the FIR; and secondly, acquittal of co-accused in original
trial, but fact remains that FIR is neither an encyclopedia of facts contained therein nor is it a report
within the meaning of Section 173 of CrPC/193 of the BNSS. On the other hand, the acquittal of
co-accused persons is on the basis of the evidence led in the trial which is not relevant in the split up
cases like this because the evidence has not been taken in the presence of the accused-petitioner. It
is, however, contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that no overt act has been attributed
against the petitioner, but neither the Police report nor any documents submitted with the Police
report has been produced either by the revision petitioner or by the State to justify such plea or
contention. On the other hand, the case was instituted around 12 or 13 years before and the present
petitioner having not appeared in the original case, the case against him was split up. It is also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 3
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
equally well settled that in considering the discharge petition, the Court has definitely power to sift
and weigh the evidence for a limited purpose of finding out whether a prima facie case is made out
against the accused persons or not. It is trite law that, if the materials placed on record disclose
grave or strong suspicion as distinguished from mere suspicion against the accused which has not
been properly explained, the Court would be fully justified to frame charge and proceed against the
accused in the trial. The test to determine prima facie case against the accused would naturally
depend upon the facts and circumstance of each case and it is difficult to lay down any universal rule
of application.
9. This Court is, however, considered it useful to refer to a recent judgment in State of Gujurat vs.
Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao;(2023) 17 SCC 688, wherein the Apex Court has held in paragraph-7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12 ,13 and 14 as under:-
7. It is trite law that application of judicial mind being necessary to determine
whether a case has been made out by the prosecution for proceeding with trial and it
would not be necessary to dwell into the pros and cons of the matter by examining
the defence of the accused when an application for discharge is filed. At that stage,
the trial judge has to merely examine the evidence placed by the prosecution in order
to determine whether or not the grounds are sufficient to proceed against the accused
on basis of charge sheet material. The nature of the evidence recorded or collected by
the investigating agency or the documents produced in which prima facie it reveals
that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused, so as to frame a charge
would suffice and such material would be taken into account for the purposes of
framing the charge. If there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused
necessarily, the accused would be discharged, but if the court is of the opinion, after
such consideration of the material there are grounds for presuming that accused has
committed the offence which is triable, then necessarily charge has to be framed.
8. At the time of framing of the charge and taking cognizance the accused has no right
to produce any material and call upon the court to examine the same. No provision in
the Code grants any right to the accused to file any material or document at the stage
of framing of charge. The trial court has to apply its judicial mind to the facts of the
case as may be necessary to determine whether a case has been made out by the
prosecution for trial on the basis of charge-sheet material only.
9. If the accused is able to demonstrate from the charge- sheet material at the stage of
framing the charge which might drastically affect the very sustainability of the case, it
is unfair to suggest that such material should not be considered or ignored by the
court at that stage. The main intention of granting a chance to the accused of making
submissions as envisaged under Section 227 of the Cr.P.C. is to assist the court to
determine whether it is required to proceed to conduct the trial. Nothing in the Code
limits the ambit of such hearing, to oral hearing and oral arguments only and
therefore, the trial court can consider the material produced by the accused before
the I.O.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 4
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
10. It is settled principle of law that at the stage of considering an application for
discharge the court must proceed on an assumption that the material which has been
brought on record by the prosecution is true and evaluate said material in order to
determine whether the facts emerging from the material taken on its face value,
disclose the existence of the ingredients necessary of the offence alleged.
11. This Court in State of Tamil Nadu Vs. N. Suresh Rajan And Others (2014) 11 SCC
709 adverting to the earlier propositions of law laid down on this subject has held:
"29. We have bestowed our consideration to the rival submissions and the
submissions made by Mr. Ranjit Kumar commend us. True it is that at the time of
consideration of the applications for discharge, the court cannot act as a mouthpiece
of the prosecution or act as a post office and may sift evidence in order to find out
whether or not the allegations made are groundless so as to pass an order of
discharge. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an application for discharge,
the court has to proceed with an assumption that the materials brought on record by
the prosecution are true and evaluate the said materials and documents with a view
to find out whether the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At this stage,
probative value of the materials has to be gone into and the court is not expected to
go deep into the matter and hold that the materials would not warrant a conviction.
In our opinion, what needs to be considered is whether there is a ground for
presuming that the offence has been committed and not whether a ground for
convicting the accused has been made out. To put it differently, if the court thinks
that the accused might have committed the offence on the basis of the materials on
record on its probative value, it can frame the charge; though for conviction, the court
has to come to the conclusion that the accused has committed the offence. The law
does not permit a mini trial at this stage."
12. The defence of the accused is not to be looked into at the stage when the accused seeks to be
discharged. The expression "the record of the case" used in Section 227 Cr.P.C. is to be understood
as the documents and articles, if any, produced by the prosecution. The Code does not give any right
to the accused to produce any document at the stage of framing of the charge. The submission of the
accused is to be confined to the material produced by the investigating agency.
13. The primary consideration at the stage of framing of charge is the test of existence of a
prima-facie case, and at this stage, the probative value of materials on record need not be gone into.
This Court by referring to its earlier decisions in the State of Maharashtra Vs. Som Nath Thapa
(1996) 4 SCC 659 and the State of MP Vs. Mohan Lal Soni (2000) 6 SCC 338 has held the nature of
evaluation to be made by the court at the stage of framing of the charge is to test the existence of
prima- facie case. It is also held at the stage of framing of charge, the court has to form a
presumptive opinion to the existence of factual ingredients constituting the offence alleged and it is
not expected to go deep into probative value of the material on record and to check whether the
material on record would certainly lead to conviction at the conclusion of trial."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 5
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
10. The scope and ambit of the power of revision has been succinctly explained by the Apex Court in
Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao (supra), wherein it has been held as under:-
"14. The power and jurisdiction of Higher Court under Section 397 Cr.P.C. which
vests the court with the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court is
for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularities of any
proceeding or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a
patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has crept in
such proceedings.
17. The revisional court cannot sit as an appellate court and start appreciating the
evidence by finding out inconsistency in the statement of witnesses and it is not
legally permissible. The High Courts ought to be cognizant of the fact that trial court
was dealing with an application for discharge."
11. In Munna Devi vrs. State of Rajasthan and another; (2001) 9 SCC 631, the Apex Court has held as
under:-
"3. xx xx The revision power under the Code of Criminal Procedure cannot be
exercised in a routine and casual manner. While exercising such powers, the High
Court has no authority to appreciate the evidence in the manner as the trial and
Appellate Courts are required to do. Revisional powers could be exercised only when
it is shown that there is a legal bar against the continuance of the criminal
proceedings or the framing of charge or the facts as stated in the First Information
Report even if they are taken at the face value and accepted in their entirety do not
constitute the offence for which the accused has been charged.xx xx"
In Ram Bikash Singh and others vrs.
Ambika Yadav and another; (2004) 7 SCC 665, the Apex Court has held thus:-
"4. Sections 397 to 401 of the Code are group of Sections conferring higher and
superior Courts a sort of supervisory jurisdiction. These powers are required to be
exercised sparingly. Though the jurisdiction U/S. 401 cannot be invoked to only
correct wrong appreciation of evidence and the High Court is not required to act as a
Court of Appeal, but at the same time, it is the duty of the Court to correct manifest
illegality resulting in gross-miscarriage of justice."
12. On a careful scrutiny of the impugned order on the backdrop of the principle narrated above, it
appears that the learned trial Court has taken into consideration the materials available on record by
observing inter-alia that the present revision petitioner is one of the Director of the said company
and the informant had deposited money in the said company, but did not get back the said amount
and the IO on due investigation has submitted charge sheet against the present petitioner and other
accused persons. Thus, on a careful conspectus of the impugned order in juxtaposition with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 6
R. Venkat Ramanan @ R vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Party on 30 April, 2025
principle laid down by the decisions referred to above on the face of facts and merit of the case, this
Court does not find any illegality or perversity in the impugned order to frame charge and proceed
against the accused persons. Nonetheless, it is informed by the learned counsel for the petitioner
that in the meanwhile, one or two witnesses have already been examined and, therefore, at this stage
it would not be proper to interfere with the impugned order merely because some of the co-accused
persons have been acquitted of the charges which in fact had been arrived at on appreciation of
evidence led in the original case, but not in the present split up case and, therefore, there is no merit
in the revision petition by the petitioner.
13. In the result, the present revision stands dismissed on contest, but there is no order as to costs.
(G. Satapathy) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 30th day of April, 2025/S.Sasmal
Location: High Court of Orissa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45354785/ 7
