Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
IN THE HIGH C0URT 0F JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
OWP No. 902/2010
IA No. 1229/2010
CM No. 6670/2021
Reserved on 22.12.2022
Pronounced on 01.03.2023
Radha Sharma ...Petitioner(s)
Mr. Rajiv K. Sharma, Adv.
Vs.
State of JK &Ors. ...Respondent(s)
Mr. Amit Gupta, AAG
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
GIST
1. This writ petition is filed by the Petitioner seeking an appropriate writ of mandamus directing
Respondents to pay a compensation of Rs. 20 Lacs along with interest to the petitioner.
PRIMARY FACTS
2. The case of the petitioner is that her son, Vishal Sharma lost his life due to electrocution when
exposed to live electric wire hanging between the poles at the height of 3 to 4 ft. from the ground.
This Act was totally attributable to the negligence of the Respondents. It is the specific case of the
Petitioner that the matter was brought to the notice of Respondents, the Electricity Department and
a request was made to straighten the electric lines/service lines and maintain the height at safe and
required height in terms of Electricity Act and Rules framed thereunder, so that no one may come in
contact with the live wires, however, needful was not done to rectify and remove the defects by
straightening the electric wires by keeping them at safe height, as a consequence of which, the son of
the Petitioner died.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 1
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
3. It is stated that the Petitioner(cid:128)s son was only 13 years old and was a brilliant student who had
secured 88% marks as per the School Certificate and was studying at Jagriti Mission School, Talab
Tillo, Jammu and had a very bright future ahead of him. However, due to the carelessness and
negligence of the Respondents, the Petitioner lost her son at a very young age.
4. It is stated that Petitioner(cid:128)s, Son Vishal Sharma was on a visit to his maternal uncle(cid:128)s home. On
22-07-2009, while he was working in the village Panghor in the agriculture field, he came in contact
with live electric wires hanging at the height of about 4 to 5 ft. above the ground level and suffered a
massive electric shock and injuries on his neck. Consequently, he was shifted to Government
Medical College Hospital, Jammu but as a result of the aforesaid electric shock, he died. The same is
reflected on perusal of the post-mortem report conducted by GMC, Jammu.
5. In this context, FIR Bearing No. 05/2010 under section 304-A RPC has been registered against
Respondents on 07-01-2010 at Police Station Gajansoo, Jammu.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE PETITIONER
6. The learned counsel for the Petitioner has vehemently argued that the Son of the Petitioner has
died due to the negligent acts attributable to Respondents who failed to maintain the electric wires
as provided under the provisions of the Electricity Act and Rules framed thereunder and thus, the
state is under legal obligation to compensate the Petitioner because due to their negligent Act, a
precious human life was lost. The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has vehemently argued that
the state is under legal obligation to protect the life of its Citizens. It is further submitted that the
state and its functionaries have failed to discharge the constitutional and statutory obligations by
not taking requisite safety measures and as a consequence of which, precious life of a young son of
the Petitioner has been cut short and accordingly, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir, now,
Union Territory is under obligation to compensate the Petitioner by way of damages.
7. It is submitted, though Respondents have stated in their objections that the height of the wires at
the relevant point of time was 15 ft, however, Learned Counsel of Petitioner has filed rejoinder
affidavit to the objections filed by the Respondents and in the rejoinder affidavit at Para No. 2, it has
been stated that challan in FIR, supra has been produced before the competent court of law and as
per investigation conducted by the Investigating Officer, it has come to fore that the wires were at
the height of 4 to 5 Ft. above the ground level and not 15 ft. at relevant point of time. Thus, the stand
of the Petitioner stands vindicated. It is further submitted that it is practically impossible that the
boy who was of 13 years of age will contact electric wire which is at a height of 15 ft as per the stand
of the Respondent. SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT
8. Per Contra, Ld. AAG appearing on behalf of the Respondents, Mr. Amit Gupta, submits that the
Respondents have not committed any act which would warrant payment of compensation and the
Petitioner by no stretch of imagination can claim compensation as a matter of right. Besides, learned
AAG appearing on behalf of the Respondents submits that FIR has been registered after six months
from the date of death and is an afterthought, thus, the finding recorded by the Investigating Officer
cannot be relied upon in absence of any opportunity being given to the Respondents to rebut the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 2
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
finding recorded by the Investigating officer. Learned Counsel, with a view to substantiate his claim,
has specifically submitted that the family members of the Petitioner never objected to the
installation of the power supply and erection of poles and installing of the electric lines over it, as
the same was done strictly in conformity with the scheme provided under the Electricity Act and
Rules framed there-under. It is the specific case of the Respondents that the requisite height of the
poles and wires was maintained at 15 feet from the ground level. Learned Counsel for the
Respondents further submits that public in general was made aware and advised time and again not
to come in contact with the live wires and fiddle with the electric wires but no heed was paid and as
such death occurred due to the negligence on part of the son of Petitioner.
9. The Learned Counsel for the Respondents has placed reliance on a judgment rendered by
Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in a case titled Chairman, Grid Corporation of Orissa Ltd. (GRIDCO) & Ors.
V/s Sukamani Das & Anr. "1999 AIR (SC) 3412(cid:128). The said judgment however is not applicable in the
present case as the distinguishable factor in that case is that there was no negligence and the
incident was on account of the act of god, but in the present case, it is clear cut case of negligence on
part of the Respondents.
10.Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
11.Admit.
12.Before this Court deals with the submissions made at the bar, it would be imperative to deal,
appreciate and reiterate the general and settled principles of law while understanding the rules
governing the present case.
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR ELECTRICITY ACT 2010/ELECTRICITY RULES, 1978
13.On the date of death of the son of petitioner, Jammu and Kashmir Electricity Act 2010/Electricity
Rules, 1978 were applicable, as such, the Respondents had to take precautions, preventive measures
as per the provisions of said Act and Rules, back then.
14.As per the Act, Section 2 (16) defines Electric Line to mean any line which is used for carrying
electricity for any purpose and includes any support for any such line, that is to say, any structure,
tower, pole or other thing in, or by or from which any such line is, or maybe, supported, carried or
suspended; and any apparatus connected to any such line for the purpose of carrying electricity.
Further, Section 2 (54) defines Service Line to mean any electric supply line through which
electricity is or is intended to be, supplied to a single consumer either from a distributing main or
immediately from the distribution licensee(cid:128)s premises and from a distributing main to a group of
consumers on the same premises or on contiguous premises supplied from the same point of the
distributing main. For the kind perusal of this Court Section 2 (16) and Section 2 (54) are
reproduced hereunder:-
2(16) "Electric Line" means any line which is used for carrying electricity for any
purpose and includes:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 3
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
a. Any support for any such line, that is to say, any structure, tower, pole or other
thing in, on, by or from which any such line is, or may be, supported, carried or
suspended; and b. Any apparatus connected to any such line for the purpose of
carrying electricity;
2(54) "Service Line" means any electric supply line through which electricity is, or is
intended to be, supplied, a. To a single consumer either from a distributing main or
immediately from the distribution licensee's premises; or b. From a distributing main
to a group of consumers on the same premises or on contiguous premises supplied
from the same point of the distributing main; Further, Rule 77 of Electricity rules,
1978 provide for clearance above ground of the lowest conductor including service
lines. For the kind perusal of this Court, Rule 77 of Electricity Rules, 1978 is
reproduced hereunder:
"Clearance above ground of the lowest Conductor.
(1) No conductor of an overhead line, including service lines, erected across a street
shall at any part thereof be at a height less than:-
(a) For low and medium voltage lines 5.791 Mts (19 Feet)
(b) For high voltage lines 6.069 Mts. (20 Feet) (2) No conductor of an overhead line,
including service lines, erected along any street shall at any part thereof be at a height
less than:-
(a) For low and medium voltage line 5.486 Mts. (18
Feet)
(b) For high Voltage Lines 5.791 Mts. (19
Feet)
(3) No conductor of an overhead line including service lines erected elsewhere than
along or across any street shall be at a height less than:-
(a) For low, medium and high voltage lines up to and including 11,000 volts, if
bare4.572 Mts. (15 Feet)
(b) For low, medium and high voltage lines up to an including 11,000 volts, if
insulated 3.963 Mts. (13 Feet
(c) For high voltage lines above 11,000 volts 5.182 Mts. (17 Feet) (4) For extra-high
voltage lines the clearance above ground shall not be less than 5.182 Mtrs. (17 Feet);
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 4
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
plus 0.305 Mtrs. (1 Feet) for every 33,000 volts or part thereof by which the voltage of the line
exceeds 33,000 volts.
Provided that the minimum clearance along or across any street shall not be less than (20 feet)
6.965 Meters.
15.From the conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions, the maximum clearance above ground of
the conductor or service line has to be 20 ft. and minimum clearance above ground has to be 13 ft.,
in all cases. RES IPSA LOQUITUR
16.Res ipsa loquitur is a doctrine in a latin phrase that means a „thing speaks for itself(cid:128). It is a
doctrine under which a court can infer negligence from the very nature of an accident or injury. The
maxim Res ipsa loquitur is resorted to when the thing is shown to be under the management of the
Respondents or his servants and the accident is such as in the ordinary course of things does not
happen if those who have the management use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the
absence of explanation by the Respondents, that the accident arose from want of care. The maxim
does not embody any rule of substantive law nor a rule of evidence it is perhaps not a rule of any
kind but simply the caption to an argument on the evidence. If the result, in the circumstances in
which the Petitioners proves it, makes it more probable than not that it was caused by the negligence
of the Respondents, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is set to apply. In this context reference maybe
made to the judgment of Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in the case of Shyam Sunder & Ors V/s State of
Rajasthan, (1974) 1 SCC 690, where the concept of res ipsa loquitur was explained. Relevant portion
of the said judgment reads as follows:
"10. The Maxim is stated in its classic form by Erle, C.J "... where the thing is shown
to be under the management of the defendant or his servants, and the accident is
such as in the ordinary course of things does not happen if those who have the
management use proper case, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of
explanation by the defendants, that the accident arose from want of care. The maxim
does not embody any rule of substantive law nor a rule of evidence. It is perhaps not a
rule of any kind but simply the caption to an argument on the evidence. Lord Shaw
remarked that if the phrase had not been in Latin, nobody would have called it a
principle. The maxim is only a convenient label to apply to a set of circumstances in
which the plaintiff proves a case so as to call for a rebuttal from the defendant,
without having to allege and prove any specific act or omission on the part of the
defendant. The principal function of the maxim is to prevent injustice which would
result if a plaintiff were invariably compelled to prove the precise cause of the
accident and the defendant responsible for it even when the facts bearing on these
defendant. But though the parties relative access to evidence is an influential factor, it
is not controlling. Thus, the fact that the defendant is as much at a loss to explain the
accident or himself died in it does not preclude an adverse inference against him, if
the odds otherwise point to his negligence (see John G. fleming, the Law of Torts, 4th
Ed., p. 264) The mere happening of the accident may be more consistent with the
negligence on the part of the defendant than with other cause. The maxim is based as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 5
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
common sense and its purpose is to do justice when the facts bearing on causation
and on the care exercised by defendant are at the outset unknown to the plaintiff and
are or ought to be within the knowledge of the defendant
11. The plaintiff merely proves a result, not any particular act or omission producing
the result. If the result, in the circumstances in which he proves it, makes it more
probable than not that it was caused by the negligence of the defendants, the doctrine
of res ipsa loquitur is said t apply, and the plaintiff will be entitled to succeed unless
the defendant by evidence rebuts that probability.
RIGHT OF THE WRIT COURT TO AWARD COMPENSATION
17.The Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in a case titled "Nila Bath Behera alias Lalita Behera V/s
State of Orissa, (1993) 2 SCC 746"
was dealing with the issues of award of compensation in proceedings under Article 32
and Article 226 of the Constitution. The Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court noted that remedy is
available in public law based on strict liability for contravention of fundamental
rights. The Court further held that this right is distinct from and in addition to the
remedy in private law for damages resulting from contravention of the fundamental
rights. The Court also held that the Supreme Court and High Courts have vide powers
under Article 32 and Article 226 respectively to forge new tools that may be necessary
for doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental rights guaranteed in the
Constitution. The relevant portion of the judgment reads as follows:-
"21.We respectfully concur with the view that the court is not helpless and the wide
powers given to this court by Article 32, which itself is a fundamental right, imposes a
Constitutional obligation on this Court to forge such new tools, which may be
necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental rights
guaranteed in the Constitution which enable the award of monetary compensation in
appropriate cases, where that is the only mode of redress available. The Power
available to this Court under Article 142 is also an enabling provision in this behalf.
The contrary view would not merely render the court powerless and the
Constitutional guarantee a mirage, but may, in certain situations, be an incentive to
extinguish life, if for the extreme contravention the Court is powerless to grant any
relief against the State, except by punishment of the wrongdoer for the resulting
offence, and recovery of damages under private law, by the ordinary process. If the
guarantee that deprivation of life and personal liberty cannot be made except in
accordance with law, is to be real, the enforcement of the right in case of every
contravention must also be possible in the constitutional scheme, the mode of redress
being that which is appropriate in the facts of each case. This remedy in public law
has to be more readily available when invoked by the have-nots, who are not
possessed of the wherewithal for enforcement of their rights in private law, even
though its exercise is to be tempered by judicial restraint to avoid circumvention of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 6
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
private law remedies, where more appropriate."
"21. We may also refer to Article 9(5) of the International Convenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 1966 which indicates that an enforceable right to compensation is
not alien to the concept of enforcement of a guaranteed right. Article 9(5) read as
under:
"Anyone who has been the victim of unlawful arrest or detention shall have an
enforceable right to compensation."
"22. The above discussion indicates the principles on which the Court's power under
Article 32 and 226 of the Constitution is exercised to award monetary compensation
for contravention of a fundamental right. This was indicated to earlier, which may
tend to minimise the effect of the principle indicated therein, do not really detract
from the principle. This is how the decisions of this Court in Rudul Shah and others
in that line have to be understood and Kasturilal distinguished therefrom. We have
considered this question at some length in view of the doubt raised, at time, about the
propriety of awarding compensation in such proceedings, instead of directing the
claimant to resort to the ordinary process of recovery of damages by recourse to an
action in tort. In the present case, on the finding reached, it is clear case of award of
compensation to the petitioner for the custodial death of her son."
18. In the given facts, I also look at another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Board V/s Shail Kumari & Anr, AIR 2002 SCC 55, that was a case where the
deceased was riding on a bicycle in the night while returning from his factory. There had been rain
and the road was partially inundated in water. The cyclist did not notice the live wire on the road
and hence he rode the vehicle over the wire, it twitched and snatched him and he was
instantaneously electrocuted. The main defence raised by the Respondent was that the wire in
question had been used by somebody to siphon energy for his own use and said act was done
clandestinely behind the back of the electricity board. The line got unfastened from the hook and it
fell on the road over which the cycle driven by the deceased slid, resulting in the instantaneous
electrocution. In those facts, the Supreme Court held as follows:-
"7. It is an admitted fact that the responsibility to supply energy in the particular
locality was statutorily conferred on the Board. If the energy so transmitted cause
injury or death of a human being, who gets unknowingly trapped into it the primary
liability to compensate the sufferer is that of the supplier of the electric energy. So
long as the voltage of electricity transmitted through the wires is potentially of
dangerous dimension the managers of its supply have the added duty to take all
safety measures to prevent escape of such energy or to see that the wire snapped
would not remain live on the road as users of such road would be under peril. It is no
defence on the part of the management of the Board that somebody committed
mischief by siphoning such energy to his private property and that the electrocution
was from such diverted line. It is the look out of the managers of the supply system to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 7
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
prevent such pilferage by installing necessary devices. At any rate, if any live wire got
snapped and fell on the public road the electric current thereon should automatically
have been disrupted. Authorities manning such dangerous commodities have extra
duty to chalk out measures to prevent such mishaps."
"8. Even assuming that all such measures have been adopted, a person undertaking
an activity involving hazardous or risky exposure to human life, is liable under law of
torts to compensate for the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any
negligence or carelessness in the part of the managers of such undertakings. The
basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature of such
activity. The liability case on such person is known, in law, as "Strict liability". It
differs from the liability which arises on account of the negligence or fault in this way
i.e., the concept of negligence comprehends that the foreseeable harm could be
avoided by taking reasonable precautions. If the defendant did all that which could be
done without harm he cannot be held liable when the action is based on any
negligence attributed. But such consideration is not relevant in cases of strict liability
where the defendant is held liable irrespective of whether he could have avoided the
particular harm by taking precautions."
"9. The doctrine of strict liability has its origin in English Common Law when it was
propounded in the celebrated case of Ryland's v/s Fletcher (1868 Law Reports (3) HL
330). Blackburn J., the author of the said rule had observed thus in the said
decision."
Xxxxx "13. In the present case, the Board made an endeavour to rely on the exception to the rule of
strict liability (Ryland's v. fletcher) being "an act of stranger." The said exception is not available to
the Board as the act attributed to the third respondent should reasonably have been anticipated or
at any rate its consequences should have been prevented by the appellant-Board. In North western
Utilities, Limited V. London Guarantee and Accident Company, Limited (1936 Appeal cases 108),
the privy Council repelled the contention of the defendant based on the aforesaid exception. In that
case a hotel belonging to the plaintiffs was destroyed in a fire caused by the escape and ignition of
natural gas. The gas had percolated into the hotel basement from a fractured welded joint in an
intermediate pressure main situated below the street level and belonging to the defendants which
was a public utility company. The Privy council held that the risk involved in the operation
undertaken by the defendant was so great that a high degree care was expected of him since the
defendant ought to have appreciated the possibility of such a leakage." "14. The privy Council has
observed in Quebec Railway, Light Heat and Power Company Limited V/s Vandry & Ors. (1920 Law
Reports Appeal Cases 662) that the company supplying electricity is liable for the damage without
proof that they had been negligent. Even the defence that the cables were disrupted on account of a
violent wind and high tension current found its way through the low tension cable into the premises
of the respondent was held to be not a justifiable defence. Thus, merely because the illegal act could
be attributed to a stranger is not enough to absolve the liability of the Board regarding the live wire
lying on the road."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 8
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
19.What follows from the aforementioned judgments is that the Supreme Court has in identical
matters taken a view that this Court has powers in an appropriate case to award compensation and
has also taken a view that the company/corporation/departments supplying electricity are liable for
damages without proof that they have been negligent based on the principle of absolute liability.
DISCUSSION
20.On the perusal of record, which includes registration of FIR against PDD Officials, Medical
Opinion and Post-mortem report, it is evidently clear that the cause of the death of the son of the
Petitioner was due to electrocution, negligence of which is completely attributable to the officials of
PDD, who have failed to take due care and caution in maintaining electric supply lines at proper
height as per Rule 77 of Electricity Rules, supra. The claim of the Respondents that they acted with
due care and caution has been negated by the investigation report of the police, wherein it has
emerged that the wires were not affixed properly. The contention of the Respondent that death was
caused due to negligence of the child does not appear to be reasonable and is practically impossible.
It is humanly not possible to fiddle with the wires placed at a height to 15ft from ground by a minor
child who is 13 years of age and its is practically impossible to touch the wires at such a height and
thus the plea raised by the Respondent cannot be considered to be reasonable and is liable to be
rejected. Clearly, the specific averments of the Petitioner about the negligence of the Respondents
have evoked a vague response from Respondents. In my opinion, facts speak for themselves and the
principles of res ipsa loquitur will clearly apply on these facts. A clear averment has been made by
the Petitioner that the Respondent was guilty of negligence. A young boy has died after coming in
contact with a live electric wire that was hanging between poles at the height of 3 to 4 ft from the
ground level. In the reply, a vague and an evasive denial based on surmises and conjectures has been
made. As such, based on the above facts and the doctrine of res ispa loquitur, it is clear that the
Respondents are guilty of negligence. The death of the deceased has occurred due to negligence of
the Respondents.
21.It goes without saying that anyone generating, transmitting, supplying or using electric energy of
high voltage, which is hazardous and inherently dangerous activity is required to ensure that no
such energy was transmitted or discharged unless requisite measures had been taken to prevent its
uncontrolled escape, which may injure, impair or takeaway life. Any omission in preventing the
discharge of high voltage electric energy by anyone engaged in the activity of supplying such electric
energy is liable to compensate for the damage caused to a human life because of such energy.
22.Under the Jammu and Kashmir Electricity Act read with Jammu and Kashmir Electricity Rules,
the state is licensed to deal with electric energy. While doing so it is required to take requisite
preventive measures as enshrined in Rule 77 and other provisions so that the electric energy does
not cause any damage to life and property. Failure of the Respondents in this case to take requisite
measures to ensure that electric/service lines are erected at a maximum height of 20 ft. and the
minimum height of 13 ft., makes them liable to compensate for the damage because the escape of
high voltage electric energy has taken the life of the son of the Petitioner. It is pertinent to note here,
that a strange submission has been made by the Respondent who is in-charge of distribution of
electricity in the area that the death could not have been caused by the electric line because electric
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 9
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
line was at the height of 15ft. from the ground level. The submission of the Respondents cannot
clearly be believed, as post-mortem report and Police Report both state in unequivocal terms that
the death of the son of the Petitioner has taken place due to electrocution on contact with electricity
wires within the territory of Respondents. This vague belief of Respondents fortifies my conclusion
of the negligence on part of the Respondents. The negligence of the Respondents in maintaining
electric/service wires is writ large on the face of the record.
23.The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Abdul Aziz Bhat v. State of Jammu and Kashmir,
2013 (III) SLJ 786, after discussing the case law on the point in paragraph 2.2, concluded thus:
"2.2 A Constitution Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of M.C. Mehta
(Reported as 1987 AIR page 1086), after referring to the aft-quoted principles laid
down by House of Lords in Rylands v. Fletcher, [L.R.] 3 H.L. 330, has proceeded to
hold that the Court must move with the march of time and evolve principles befitting
the cause of justice and that law has to grow in order to satisfy the needs of the fast
changing society. It cannot afford to remain static. Keeping in view the aforesaid
backdrop their Lordships opined as under:--
".................We are of the view that an enterprise which is engaged in a hazardous or
inherently dangerous industry which poses a potential threat to the health and safety
of the persons working in the factory and residing in the surrounding areas owes an
absolute and non- delegable duty to the community to ensure that no harm results to
anyone on account of hazardous or inherently dangerous nature of the activity which
it has undertaken. The enterprise must be held to be under an obligation to provide
that the hazardous or inherently dangerous activity in which it is engaged must be
conducted with the highest standards of safety and if any harm results on account of
such activity, the enterprise must be absolutely liable to compensate for such harm
and it should be no answer to the enterprise to say that it had taken all reasonable
care and that the harm occurred without any negligence on its part. Since the persons
harmed on account of the hazardous or inherently dangerous activity carried on by
the enterprise would not be in a position to isolate the process of operation from the
hazardous preparation of substance or any other related element that caused the
harm the enterprise must be held strictly liable for causing such harm as a part of the
social cost of carrying on the hazardous or inherently dangerous activity. If the
enterprise is permitted to carry on an hazardous or inherently dangerous activity for
its profit, the law must presume that such permission is conditional on the enterprise
absorbing the cost of any accident arising on account of such hazardous or inherently
dangerous activity as an appropriate item of its overheads.
........................ This principle is also sustainable on the ground that the enterprise
alone has the resource to discover and guard against hazards or dangers and to
provide warning against potential hazards. We would therefore hold that where an
enterprise is engaged in a hazardous or inherently dangerous activity and harm
results to anyone on account of an accident in the operation of such hazardous or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 10
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
inherently dangerous activity resulting, for example, in escape of toxic gas the
enterprise is strictly and absolutely liable to compensate all those who are affected by
the accident and such liability is not subject to any of the exceptions which operate
vis-a-vis the tortious principle of strict liability under the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher.
A perusal of the aforesaid para in unmistakable terms shows that a hazardous or an
inherently dangerous activity can be tolerated only on the condition that such an
enterprise would indemnify all those who suffer on account of carrying on of such
dangerous activity, regardless of whether it is carried on with reasonable and due
care. Therefore, even in a case where due care and caution had been taken but on
account of hazardous or inherently dangerous activities death or injuries have
resulted, then indemnification is imperative. These principles have found full support
from the view expressed by another Constitution Bench in Charan Lal Sahu(cid:128)s case
(supra). Again in the case of M.P. Electricity Board v. Shail Kumari (2002) 2 SCC 162
that can be fruitfully referred. This was case where a cyclist was fatally electrocuted
on account of his cycle touching a live wire lying on road partially inundated with
water. The Apex Court laid down the law which is reproduced as follows:
"These principles have been followed and applied as is evident from perusal of para 8
and 11 of the judgment which are quoted below in extenso:-
"8. Even assuming that all such measures have been adopted, a person undertaking
an activity involving hazardous or risky exposure to human life, is liable under law of
torts to compensate for the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any
negligence or carelessness on the part of the managers of such undertakings. The
basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature of such
activity. The liability cast on such person is known, in law, as "strict liability". It
differs from the liability which arises on account of the negligence or fault in this way
i.e. the concept of negligence comprehends that the foreseeable harm could be
avoided by taking reasonable precautions. If the defendant did all that which could be
done for avoiding the harm he cannot be held liable when the action is based on any
negligence attributed. But such consideration is not relevant in cases of strict liability
where the defendant is held liable irrespective of whether he could have avoided the
particular harm by taking precautions."
24.This court in case titled State of JK &Ors. vs. Altaf Ahmad Ganai & Anr. SLJ 2003 (1)has held as
under:-
"14. .......Thus, a person undertaking an activity involving hazardous or risky exposure
to human life, is liable under law of torts to compensate for the injury suffered by any
other person irrespective of any negligence or carelessness on the part of the
managers of such undertakings. As indicated above, the basis of such liability is the
foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature of such activity. Thus, in such cases, the
negligence comprehends that the foreseeable risk would be avoided by taking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 11
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
reasonable precautions."
25.From the above, it is crystal clear that the rule of strict liability has been approved and followed
in many subsequent decisions in England. This principle has also gained approval in India. A
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as Charan Lal Sahu Vs. Union
of India. 1990 (1) SCC 613and a two Judge Bench in the case of Kaushunma Begum Vs. New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. 2001 (2) SCC 9 adopted this principle. As a matter of fact, in an earlier decision
reported as M.C. Mehta Vs. Union of India, 1987 (1) SCC 395, the Supreme Court of India has gone
even beyond the rule of strict liability and has held that where an enterprise is engaged in a
hazardous or inherently dangerous activity and harm anyone on account of the 'accident in the
operation of such activity, the enterprise is strictly and absolutely liable to compensate those who
are affected by the accident.
26.The rule of absolute liability does not require that a claimant is under obligation to prove
negligence. On account of hazardous and dangerous nature of enterprise the liability is fastened on
the defaulter even when due and necessary care has been taken. The accident is admitted and it has
not been disputed that death of Vishal Sharma has not occurred on account of electrocution. The
claimant would become entitled to demand compensation in such like cases on account of violation
of fundamental rights to life and liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
27.The respondents, in the instant case, have also not provided any material that may lend support
to the plea taken by them in their defence that the negligence was of the deceased and not the
respondents.
28.In view of the above quoted legal position, I hold the respondents liable to compensate the
petitioner for the death of her son who has been electrocuted due to the negligence on part of the
respondents.
29.The next question which falls for determination is regarding the quantum of compensation to
which the petitioner may be entitled to, for the death of her son.
30.The Finance Department of the erstwhile State of J&K (now UT) has framed a policy in this
regard by carrying an amendment in the J&K Book of Financial Powers in pursuant to the SAC
Decision No. 271/22/2019 dated 22.10.2019 by virtue of Government Order No. 454-F of 2019 dated
24-10-2019 whereby, sanction was accorded to the following amendments in the J&K Book of
Financial Powers in Chapter 5.9 against serial No. 123-A(1), the relevant column „Extent(cid:128) shall be
recast as under:-
S. Nature of Power To Extent
No. whom
delegated
123- 1)To grant Ex- DCP Full powers within the
A gratia Relief in Budget
favour of the
employees of the Provisions with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 12
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
PDD, other persons following
or their heir and to scales:
the owners of
Domestic Animals,
who are
electrocuted and
die, or are rendered
A. Human Beings:
fully/partially
disabled due to the I. In case of Death=Rs
negligence of the 10.00 lacs.
PDD, subject to the
conditions that:
II.Total Disability=Rs
7.50 lacs.
III. .Partial Disability=Rs
(i) All the 2.00 lacs.
employees of the
PDD, whether
regular
,DRW/Casual
labour, Work
Charged,
Contingent paid
In case of death of any
etc., engaged in
employee, the Ex-gratia
the generation,
relief shall be paid to the
transmission or legal heirs of the
supply of deceased. The payment
electrical energy shall be subject to the
in the condition that the relief,
Department, who granted by the
are killed, Government under the
incapacitated, Workman's
wholly or Compensation Act, shall
partially, during be adjusted while making
payment of the Ex-gratia
the course of
relief.
discharging their
bonafide and
legitimate duties;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 13
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
ii) Civilians, killed
or injured,
resulting in their
partial or total
disability, subject
to the explicit
condition that the
accident is
not attributable to
them, but to .the
lapses, attributable
to the POD, as B. Domestic Animals
verified by the
Director, TTI&C; i. Cow ,bull, horse=Rs
20,000
ii.Sheep/Goat=Rs 5,000.
iii) Domestic
animals killed by
electrocution,
caused due to
lapses,
attributable to the
Department and
verified by the
Director, TTI&C.
31.Since the Government has already framed a policy vis-à-vis the death caused due to electrocution
by virtue of the aforesaid Government Order, this Court need not to go into the parameters
prescribed for awarding of compensation in case of death/injuries arising out of the motor vehicles
accidents under the Motor Vehicles Act. The case of the death of the petitioner(cid:128)s son is fully covered
by the aforesaid policy as the accident is not attributable to the deceased but to the lapses
attributable to PDD as per the pleadings and record discussed herein above.
CONCLUSION
32.In view of the above, the writ petition is maintainable for award of compensation and the state
was under obligation/duty to see that the electric installations are properly fenced and are placed in
a position and height so that these are not accessible to the general public and the children in
particular. The state cannot claim immunity by shifting the burden on the deceased who was a
minor child of 13 years of age.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 14
Radha Sharma vs State Of Jk &Ors on 1 March, 2023
33.Petitioner(cid:128)s case for compensation needs to be considered for assessment of compensation on
the basis of policy promulgated, vide Government Order No. 454-F of 2019 dated 24.10.2019.
34.In the circumstances and keeping in view of fact that the deceased has left behind his mother,
who has to lead rest of life in absence of the company, love and affection of the deceased, an amount
of Rs. 10.00 Lacs in total would be in my view appropriate, just and fair compensation for the
petitioner for deprivation of the life of her child and for the damage which has been caused to the
quality of her life as well in conformity with the policy of payment of ex-gratia relief to civilians and
departmental employees of PDD who have died or injured due to electricity related incidents
promulgated vide order No. 454-F of 2019 dated 24.10.2019.
35.The writ petition is, therefore, allowed and respondents are directed to pay to the petitioner a
sum of Rs. 10,00,000/- (Ten Lac Rupees) within a period of two months, starting today i.e.,
01.03.2023.
36.Writ Petition is allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid manner.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 01-03-2023 Altaf Whether Approved for Reporting:
Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114575269/ 15
