Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17
April, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
S. No. 149
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU &KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Bail App No. 331/2022
Reserved on:-31.03.2022
Pronounced on:-17.04.2023
Radhey Sham age 28 years, ....Petitioner(s)
S/o Ashok Kumar,
R/o Village Malhar,
Tehsil & District Udhampur.
Through :- Sh.Gagan Basotra, Sr. Advocate with
Sh. Sudesh Sharma, Advocate.
V/s
UT of Jammu & Kashmir, ....Respondent(s)
Through SHO Police Station,
Rehmbal District Udhampur.
Through:- Sh. Sumeet Bhatia, GA.
1.
Coram: HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
O R D E R
17 . 04 . 2023
1. Petitioner/accused has sought regular bail in terms of Section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in case FIR No. 70/2020 for the commission of offences punishable u/ss 8/15 of Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 (for short the ―NDPS Act(cid:129)). It is averred, that the
petitioner is a peace loving and law abiding citizen of India who enjoys the guarantee of
fundamental rights as enshrined in part-III, in particular right to life and liberty as postulated under
Article 21 of the constitution of India which cannot be curtailed without due process of law,
however, the respondent has vitiated the above said right of the petitioner in the given facts and
circumstance of the case; that the respondent presented chargesheet u/ss 8/15 NDPS Act in the
above FIR No. 70/2020 on 17- 12-2021 in the court of Pr. Sessions Judge Udhampur in absence of
accused, who later on surrendered before the trial court on 16-04-2022, whereafter, petitioner filed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 1
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
an application for grant of bail which was rejected by the trial court of Pr. Sessions Judge Udhampur
on 16-07-2022. It is moreso averred, that the petitioner is young aged person and belongs to
respectable family, however, the respondent has laid chargesheet against him before the trial court
for the allegations, that petitioner was caught red handed by police on 03-06-2020 while
transporting poppy straw in two plastic bags of the weight of more than 52.500 kg in tractor trolley
bearing registration No. JK14-D-6019, and when the police officials were completing the formalities
on spot, petitioner gave a slip to the police party by jumping from the trolley and ran away from the
spot by taking advantage of the darkness; that the rigors of Section 37 of NDPS Act cannot be made
applicable in the case in hand as petitioner has been implicated in false and frivolous case; that the
court below has passed the order dated 16-07-2022 rejecting his bail application without
appreciating the material on record; petitioner immediately after gaining knowledge regarding
presentation of chargesheet surrendered before the court on his own, as such, there is no likelihood
of his jumping over the bail conditions if admitted to bail as the petitioner who is behind the bars for
the last more than 1 year is ready to furnish bail and personal bonds to the satisfaction of the court.
2. Respondent, per contra, has vehemently opposed the bail on the grounds, that the offence
committed by the accused is against society and prejudicial to the interest of general public,
therefore, if the accused is enlarged on bail, there is every probability/likelihood of his tampering
with the prosecution evidence, hence, the accused deserves to be kept at bay and not granted bail,
moreover, the enlarging of accused on bail at this stage would encourage the offenders of the like
nature. It is contended, that on 29.10.2020 police while performing patrolling duty at Malhar NHW
and it's surrounding area, at about 2200 hrs when reached at Malhar, one Tractor bearing
registration No. JK14D-6019 which was driven by the accused/driver from Link Road Malhar
towards NHW was asked to stop for checking purpose and during checking of the said tractor, two
plastic bags of yellow color were found loaded in the trolley of the said tractor, the driver/accused of
the said tractor was asked to open the said plastic bags and on opening, poppy straw like substance
weighing 53 kgs were recovered from the bags from the possession of the accused who due to
darkness jumped from the tractor and ran away from the spot. It is moreso contended, that the
contraband was taken in possession, samples for FSL examination/expert opinion were drawn and
poppy straw was detected, I.O recorded the statements of witnesses u/s 161 Cr.pc, made all possible
efforts to arrest the accused person, but his whereabouts could not be traced out, after completing
all the legal formalities, I.O proved the offence u/s 8/15 NDPS Act against the petitioner/accused
and produced the Challan against him u/s 512 Cr.pc in the Court of law on 17.12.2021, accused is
involved in heinous crime which carries severe punishment, therefore, there is also every
apprehension that the petitioner may influence the prosecution witnesses if admitted to bail, prayer
has been made for dismissal of the bail application.
3. Sh. Gagan Basotra, learned senior counsel while recapitulating the grounds urged in the bail
petition, has vehemently sought release of petitioner/accused on bail by canvassing arguments, that
petitioner has neither committed any offence nor he has any link with the commission of any
offence, petitioner has surrendered before the Court of law on 16.04.2022 and since then he
continues to be in judicial custody, moreso charges have also been framed against him and the case
is at the stage of prosecution evidence. It is argued, that no contraband has ever been recovered
from the possession of petitioner/accused as the same as per prosecution case has been recovered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 2
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
from the tractor, petitioner has voluntarily surrendered voluntarily before the trial Court and is lying
in incarceration for the last more than 1 year, right to speedy trial is implicit in the broad sweep and
content of Article 21, therefore the delay in the completion of trial deserves the accused to be
admitted to bail. It is vehemently argued, that even Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has granted bail
to an accused involved in commercial quantity of contraband ganja weighing 180 kg while relaxing
the rigor of Section 37 of NDPS Act and applying the import of Section 436-A of Cr.pc, wherein, an
accused if undergone detention for a period extending upto one half of the maximum period of
imprisonment specified for that offence he shall be released by the court on his personal bond with
or without sureties. To support his arguments, learned counsel has relied upon a recent judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court titled MOHD MUSLIM @ HUSSAIN--APPELLANTS VERSUS STATE (NCT
OF DELHI)--RESPONDENTS [Criminal Appeal NOS. of 2023 ( @ Special Leave petition (CRL)
NOS. 915 of 2023)].
4. Sh. Sumeet Bhatia Ld. GA, per contra, has sought the dismissal of bail application by portraying
arguments, that petitioner/accused is involved in a very heinous offence of carrying 52.500 kgs of
contraband poppy straw of commercial quantity which carries minimum punishment of rigorous
imprisonment of not less than 10 years but maximum of 20 years and also fine which shall not be
less than 1 lac but may extent to 2 lacs in terms of section 15 of NDPS Act, mores, the rigor of Section
37 of NDPS Act is attracted with full force and therefore, petitioner/accused is not entitled bail. It is
vehemently argued, that even as per the mandate of the recent judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court
relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner/accused rendered in Mohd Muslim's Case [Criminal Appeal
NOS. of 2023 ( @ Special Leave petition (CRL) NOS. 915 of 2023)], accused/petitioner in the case in
hand is not entitled to bail as the recovery of contraband poppy straw of commercial quantity has
been effected from the possession of accused while driving the tractor, and moreso, as mandated u/s
436-A Cr.pc petitioner/accused in the case in hand has not even undergone detention for half of the
period of maximum period of 20 years as mandated in Section of 20 NDPS Act. Prayer has been
made for dismissal of bail application.
5. I have heard learned Sr. counsel for petitioner/accused and Ld. GA for respondent/UT. I have
bestowed my thoughtful consideration to the material aspects involved in the bail application in
hand, have gone through the relevant law on the subject matter very carefully and considered the
ratio of judgment relied by learned Counsel for petitioner/accused.
6. Now, I would like to appreciate the decisions in regard to grant or refusal of bail under the
provisions of Section 37 of NDPS Act.
In 2017 (4) Crimes 384(SC) SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Union of India--Appellant Versus
Niyazuddin Sk. and Anr--Respondent], Hon'ble Supreme Court while setting aside the order of the
High Court granting bail to the accused indicted for possessing commercial quantity of contraband
without discussing the two mandatory conditions appearing in section 37 of the Act viz;(1) the court
must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person is not guilty of such
offence & (2) the person is not likely to commit any offence on bail, while rejecting bail, in paras
7,8&9 of the judgment held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 3
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
(7) Section 37 of NDPS Act contains special provisions with regard to the grant of bail
in respect of certain offences enumerated under the said section. They are:-
(1) In the case of person accused of an offence punishable under section 19.
(2) Under section 24.
(3) Under section 27A and (4) Of offences involving commercial quantity.
The accusation in the present case is with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial quantity.
Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor opposes the application for bail to a person accused of
the enumerated offences under section 37 of the NDPS Act, in case, the court proposes to grant bail
to such person, two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to the normal
requirements under the provisions of the Cr. PC or any other enactment, (1) the court must be
satisfied that there is reasonable ground for believing that the person is not guilty of such offence;
(2) that person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(8) There is no such consideration with regard to the mandatory requirements, while releasing the
respondents on bail. (9) Hence, we are stratified that the matter needs to be considered afresh by
the High Court. Impugned order is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for fresh
consideration. It will be open to the parties to take all available contentious to the High Court. In
2018 (5) Supreme 705 SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Satpal Singh-- Appellants Versus The State of
Punjab--Respondents], Hon'ble Supreme Court while rejecting bail to an accused indicted for the
allegations of possession of commercial quantity of contraband in head note C& para 15 of the
judgment held as under:-
(c)Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 - Section 37, 22 and 29 -
Instantly quantity of drug commercial - Order could not be passed by High Court u/s
438 or 439, Cr.PC without reference to section 37 and without entering a finding on
the required level of satisfaction -
Impugned order set aside.
15. Be that as it may, the order dated 21.09.2017 passed by the High Court does not show that there
is any reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act. The quantity is reportedly commercial. In the facts
and circumstances of the case, the High Court could not have and should not have passed the order
under Sections 438 or 439Cr.P.C. without reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act and without
entering finding on the required level of satisfaction in case the Court was otherwise inclined to
grant the bail. Such a satisfaction having not being entered, the order dated 21.09.2017 is only to be
set aside and we do so.
The decisions rendered by Hon'ble Supreme Court in ―NiyazuddinSk's Case(cid:129) & ―Satpal Singh's
Case(cid:129) (Supra) make the legal proposition abundantly clear and also settles the legal controversy at
rest, that in case of the accusations against accused regarding possession of commercial quantity of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 4
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
the contraband, the court has to render findings regarding,(i) the court must be satisfied that there
are reasonable grounds for believing that the person is not guilty of such offence & (ii) the person is
not likely to commit any offence on bail, and if these conditions are not satisfied by the court, the
accused is not entitled bail.
It is apt to mention here, that Hon'ble Supreme Court in a case law titled N.C.B versus Krishan Lal
[AIR 1991 S.C 588] held that ―unless conditions prescribed under section 37 of NDPS Act are not
fulfilled, the court has no discretion to relax these conditions in order to give the benefit of bail to an
accused(cid:129). It is trite law by the authoritative pronouncement by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a
case law reported in, AIR 2007 S.C 451 (Rajesh Ranjan Yadav alias Pappu Yadav v.s CBI through its
Director), "that the interest of society outweighs the individual interest of a person, and the longer
period of imprisonment cannot be a ground for grant of bail".
7. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in it's recent judgment titled MOHD MUSLIM @
HUSSAIN--APPELLANTS VERSUS STATE (NCT OF DELHI)--
RESPONDENTS [Criminal Appeal NOS. of 2023 ( @ Special Leave petition (CRL) NOS. 915 of
2023)] relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner/accused, while granting bail to appellant/accused lying
in incarceration for the last over 7 years & 4 months indicted for commission of offences punishable
u/ss 20/25/29 of NDPS Act 1985 for recovery commercial quantity of 180 kilograms of ganja not
from the possession of appellant/accused but from the possession of other four (4) co-accused
persons in paragraphs 16, 17 & 20 of the judgment held as under:-
16. In the most recent decision, Satender Kumar Antil v. Central Bureau of
Investigation prolonged incarceration and inordinate delay engaged the attention of
the court, which considered the correct approach towards bail, with respect to several
enactments, including Section 37 NDPS Act. The court expressed the opinion that
Section 436A (which requires inter alia the accused to be enlarged on bail if the trial
is not concluded within specified periods) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
would apply:
―We do not wish to deal with individual enactments as each special Act has got an
objective behind it, followed by the rigour imposed. The general principle governing
delay would apply to these categories also. To make it clear, the provision contained
in Section 436-A of the Code would apply to the Special Acts also in the absence of
any specific provision. For example, the rigour as provided under Section 37 of the
NDPS Act would not come in the way in such a case as we are dealing with the liberty
of a person. We do feel that more the rigour, the quicker the adjudication ought to be.
After all, in these types of cases number of witnesses would be very less and there
may not be any justification for prolonging the trial. Perhaps there is a need to
comply with the directions of this Court to expedite the process and also a stricter
compliance of Section 309 of the Code.(cid:129)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 5
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
17. The facts in this case reveal that the recovery of ganja was made on 28.09.2015,
from the four co-accused, including Nitesh Ekka. The present appellant was arrested
at the behest, and on the statement of this Nitesh Ekka. The prosecution has relied on
that statement, as well as the confessional statement of the present appellant; in
addition, it has relied on the bank statements of Virender Singh @ Beerey, who
allegedly disclosed that money used to be transferred to the appellant. As against
this, the prosecution has not recovered anything else from the appellant; its
allegation that he is a mastermind, is not backed by any evidence of extensive dealing
with narcotics, which would reasonably have surfaced. The prosecution has not
shown involvement of the appellant, in any other case. Furthermore, he was
apparently 23 years of age, at the time of his arrest. It is an undisputed fact that two
co- accused persons (who also, were not present at the time of raid and from whom
no contraband was recovered) - the accused (Virender Singh @ Beerey) who allegedly
transferred money to the appellant's account as payment for the ganja, and the
accused (Nepal Yadav @ Tony Pahalwan) from whom the original insurance papers
and registration certificate of the car from which contraband was seized, was
recovered18 - have both been enlarged on bail. The appellant has been in custody for
over 7 years and 4 months. The progress of the trial has been at a snail's pace: 30
witnesses have been examined, whereas 34 more have to be examined.
20. The standard to be considered therefore, is one, where the court would look at the
material in a broad manner, and reasonably see whether the accused's guilt may be
proved. The judgments of this court have, therefore, emphasized that the satisfaction
which courts are expected to record, i.e., that the accused may not be guilty, is only
prima facie, based on a reasonable reading, which does not call for meticulous
examination of the materials collected during investigation (as held in Union of India
v. Rattan Malik19). Grant of bail on ground of undue delay in trial, cannot be said to
be fettered by Section 37 of the Act, given the imperative of Section 436A which is
applicable to offences under the NDPS Act too (ref. Satender Kumar Antil supra).
Having regard to these factors the court is of the opinion that in the facts of this case, the appellant
deserves to be enlarged on bail.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) of Mohd Muslim's case makes the legal position abundantly clear,
that the grant of bail cannot be fettered by section 37 of the Act as Section 436-A Cr.pc is applicable
to offences under NDPS Act and the accused is only entitled to bail, ‗where no recovery is effected
from the accused who was arrested on the statement of co-accused persons who were not present at
the time of raid and no recovery was effected from them and they were already enlarged on bail, the
progress of trial is at snail's pace'. Ratio of the judgment (Supra) is distinguishable from the facts of
the case in hand. It is apt to reiterate here, that from the possession of petitioner/accused while
driving tractor trolley bearing registration No. JK14-6019 police recovered 2 plastic bags containing
poppy straw weighing 52.500 kgs which is of commercial nature. Petitioner/accused at the time of
the recovery of the contraband, ran away from the spot, however, Challan against him was presented
in the trial court u/s 512 Cr.pc on 17-12-2021. Petitioner/accused surrendered before the trial court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 6
Radhey Sham Age 28 Years vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir on 17 April, 2023
on 16- 04-2022 and presently is lying in judicial custody in District Jail Udhampur. The maximum
punishment u/s 8/15 NDPS Act is rigorous imprisonment for 20 years. As mandated by the broader
parameters/guidelines of Mohd Muslim's case (Supra) by Hon'ble Supreme Court, while examining
the applicability of Section 436A Cr.pc to the facts of the bail application in hand, petitioner/accused
till date has undergone detention only for a period 1 year since his surrender before the trial court
on 16-04-2022 and has not even undergone detention extending upto one half ( ½) of maximum
period of detention of 20 years as envisaged u/s 20 of the NDPS Act, therefore, has not legally
qualified for his release on bail.
8. Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that the menace of the crime of smuggling of contraband drugs
is on increase and therefore, the perpetrators of the crime who are destroying the society and
younger generations rendering them incapacitated by falling prey to drug abuse must be dealt with
iron hands. The crime alleged against petitioner/accused is against the society and by his criminal
activities, he is spoiling the young generation of the country. Such types of offences are to be dealt
with severity and with heavy hands. Showing leniency in such matters would be really a case of
misplaced sympathy. The criminal act of petitioner/accused operating in a manner as the smuggler
of commercial quantity of contraband poppy straw, is destructive, and is aimed to destroy the social
fiber of the country, therefore, curtailment of his liberty is reasonable. The act of petitioner/accused
is not only shocking but outrageous in contours. The granting of bail to petitioner/accused would
lead to the danger of the course of justice being thwarted. I, therefore, hold that this is a fittest case
where, "Jail" and not "Bail", is the appropriate remedy at this stage. The case law relied upon by
learned counsel for petitioner/accused is distinguishable and inapplicable to the facts of the case in
hand. The bail application being misconceived under law, is disallowed, rejected and dismissed.
9. Disposed of accordingly alongwith connected CM(s), if any.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Jammu 17.04.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No Whether the
order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23178446/ 7
