Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December,
2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1773
Author: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
Bench: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
1 MCRC-36890-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
MCRC-36890-2019
(RAEES KHAN Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)
Jabalpur, Dated : 02-12-2019
Shri Anurag Sahu, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Rajesh Tiwari, learned G.A. for the respondent/State.
Original papers of the motorcycle bearing registration No.MP/12- MP/0880 has been produced by
the learned counsel for the applicant.
Case diary is available.
The case is heard finally with the consent of both the parties. This petition has been filed under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C. against the o rd er dated 16/08/2019 passed by Special Judge, Special Court
under Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as "ÂœNDPS
Act"Â) Khandwa in Special Case NDPS No.3/2019, whereby learned Special Judge rejected the
applicant's application filed u/S.457/451 of Cr.P.C to get the interim custody of the motorcycle
bearing registration No.MP/12-MP/0880, seized by the Police Station Kotwali, District Khandwa in
Crime No.776/2018 registered for the offence Punishable under Section 8, 20 of the NDPS Act.
2. It is alleged that the Police seized motorcycle bearing registration No.MP/12-MP/0880 in
connection with Crime No.776/2018 for the offence punishable under Section 8, 20 of the NDPS Act
and after investigation, police filed the charge-sheet and on that charge sheet Special Case NDPS
No.3/2019 was registered, which is pending before Special Judge (NDPS), Khandwa (notified under
NDPS Act). During pendency of the case, the applicant, who is the registered owner of the said
motorcycle bearing registration No.MP/12-MP/0880 filed an application under Section 457/451 of
Cr.P.C. before Special Judge Khandwa for getting interim custody of the said vehicle. The learned
Special Judge rejected the application vide order dated 16/08/2019. Being aggrieved by that order,
applicant filed this petition.
2 MCRC-36890-2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 1
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
3. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that applicant is the registered owner of the
motorcycle bearing registration No.MP/12-MP/0880, so he is entitled to get the custody of said
vehicle. He further submitted that learned Special Judge committed mistake in rejecting the prayer
of the applicant and not giving the said vehicle in his interim custody. In this regard, counsel has
relied on the Apex Court judgment passed in the case of Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai vs. State of
Gujarat (2002)10 SCC 283, whereby the Court held that whatever be the situation, it is of no use to
keep seized vehicle at Police Stations for long period. It is for the Magistrate to pass appropriate
orders immediately by taking bond and guarantee as well as security for return of said vehicle, if
required at any point of time. Hence counsel prayed that the application be allowed.
4 . On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondent/State has opposed the submissions of
learned counsel for the applicant and has submitted that the said vehicle was seized by the police
under the NDPS Act, therefore, looking to the provisions of Section 52A of the NDPS Act and the
Notification dated 16/01/2015 in which it is mentioned that seized conveyance will also be disposed
of by the Drug Disposal Committee learned trial Court has rightly rejected the applicant'Â™s
application.
5. This Court has gone through the record and arguments put forth by both the parties. It appears
from the record that learned Special Judge rejected the applicant'Â™s prayer only on the ground
that as per the notification dated 16/01/2015 issued by the Central Government under Section 52A
of the Act, all narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances
seized under the NDPS Act shall be disposed of by the Drugs Disposal Committee and according to
Sub-rule (5) of the Rule 9 of the said notification, seized vehicles can be disposed off by the
Committee through auction. If the vehicle is given in the interim custody to the applicant, then the
proceedings of the Drug Disposal Committee will be 3 MCRC-36890-2019 hampered. But the
reasons assigned by the learned Special Judge for rejecting the applicant's application does not
appear to be correct.
6. The relevant provisions of the NDPS Act and the notification dated 16/01/2015 reads as under:-
"ÂœSection 52A as amended by Act 16 of 2014, deals with disposal of seized drugs
and psychotropic substances. It reads:-
"ÂœSection 52A : Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the hazardous nature,
vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of proper storage space or any other
relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances,
controlled substances or conveyances, b y notification in the Official Gazette, specify
such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyance or
class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances, class of controlled
substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after their seizure, be
disposed of by such officer and in such manner as that Government may, from time
to time, determine after following the procedure hereinafter specified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 2
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
( 2 ) Where any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances has
been seized and forwarded to t h e officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or to the officer
empowered under section 53, the officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall prepare an inventory of
such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances containing such
details relating to their description, quality, quantity, mode of packing, marks, numbers or such
other identifying particulars of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances or the packing in which they are packed, country of origin and other particulars 4
MCRC-36890-2019 as the officer referred to in sub-section (1) may consider relevant to the identity
of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances in any proceedings
under this Act and make an application, to any Magistrate for the purpose of-
(a) certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared; or (b ) taking, in the
presence of such Magistrate, photographs of "such drugs, substances or conveyances
and certifying such photographs as true; or (c ) allowing to draw representative
samples of such drugs or substances, in the presence of such Magistrate and
certifying the correctness of any list of samples so drawn.
(3) When an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as soon
as may be, allow the application.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872)
or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offence
under this Act, shall treat the inventory, the photographs of [narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances] and any list of
samples drawn under sub-section (2) and certified by the Magistrate, as primary
evidence in respect of such offence.]Â€"
S ub Clause 5 of clause 9 of Notification dated 16.01.2015 in which the provision has
been made for disposal of the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or the conveyances under Section 52A of the NDPS Act provides as
under:-
( 5 ) Narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances having
legitimate medical or industrial use, and conveyances shall be disposed of in the
following manner:-
( a ) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances which are in
the form of formulations and labeled in accordance with the provisions of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940
5 MCRC-36890-2019 (23 of 1940) and the rules made thereunder may be sold, by way of tender or
auction or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug Disposal Committee, after
confirming the composition and formulation from the licensed manufacturer mentioned in the
label, to a person fulfilling the requirements of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 3
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and the rules and orders
made thereunder, provided that a minimum of 60% of the shelf Psychotropic Substances Rules,
1985.life of the seized formulation remains at the time of such sale;
( b ) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances seized in the form of
formulations and without proper labeling shall be destroyed;
( c ) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances seized in bulk form may be
sold by way of tender or auction or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug Disposal
Committee, to a person fulfilling the requirements of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of
1940) and the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985), and the rules and
orders made thereunder, after confirming the standards and fitness of the seized substances for
medical purposes from the appropriate authority under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of
1940) and the rules made thereunder;
(d) controlled substances having legitimate industrial use may be sold, by way of tender or auction
or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug Disposal Committee, to a person fulfilling
the requirements of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and the
rules and orders made thereunder;
(e) seized conveyances shall be sold off by way of tender or auction as determined by the Drug
Disposal Committee.
7. Sections 60(3) and 63 of NDPS Act also have relevance to the 6 MCRC-36890-2019 issue involved
in this case for determination. Section 60(3) and Section 63 of the NDPS Act reads as follows:-
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to
confiscation.-
( 1 ) xxxxx (2) xxxxx (3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug
or psychotropic substance, or any article liable to confiscation under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or
conveyance proves that it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the
owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person-in-charge of the animal or
conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable precautions against such
use.
63. Procedure in making confiscation.- (1) In the trial of offences und er this Act,
whether the accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide
whether any article or thing seized under this Act is liable to confiscation For
Subsequent orders under section 60 or section 61 or section 62, and, if it decides that
the article is so liable, it may order confiscation accordingly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 4
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act appears to be liable to
confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or section 62, but the person who
committed the offence in connection therewith is not known or cannot be found, the
court may inquire into and decide such liability, and may order confiscation
accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or thing shall be made until the
expiry of one month from the date of seizure, or without hearing any person who may
claim any right thereto and the evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his
claim:
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a narcotic drug,
psychotropic substance [or controlled substance] the opium poppy, coca plant or
cannabis plant is liable to speedy and
7 MCRC-36890-2019 natural decay, or if the court is of the opinion that its sale would be for the
benefit of its owner, it may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of this sub-section
shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of the sale."
8. From the perusal of the above-mentioned provisions of NDPS Act and the Notification, it emerges
that earlier in the Act there were no provisions regarding the pre-trial disposal of the seized narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances. The storage of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances up to the final conclusion of the trial of the cases created many problems. Section
52-A(1) of the NDPS Act, 1985 empowers the Central Government to prescribe by a notification the
procedure to be followed for seizure, storage and disposal of drugs and psychotropic substances. So,
to counter the problems like vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraints of proper storage space
and other relevant problems the Central Government in the exercise of that power has issued said
notification, which prescribes the procedure of pre-trial disposal and destruction of seized narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and conveyance.
9 . However the legislature has not given any power to the Drugs Disposal Committee to decide the
claim of a person who place claims on the conveyance (vehicle) seized under the provisions of NDPS
Act for illegal transporting of any narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, as given by the
legislature to the special Court under Section 60 and 63 of the Act. Where a person claims for
release the vehicle seized under the provisions of NDPS Act for illegal transportation of any narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances, there are no provisions in the notification to decide that claim.
So, in that case, the provisions of Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act would prevail on the provisions
of the notification issued by the Central Government under Section 52A of the NDPS Act. According
to the provisions of Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act, seized conveyance cannot be disposed of
without 8 MCRC-36890-2019 deciding the claim of the person who claimed that conveyance and
the power to decide the claim of such a person is only given by the legislature to special court under
Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act. In Sections 52 and 52A of NDPS Act, the word 'confiscation' is not
used because the trial is yet to come and it is the discretion of the trial Court "to confiscate or not to
confiscate" the conveyance seized under the NDPS Act as per the legal provisions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 5
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
10. Although Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Mohanlal, (2016) 3 SCC 379
held "ÂœNo sooner the seizure of any narcotic drugs and psychotropic and controlled substances
and conveyances is affected, the same shall be forwarded to the officer in charge of the nearest police
station or to the officer empowered under Section 53 of the Act. The officer concerned shall then
approach the Magistrate with an application under Section 52-A(2) of the Act, which shall be
allowed by the Magistrate as soon as may be required under sub-section (3) of Section 52-A, as
discussed by us in the body of this judgment under the heading "Âœseizure and sampling"Â(cid:132).
1 1 . But in that judgment Apex Court has not dealt with the provisions of Section 60(3) and 63 of the
NDPS Act and has not held that where a person claims to the conveyance seized under the
provisions of NDPS Act for illegal transporting of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic or controlled
substances, the committee has the power to dispose of the said vehicle before decision of his claim
by the concerned special judge. So in the considered opinion of this Court, the ultimate effect of the
provisions of the Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act is that where a person claims to get a vehicle
seized under the provisions of NDPS Act, for illegal transporting of any contraband, the committee
cannot dispose that vehicle unless the claim of the person is decided by the concerned Court. The
disposal of conveyance in terms of the Para-9(5)(e) by the committee is only possible after the 9
MCRC-36890-2019 confiscation proceeding is complete. As also held by the Single Bench of Tripura
High Court in the Case of Sri Sankar Das Vs The State of Tripura criminal petition No.9 of 2018
Judgement dated 16th March of 2018.
12. On perusal of the provisions of Section 60(3) and Section 63 of the NDPS Act, as mentioned
above it is clear that the conveyance seized under the NDPS Act shall be liable to confiscation only
when the owner of the conveyance who was given an opportunity by the Court could not prove that
the conveyance was used without his knowledge or connivance. The Court will have to decide
whether a vehicle seized under the NDPS Act is liable to confiscation only on conclusion of the trial.
13. There is no provision in the NDPS Act to restrict the power of the trial Court to release the
vehicle in interim custody. It has been held by this Court in the case of Pandurang Kadam vs State of
M.P. 2005 (2) ANJ MP 351, that notwithstanding the fact that the vehicle is liable to be confiscated
under Section 60 of the NDPS Act, it may be released in interim custody in appropriate cases. Thus,
interim custody should not be denied to the owner of the vehicle, simply because it is liable to be
confiscated under Section 60 of the NDPS Act.
14. There is also no evidence on record to show that applicant has a criminal past and he was
involved in similar crimes in the past too. If the seized vehicle is kept lying at the Police Station, the
value of the said vehicle would be diminished and its parts would be damaged. So in the considered
opinion of this Court learned Special Judge committed mistake in rejecting the applicant'Â™s
application to get the interim custody of the vehicle.
1 5 . Hence, petition is allowed and it is directed that the said motorcycle bearing registration
No.MP/12-MP/0880 seized in Crime No.776/2018 registered at Police Station Kotwali, District
Khandwa for the offence Punishable under Section 8, 20 of NDPS Act be released in favour of
applicant who is registered owner of the vehicle on the following terms and conditions :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 6
Raees Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 December, 2019
10 MCRC-36890-2019 1 . The applicant Raees Khan S/o Majid Khan shall furnish
Supurdiginama to the sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lacs Only) and the surety
of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court for releasing the vehicle in
question.
2 . The applicant shall also furnish an undertaking that he shall produce the vehicle in
question as and when required during the trial.
3. The applicant shall not alienate the same or make use of such vehicle for any
unlawful purpose during pendency of the case.
4 . An undertaking shall also be given by the applicant that the nature of the vehicle
in question shall not be changed without prior permission of this Court.
15. It is further directed that before releasing the vehicle in interim custody of the
applicant, the S.H.O. of concerning Police station shall get photographs sized 18 x 12
inches of the concerned vehicle taken from all sides and also the photographs
showing engine number and chassis number.
Such photographs shall be filed in the trial Court to be kept along with the record.
16. With the aforesaid directions, this petition stands disposed of. Certified copy as per rules.
(RAJEEV KUMAR DUBEY) JUDGE as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/81779260/ 7
