Raghuveersingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 30 April, 2019
Raghuveersingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 30 April,
2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH :INDORE BENCH
M.Cr.C. No.11874/2019
(Raghuveersingh Vs. State of M.P.)
Indore dated :30.04.2019
Shri Amitabh Upadhyaya, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Nisheet Wishard, learned Public Prosecutor for the
non-applicant/State.
Heard. Case diary perused.
This is first application under Section 439 of Cr.P.C. for
grant of bail in connection with Crime No.59/19, registered at
Police Station - Afzalpur, District - Mandsaur(M.P.), for
commission of offence punishable under Section 34(2) of M.P.
Excise Act, 1915. The applicant is in custody since 28/02/2019.
As per case diary, 54 bulk litre of illicit liquor has been
recovered from the possession of the present applicant for which
he is having no valid license. On the basis of the aforesaid, the
alleged offence has been registered against the present applicant.
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the
applicant is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the
alleged offence. There is no legal and admissible evidence
against the applicant to connect him with the alleged crime. He
further submits that after investigation, charge-sheet has been
filed. No further custodial interrogation from the applicant is
required. The alleged offence is triable by Judicial Magistrate First
Class. Therefore, he prays for grant of bail.
Learned Public Prosecutor for the non-applicant/State has
opposed the prayer.
On due consideration of the totality of the facts and
circumstances of the case and material evidence available in the
case diary, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the
case, I allow this bail application and it is directed that Applicant -
Raghuveersingh be released on bail upon his furnishing a
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH :INDORE BENCH
M.Cr.C. No.11874/2019
(Raghuveersingh Vs. State of M.P.)
personal bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand)
with two local sureties in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
concerned JMFC/CJM for his appearance before him or trial
Court, as the case may be on each and every date of hearing
fixed in this behalf by the Court concerned during trial and, if
during trial he found absent without any sufficient cause by the
trial Court then the bail order passed by this Court shall
automatically come to an end. This order will remain operative
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168366444/ 1
Raghuveersingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 30 April, 2019
subject to the compliance of the following conditions :-
1.
The applicant will comply with all the terms and conditions of the bond executed by him;
2. The applicant will co-operate in the trial/investigation, as the case may be;
3. The applicant will not indulge himself in extending inducement, threat to the prosecution
witnesses or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or to the Police Officer, as the case may be;
4. The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused;
5. The applicant will not seek unnecessary adjournments during the trial;
6. The applicant will mark his presence at Police Station - Afzalpur, District - Mandsaur (M.P.) once
in a month till the trial is completed.
A copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned for compliance.
Certified copy as per rules.
(Ms. Vandana Kasrekar) Judge pn Preetha Nair 2019.04.30 17:18:04 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168366444/ 2
