Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
S. No. 117
Suppl. Cause List
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CrlM No. 871/2025
In CRM(M) No. 217/2023
Rahil Mughal ...Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Mian Tufail, Advocate
Vs.
UT of J&K and Ors. ...Respondent(s)
Through: None
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
09.07.2025
1. Quashing of charge-sheet as also FIR no.33/2023 dated 03.05.2023 pending trial before the court
of Sub Judge/Special Mobile Magistrate, Srinagar (Trial Court) is sought for in the instant
application jointly filed by petitioner and respondent No.4.
2. I have heard the learned counsel for petitioner and perused the record on the file and considered
the matter.
3. An application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. had been filed by respondent No.4 before the Trial
Court who forwarded it to SHO Police Station, Sadder for submission of status report. It is averred
in the instant application that the SHO concerned instead of filing the status report made a
statement before the Trial Court that he registered FIR against the petitioner and the application of
respondent No.4 came to be dismissed as having been rendered infructuous.
4. Counsel for petitioner would contend that proceedings initiated under Section 488 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure were set at rest as parties resolved the dispute by virtue of settlement by
dissolving the marriage. He would state that in view of above fact situation, impugned FIR and
charge-sheet are bad in law and require to be quashed inasmuch as continuation of proceedings
emanating from aforesaid FIR/challan are causing harassment to petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 1
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
5. In the above backdrop, it would be appropriate to say that provisions of Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
provide for inherent powers to the High Court, which is noticed as under :
"482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. -- Nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders
as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of
the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice."
6. Exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., thus, envisages three circumstances in which
inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code; (ii) to
prevent abuse of the process of court; and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice.
7. It is well settled that inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is designed to achieve a
salutary purpose and that criminal proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a
weapon of harassment. When the Court is satisfied that criminal proceedings amount to an abuse of
process of law or that it amounts to bringing pressure upon accused, in exercise of the inherent
powers such proceedings can be quashed.
8. In State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, the Supreme
Court considered the scope of inherent powers of the Court and after referring to earlier decisions,
the Supreme Court enumerated the following categories of cases by way of illustration where the
extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the inherent powers
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be exercised by the High Court to prevent
abuse of process of Court or otherwise to secure ends of justice:-
"(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the
allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police
officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the
purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 2
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is
an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
9. A three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in State of Karnataka v. M. Devenderappa and
another, 2002 (3) SCC 89, had an occasion to consider the ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. By
analyzing the scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C., the Apex Court has laid down that the authority of the
Court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to
produce injustice, the Court has power to prevent abuse. It has further held that the Court would be
justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that the initiation/ continuance thereof amounts to the
abuse of the process of the Court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of
justice. Following was laid down in paragraph 06:
"6......All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in the absence of any express
provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the
right and to undo a wrong in course of administration of justice on the principle
quando lex aliquidalicuiconcedit, concederevidetur et id sine quo res ipsaeesse non
potest (when the law gives a person anything it gives him that without which it
cannot exist). While exercising powers under the section, the court does not function
as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent jurisdiction under the section though wide
has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when such exercise
is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the section itself. It is to be exercised
ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which
alone courts exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any
attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has
power to prevent abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any
action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of
the powers court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that
initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of
these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is
disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a
complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to
assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if
the allegations are accepted in toto."
10. It would also be worthwhile to reproduce paragraph 8 infra:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 3
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
"8.....Judicial process should not be an instrument of oppression, or, needless
harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and
should take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing
process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to
unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the same time the section is not
an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit a prosecution and bring
about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code
and the categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its power under it
relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process of any court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by this Court in State of
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (AIR 1992 SC 604)."
11.The Supreme Court in another case titled as Priya Vrat Singh and others v. Shyam Ji Sahai
reported in 2008 (8) SCC 232, relied on Category 07 as laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra).
In the said case the Allahabad High Court dismissed petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to
quash proceedings under Section 494, 120-B, and 109 IPC and Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act. After noticing background facts and parameters for exercise of powers under
Section 482 Cr. P.C., the Supreme Court has held that Section 482 Cr. P.C. does not confer any new
power on the High Court as it only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which inherent jurisdiction may be
exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down
any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative
enactment dealing with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. The High
Courts, therefore, have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary
for proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the doctrine, which
finds expression in the section, which merely recognizes and preserves inherent powers of the High
Courts. All courts, whether the civil or criminal, possess, in the absence of any express provision, as
inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong
in the course of the administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquidalicuiconcedit,
concederevidetur id sine quo res ipsaesse non potest (when the law gives a person anything it gives
him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers under section 482 Cr.P.C., the
Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent jurisdiction under Section 482
Cr.P.C. though wide has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when such
exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the section itself. It is to be exercised ex
debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone the courts
exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of the justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent abuse. It would be an
abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent
promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers, the court would be justified to quash any proceeding
if it finds that the initiation / continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing
of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 4
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
12.It is not in dispute that matrimonial disputes have been on considerable increase in recent times
resulting in filing of various types of complaints not only against husband but also against relatives
of husband. The question is when such matters are resolved by mutual settlement, the other
pending disputes should also be set at rest
13.It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to the filing of complaint, FIR has been
lodged against petitioner, however, parties after arriving at amicable settlement have dissolved their
marriage and parted their ways and are happy in their individual life. In such circumstances
pendency of criminal proceedings before Trial court or for that matter any other proceeding/case(s)
of like nature before any other Court/forum, amounts to abuse of process of law and in order to
serve interests of justice, exercise of inherent powers under and in terms of Section 482 Cr.P.C. is
imperative.
14.It may also be relevant to add here that the Supreme Court in B.S. Joshi and others v. State of
Haryana and another, (2003) 4 SCC 675, has held that the High Court in exercise of its inherent
powers under Section 482 can quash criminal proceedings in matrimonial disputes where the
dispute is entirely private and the parties are willing to settle their disputes amicably.
15.After considering the law laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal(supra) and explaining the decisions
rendered in Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra, (1977) 4 SCC 551, Surendra Nath Mohanty and
another v. State of Orissa, (1999) 5 SCC 238; and Pepsi Foods Limited and another v. Special
Judicial Magistrate and others, (1998) 5 SCC 749, the Supreme Court held:
"8. We are, therefore, of the view that if for the purpose of securing the ends of
justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 would not be a bar to the
exercise of power of quashing. It is, however, a different matter depending upon the
facts and circumstances of each case whether to exercise or not such a power."
16.Considering matrimonial matters, the Supreme Court also held that the special features in such
matrimonial matters were evident and it became the duty of the court to encourage genuine
settlements of matrimonial disputes. Thus, inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482 of
the Code are wide and unfettered. In B.S. Joshi (supra), the Supreme Court has upheld the powers
of the High Court under Section 482 to quash criminal proceedings where dispute is of a private
nature and a compromise is entered into between the parties who are willing to settle their
differences amicably. It is worthwhile to mention here that the said decision is directly applicable to
the case in hand.
17.In Jitendra Raghuvanshi and others v. Babita Raghuvanshi and another, [2013] 2 SCR 921, the
Supreme Court has viewed that it is the duty of the courts to encourage genuine settlements of
matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the same are on considerable increase. Even if the offences
are non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the court is satisfied that parties
have settled the same amicably and without any pressure for the purpose of securing ends of justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 5
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
18.There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
occupies an important place and it has an important role to play in the society. Therefore, every
effort should be made in the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life
and live peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably
by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
matrimonial matters, the courts should be less hesitant in exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction.
19.It is trite to state that the power under Section 482 Cr. P. C. should be exercised sparingly and
with circumspection only when the court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the process of the court or that ends of
justice require that proceedings ought to be quashed. Exercise of such power would depend upon
the facts and circumstances of each case and it has to be exercised inappropriate cases in order to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone the courts exist. It is the duty of the
courts to encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes and Section 482 of the Code
enables the High Court to pass such orders. The High Court in exercise of its inherent powers can
quash criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in appropriate cases in order to meet the ends of
justice and Section 320 Cr.P.C. does not limit or affect the powers of the High Court under Section
482 Cr.P.C.
20.In the facts and circumstance of this case and taking note of their stand taken by them in their
pleadings, it would serve no purpose to keep case-FIR/criminal proceedings pending against
petitioner and this Court in exercise of its inherent powers vested under Section 482 Cr.P.C.,
quashes the same so that parties get rid of uncertainties that prevail between them in view of the
impugned challan/proceedings. Reliance in this regard is placed on the judgment of the Supreme
Court rendered in the case of Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 and Narinder Singh
v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC
466. The observations of the Supreme Court made in the paragraph 29 in the case of Narinder Singh
(supra) are very relevant and same are "29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay
down the following principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate
treatment to the settlement between the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of the
Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to accept the
settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution:
29.2 When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
secure:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 6
Rahil Mughal vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 9 July, 2025
(i) end of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court. While exercising the power the High
Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
29.3 Such a power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private
in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
public servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender:
29.4 On the other hand, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
predominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of commercial
transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes should be
quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among themselves".
21.The aforementioned judgements of the Supreme Court have been relied by various
High Courts and in appropriate cases, the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. have
been exercised to prevent the abuse of process of law and secure ends of justice.
22.In light of aforesaid legal position, besides that the parties have already settled
their dispute amicably, this Court thinks it appropriate to allow instant petition as
continuance of proceedings before Trial Court would be sheer abuse of process of law.
23.Based on the all-inclusive consideration of the facts and circumstances summed
up in foregoing paragraphs, exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
seemingly is warranted. Hence, the instant petition is allowed. FIR no.33/2023 under
Section 4 of Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act 2019 registered
at police station Sadder Srinagar, as also challan pending trial before the Trial Court
and criminal proceedings emanated therefrom and pending before the Trial Court are
quashed.
24.Copy of this order be sent to Trial court.
25.Disposed of in terms of above.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 09.07.2025 Manzoor authenticity of this
document CrlM No. 871/2025 15.07.2025 10:28 In CRM(M) No. 217/2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61140557/ 7
