Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
Author: Tashi Rabstan
Bench: Tashi Rabstan
Sr.No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRA No. 03/2017
Crl M No. 253/2023
c/w
CONF No. 05/2016
Reserved on: 19.12.2023
Pronounced on: 26.12.2023
Raj Kumar alias Raju .....Applicant
Through: Mr. Muzaffar Iqbal Khan, Advocate
Vs
State of J&K ..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Ramesh Arora, AAG
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE TASHI RABSTAN, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
ORDER
(Rajesh Sekhri-J)
1. The present application, purportedly in terms of Section 426 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1989 (Cr.P.C. for short) has been preferred by the applicant- life convict for suspension of sentence
and grant of bail pending disposal of the appeal.
2. Applicant is aggrieved of the judgment of conviction and sentence dated 15.01.2016 passed by
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Rajouri in case titled, 'State v. Raj Kumar @ Raju' vide which, he
has been convicted and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.5,000/- for
commission of offence under Section 302 of Ranbir Penal Code, 1989 (RPC, for short) and one
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 1
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
month simple imprisonment on default of payment of fine. He has preferred conviction appeal in
terms of Section 410 Cr.P.C.
3. Applicant seeks suspension of sentence and enlargement on bail on the predominant premise that
he is facing incarceration for the last more than twelve years and six months and there is no
likelihood of his appeal being heard and disposed of soon.
4. Heard arguments and perused the file.
5. Mr. Muzaffar Iqbal learned counsel appearing for the applicant has primarily relied upon Saudan
Singh v. The State of Uttar Pradesh (Criminal Appeal No. 308/2022 dated 25.02.2022) to contend
that applicant-life convict has completed more than ten years of sentence and since statutory appeal
preferred by the applicant is not in proximity of hearing, therefore, sentence be suspended and
applicant be enlarged on bail. This plea has been strenuously opposed by the other side on the
ground of gravity of offence and severity of punishment attached thereto.
6. Hon'ble Supreme Court as recent as in May, 2023, in Om Prakash Sahni v. Jai Shankar
Chaudhary and anr.; 2023 Live Law (SC) 389 has observed that sentence can be suspended only
when convict has fair chances of acquittal. It was held that endeavor on the part of appellate Court
should be to see as to whether the case presented by the prosecution and accepted by the Trial Court
can be said to be a case in which, ultimately the convict stands for fair chance of acquittal. Relevant
excerpts of the judgment read as under:
"23. The principle underlying the theory of criminal jurisprudence in our country is
that an accused is presumed to be innocent till he is held guilty by a court of the
competent jurisdiction. Once the accused is held guilty, the presumption of innocence
gets erased. In the same manner, if the accused is acquitted, then the presumption of
innocence gets further fortified.
24. From perusal of Section 389 of the CrPC, it is evident that save and except the
matter falling under the category of sub-section 3 neither any specific principle of law
is laid down nor any criteria has been fixed for consideration of the prayer of the
convict and further, having a judgment of conviction erasing the presumption leaning
in favour of the accused regarding innocence till contrary recorded by the court of the
competent jurisdiction, and in the aforesaid background, there happens to be a fine
distinction between the prayer for bail at the pre-conviction as well as the
post-conviction stage, viz. Sections 437, 438, 439 and 389(1) of the CrPC.
26. This Court, in the case of Ash Mohammad v. Shiv Raj Singh alias Lalla Babu and
Another, reported in (2012) 9 SCC 446, has observed in para 30, as follows:
"30. We may usefully state that when the citizens are scared to lead a peaceful life
and this kind of offences usher in an impediment in establishment of orderly society,
the duty of the court becomes more pronounced and the burden is heavy. There
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 2
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
should have been proper analysis of the criminal antecedents. Needless to say,
imposition of conditions is subsequent to the order admitting an accused to bail. The
question should be posed whether the accused deserves to be enlarged on bail or not
and only thereafter issue of imposing conditions would arise. We do not deny for a
moment that period of custody is a relevant factor but simultaneously the totality of
circumstances and the criminal antecedents are also to be weighed. They are to be
weighed in the scale of collective cry and desire. The societal concern has to be kept
in view in juxtaposition of individual liberty. Regard being had to the said parameter
we are inclined to think that the social concern in the case at hand deserves to be
given priority over lifting the restriction on liberty of the accused.
(Emphasis supplied)
28. In Sidhartha Vashisht alias Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), reported in
(2008) 5 SCC 230 (popularly known as the Jessica Lal murder case), this Court had
the occasion to consider the rival submissions as well as various judicial
pronouncements referred to by both the sides over the prayer for bail. Thus, it has
been held as follows:
"19. We are conscious and mindful that the main matter (appeal) is admitted and is
pending for final hearing. Observations on merits, one way or the other, therefore,
are likely to prejudice one or the other party to the appeal. We are hence not entering
into the correctness or otherwise of the evidence on record. It, however, cannot be
overlooked that as on today, the applicant has been found guilty and convicted by a
competent criminal court. Initial presumption of innocence in favour of the accused,
therefore, is no more available to the applicant.
30. ....In the above cases, it has been observed that once a person has been convicted,
normally, an appellate court will proceed on the basis that such person is guilty. It is
no doubt true that even thereafter, it is open to the appellate court to suspend the
sentence in a given case by recording reasons. But it is well settled, as observed in
Vijay Kumar [(2002) 9 SCC 364 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1195 : JT 2002 Supp (1) SC 60] that
in considering the prayer for bail in a case involving a serious offence like murder
punishable under Section 302 IPC, the Court should consider all the relevant factors
like the nature of accusation made against the accused, the manner in which the
crime is alleged to have been committed, the gravity of the offence, the desirability of
releasing the accused on bail after he has been convicted for committing serious
offence of murder, etc. It has also been observed in some of the cases that normal
practice in such cases is not to suspend the sentence and it is only in exceptional
cases that the benefit of suspension of sentence can be granted.
31. In Hasmat [(2004) 6 SCC 175 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 1757 : JT (2004) 6 SC 6] , this
Court stated : (SCC p. 176, para 6) ―6.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 3
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
Section 389 of the Code deals with suspension of execution of sentence pending the appeal and
release of the applicant on bail. There is a distinction between bail and suspension of sentence. One
of the essential ingredients of Section 389 is the requirement for the appellate court to record
reasons in writing for ordering suspension of execution of the sentence or order appealed. If he is in
confinement, the said court can direct that he be released on bail or on his own bond. The
requirement of recording reasons in writing clearly indicates that there has to be careful
consideration of the relevant aspects and the order directing suspension of sentence and grant of
bail should not be passed as a matter of routine."
(emphasis supplied)
32. The mere fact that during the period of trial, the accused was on bail and there was no misuse of
liberty, does not per se warrant suspension of execution of sentence and grant of bail. What is really
necessary is to consider whether reasons exist to suspend execution of the sentence and grant of
bail."
(Emphasis supplied)
29. In the case of Atul Tripathi v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others, reported in (2014) 9 SCC 177,
whereunder apart from identifying the differences of consideration of prayer for grant of bail
relating to preconviction stage as well as post-conviction stage, it has been held in para 14 which is
as follows:
"14. Service of a copy of the appeal and application for bail on the Public Prosecutor
by the appellant will not satisfy the requirement of the first proviso to Section 389(1)
CrPC. The appellate court may even without hearing the Public Prosecutor, decline to
grant bail. However, in case the appellate court is inclined to consider the release of
the convict on bail, the Public Prosecutor shall be granted an opportunity to show
cause in writing as to why the appellant be not released on bail. Such a stringent
provision is introduced only to ensure that the court is apprised of all the relevant
factors so that the court may consider whether it is an appropriate case for release
having regard to the manner in which the crime is committed, gravity of the offence,
age, criminal antecedents of the convict, impact on public confidence in the
justice-delivery system, etc......
30. In Kishori Lal v. Rupa and Others, reported in (2004) 7 SCC 638, this Court has indicated the
factors that require to be considered by the courts while granting benefit under Section 389 of the
CrPC in cases involving serious offences like murder etc. Thus, it is useful to refer to the
observations made therein, which are as follows:
"4. Section 389 of the Code deals with suspension of execution of sentence pending
the appeal and release of the appellant on bail. There is a distinction between bail and
suspension of sentence. One of the essential ingredients of Section 389 is the
requirement for the appellate court to record reasons in writing for ordering
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 4
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
suspension of execution of the sentence or order appealed against. If he is in
confinement, the said court can direct that he be released on bail or on his own bond.
The requirement of recording reasons in writing clearly indicates that there has to be
careful consideration of the relevant aspects and the order directing suspension of
sentence and grant of bail should not be passed as a matter of routine.
5. The appellate court is duty-bound to objectively assess the matter and to record
reasons for the conclusion that the case warrants suspension of execution of sentence
and grant of bail. In the instant case, the only factor which seems to have weighed
with the High Court for directing suspension of sentence and grant of bail is the
absence of allegation of misuse of liberty during the earlier period when the
accusedrespondents were on bail.
6. The mere fact that during the trial, they were granted bail and there was no
allegation of misuse of liberty, is really not of much significance. The effect of bail
granted during trial loses significance when on completion of trial, the accused
persons have been found guilty. The mere fact that during the period when the
accused persons were on bail during trial there was no misuse of liberties, does not
per se warrant suspension of execution of sentence and grant of bail. What really was
necessary to be considered by the High Court is whether reasons existed to suspend
the execution of sentence and thereafter grant bail. The High Court does not seem to
have kept the correct principle in view."
31. In Vijay Kumar v. Narendra and Others reported in (2002) 9 SCC 364 and Ramji Prasad v.
Rattan Kumar Jaiswal and Another reported in (2002) 9 SCC 366, it was held by this Court that in
cases involving conviction under Section 302 of the IPC, it is only in exceptional cases that the
benefit of suspension of sentence can be granted. In Vijay Kumar (supra), it was held that in
considering the prayer for bail in a case involving a serious offence like murder punishable under
Section 302 of the IPC, the court should consider the relevant factors like the nature of accusation
made against the accused, the manner in which the crime is alleged to have been committed, the
gravity of the offence, and the desirability of releasing the accused on bail after they have been
convicted for committing the serious offence of murder.
32. The aforesaid view is reiterated by this Court in the case of Vasant Tukaram Pawar v. State of
Maharashtra reported in (2005) 5 SCC 281 and Gomti v. Thakurdas and Others reported in (2007)
11 SCC 160.
33. Bearing in mind the aforesaid principles of law, the endeavour on the part of the Court,
therefore, should be to see as to whether the case presented by the prosecution and accepted by the
Trial Court can be said to be a case in which, ultimately the convict stands for fair chances of
acquittal. If the answer to the above said question is to be in the affirmative, as a necessary corollary,
we shall have to say that, if ultimately the convict appears to be entitled to have an acquittal at the
hands of this Court, he should not be kept behind the bars for a pretty long time till the conclusion
of the appeal, which usually take very long for decision and disposal. However, while undertaking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 5
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
the exercise to ascertain whether the convict has fair chances of acquittal, what is to be looked into is
something palpable. To put it in other words, something which is very apparent or gross on the face
of the record, on the basis of which, the Court can arrive at a prima facie satisfaction that the
conviction may not be sustainable. The Appellate Court should not reappreciate the evidence at the
stage of Section 389 of the CrPC and try to pick up few lacunas or loopholes here or there in the case
of the prosecution. Such would not be a correct approach."
7. It is manifestly clear from the principle of law enunciated in Om Prakash Sahni (supra) that
appellate court, while considering the suspension of sentence envisaged under Section 389 Cr.P.C.
cannot embark upon to re-appreciate the evidence and try to pick up lacunas or loopholes in the
prosecution case. However, if appellate Court arrives at a prima facie satisfaction that convict
ultimately may have a clear chance of acquittal and prima facie conviction is not sustainable, only
then, order of substantive sentence can be suspended.
8. It is pertinent to mention that applicant, in the present case, came to be convicted by the trial
court on the basis of direct evidence as all the eye witnesses fortified the prosecution case. Graphic
narration of the complainant recorded during the trial has been supported by all the eye witnesses.
Mr. Khan learned counsel for the applicant has taken this Court through statements of prosecution
witnesses to highlight certain contradictions and discrepancies. However, whether these
contradictions and discrepancies or exaggerations in the testimonies of prosecution witnesses are so
glaring to affect the core of the prosecution case, can be examined at the stage of final consideration.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Om Prakash Sahni (supra) has clearly ruled that such discrepancies and
contradictions cannot be taken into consideration by the appellate court while considering
suspension of sentence in terms of Section 389 Cr.P.C.
9. A Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Rakesh Kumar v. State of J&K [CRA No. 12/2018 dated
01.08.2023] has also relied upon Om Prakash Sahni to decline the plea of suspension of sentence
and enlargement of the convict on bail in a similar fact situation.
10. No doubt, as per nominal rolls submitted by the jail authorities, the applicant is under
incarceration for about 12 years now, however mere long incarceration, per se, does not warrant
suspension of sentence and grant of bail. Learned counsel for the applicant has failed to point out
anything gross or apparent on the face of the record to convince that conviction recorded by the trial
court is not sustainable.
11. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed above, we are of the considered view that
there is nothing apparent on the face of record from which this Court can arrive at prima facie
satisfaction that conviction against the applicant is not sustainable. Hence the application seeking
suspension of sentence and release of applicant/convict on bail is, therefore, dismissed.
12. CrlM No. 253/2023 stands disposed of.
13. Registry to list the main appeal on 05.03.2024.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (TASHI RABSTAN)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 6
Raj Kumar Alias Raju vs State Of J&K on 26 December, 2023
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
26.12.2023
Paramjeet
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177867772/ 7
