Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & LADAKH
AT JAMMU
MA No.10/2023 (O&M)
Reserved on: 24.05.2023
Pronounced on: 21.07.2023
Raj Kumar Gupta ...Appellant(s)
Through :- Mr. Parveen Kapahi, Adv.
v/s
Bank of India and anr. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Jugal Kishore, Advocate
CORAM: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The instant appeal has been preferred by the appellant against order dated 09.05.2023 passed by
learned 1st Additional District Judge, Jammu (Court below, for short) in file No. IA/01/2-23 titled
Raj Kumar Gupta v. Bank of India and anr.
2. The parties hereinafter shall be referred by their rank and title of the suit i.e. plaintiff and
defendants.
BRIEF FACTS
3. Plaintiff filed a suit in the Court below for declaration that the deed of further charge of mortgage
of land cum additional mortgage dated 17.02.2014 and mortgage dated 06.02.2014 respectively
executed by the plaintiff in favour of the defendant-Bank as null and void and not operative
ineffective and not legally enforceable and cannot be acted upon by the defendants for alienation in
any manner being nonest in the eyes of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 1
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
4. Plaintiff while filing the aforesaid suit before the Court below has specifically pleaded that he was
allotted state land and thereafter rights were vested in the land in him under Section 08 of the Land
Revenue Act with a restriction under Section 8A that the land shall be vested in the occupant and
shall not be alienated after such vesting without permission of committee or such authority as may
be prescribed. The detail of the land which was vested upon the appellant is as under:
"a. Land measuring 11 kanals 03 marlas comprising in Khasra No. 126 Khata No. 41
Khewat No.04.
b. Land measuring 10 kanals 14 marlas comprising in Khasra No. 125. c. Land
measuring 04 kanals comprising in Khasra No. 126/1.
d. Land measuring 18 kanals 13 marlas comprising in Khasra No. 130.
e. Land measuring 33 kanals 07 marlas comprising in Khasra No.86 Khewat No. 06
in fact total land is 44 kanals 10 malas which has been wrongly calculated by the bank
in the mortgage deed."
5. The specific case of the plaintiff before the Court below was that in terms of Section 8 of Agrarian
Reforms Act, the plaintiff had no right to transfer the said land by sale, gift, exchange, will, mortgage
or by any other means whatsoever and any transfer of such right made after 01.05.1973 shall be null
void and such rights shall vest in State of Jammu and Kashmir and as per Section 28A of Agrarian
Reforms Act, no person who is vested with right under Section 08 of Agrarian Reforms Act shall
transfer such land or such right to any other person except the government or its agencies. It is
averred that the plaintiff is promoter of M/s New Jammu Flour Mill Private Limited Adha Sarore
District Samba and was running floor mill on the said land and the defendants had approached him
for grant of certain loan facilities and impelled the plaintiff to raise loan facilities from their bank
after taking over from Punjab and Sind Bank. The plaintiff was reluctant to shift his account from
Punjab and Sind bank to bank of defendant as the account of plaintiff was running satisfactory
whereas the continuous persistent of the officers of the defendants to take over the accounts of the
plaintiff from the said bank and also offered the enhancement of loan facilities which was availed of
by the plaintiff from the Punjab and Sind Bank. The defendants (bank) on their own got verified the
title of the property and also its valuation and forced and impelled the plaintiff to file application for
taking over the loan from the Punjab and Sind Bank and legal opinion obtained by the defendants
stated that the land in question had been allotted/vested upon plaintiff under Section 08 of Agrarian
Reforms Act which was prohibited under law for not transferring the said property in any manner
except to the Government. The defendants in order to increase their business profile took over the
loan and also security of immovable property which was subject matter of suit and was vested upon
the plaintiff under Section 08 of Agrarian Reforms Act which was not alienable in terms of Sections
26 and 26 A of Agrarian Reforms Act 1976. The defendants got executed on 06.02.2014 and
subsequently on 17.02.2014 mortgages for security of certain loan facilities by creating mortgage
without possession of the land mentioned above and got registered mortgages in the court of Sub
Judge Jammu on 18.02.2014. These mortgaged also covered the other properties belonging to the
plaintiff situated in Jammu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 2
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
6. It was specific plea of the plaintiff before the Court below that the documents which were
executed with respect to the land were vested upon the plaintiff under Section 08 and were not
transferrable in any manner despite legal embargo placed by Sections 26 and 26 A of the Agrarian
Reforms Act. The account of the plaintiff became non performance assets in year 2016 and the
defendants started threatening to enforce the said mortgages for realization of their alleged dues.
These mortgages were void from the date of its inception which was required to be declared,
ineffective, non-existing and void and nonest in the eyes of law. It has been further pleaded that the
defendants filed civil suits of recovery against the plaintiff and declared that the said property which
has been registered by way of mortgage deeds dated 06.02.2014 subsequently on 17.02.2014
respectively would be enforced by selling the same which cannot be transferred/prohibited under
law to be transferred even by the plaintiff because these mortgages with respect to the land in
question vested upon plaintiff under Section 08 of Agrarian Reforms Act cannot be transferred in
any manner much less mortgages of the property which is void ab initio.
7. Plaintiff contended that Court below vide order dated 09.02.2023 after hearing the learned
counsel for the parties and after considering the material placed on record, directed the parties to
maintain the status quo and respondent- bank was directed to file the written statement. The
defendant-Bank has filed its written statement by taking the following pleas/defences:
a. The appellant/plaintiff who had voluntarily mortgaged the land in question, has no
right to challenge the same and the appellant/plaintiff was estopped from challenging
the Mortgage deeds and the nature of land in question which had been legally
mortgaged by him in favour of the Bank.
b. The court has no jurisdiction to entertain and decide the suit as the mortgaged
property was admittedly situated in District Samba.
c. The Suit was barred by limitation as the mortgage deeds were executed in the year
2014 and the suit has been filed after 09 years of the execution of the said mortgage
deeds was hopelessly time barred.
d. The appellant/plaintiff had not come to the court with clean hands and had
concealed the material fact of having applied to the Government for according
sanction for the conversion of land measuring 11 Kanals and 03 marlas under Khasra
No. 126 and 33 Kanals and 07 marlas comprising under Khasra No. 125 (10 Kanals
and 14 Marlas) Khasra No. 126/1 (04 Kanals) and Khasra No. 130 (18 Kanals)
situated at Village Kartholi Tehsil and District Samba from agricultural use to non
agricultural use on the ground that the industrial units are existing on the said land
and said permission was granted by the Government. Vide No. Rev/S/262/2013
dated 25.09.2013 and the nature of said land in the revenue record has thus been
shown as Gair Mumkin Karkhana. The appellant/plaintiff with malafide intentions
has concealed this fact in the suit and therefore the suit is wholly misconceived and is
liable to be dismissed with exemplary costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 3
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
e. The provisions of section 28 and 28-A of Agrarian Reforms Act are subject to the
provisions contained in the said Acts where there is no complete bar of creating
simple mortgage which however is subject to the provisions of Alienation of Land
Act. The land in question has thus been legally mortgaged after grant of permission
by the Govt./Revenue Minister for conversion of the land from agricultural use and
non agricultural use. On spot, the industrial units are existing and the same are being
used for commercial/non-agricultural purpose since long. There was no legal bar for
the mortgage of land in favour of the bank when the said mortgage deeds were
executed by the plaintiff. There is no violation of any provisions of the Agrarian
Reforms Act in mortgaging the land in question in favour of the respondent Bank.
The mortgage deeds thus executed by the plaintiff/appellant in favour of the
respondent bank are legally enforceable.
f. That the land in question was not being used as agricultural land but was a
commercial land with industrial units of the appellant/plaintiff having been raised
thereon and running since long. Therefore, the nature of the land stood already
changed to a commercial land on spot much prior to the execution of the mortgage
deeds. Accordingly the nature of the land in question has been shown as Gair
Mumkin Karkhana and not agricultural land and thus there being no violation of any
provision of the Agrarian Reforms Act, the present suit was not maintainable.
g. That the accounts of the appellant/plaintiff had become NPA and the respondent
bank was coerced to issue notices under the SARFAESI Act and which notices were
challenged by the appellant/plaintiff before the Hon(cid:128)ble High court and district
Judge Samba but failed to succeed in the same.
h. That the borrowers (appellant/plaintiff) by diverting the loan/limit amounts from
their accounts to various accounts of their sister concerns and other related accounts
has failed to utilize the sanctioned loan/limits for the purpose for which the same
were sanctioned. The borrowers and their directors/partners even withdrew huge
cash amounts from the sanctioned loan/limits. Four FIRs stand already registered by
CBI against the Borrower firms and their directors/partners. The Enforcement
Directorate on the basis of FIRS registered by CBI and the material/information
received in the cases from the defendant bank has also proceeded against the
plaintiff/`borrowers/directors/partners of the borrower firms under the provisions
of Prevention of Money Laundering Act."
8. It is contended that Court below, after hearing the parties and examining the record vide order
dated 09.05.2023, dismissed the application seeking temporary injunction and vacated the interim
direction passed on 09.02.2023 against which the present appeal has been preferred by the plaintiff.
9. It is specific stand of the appellant that order dated 09.05.2023 which is impugned in the present
appeal has decided the application filed by the plaintiff in terms of order XXXIX Rules 1, 2 and 3 of
Code of Civil Procedure (CPC, for short) for grant of temporary injunction wherein status quo order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 4
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
dated 09.02.2023 has been vacated by holding that the plaintiff has no prima facie case and also the
balance of convenience does not lie in his favour nor the plaintiff shall suffer any loss or injury as
compare to the defendants in case of vacation of injunction. Accordingly, the court below has
dismissed the application being devoid of any merit and the interim direction dated 09.02.2023
stood vacated. However, court below has further observed that observation made in the order
impugned dated 09.05.2023 are limited for the disposal of the application only and shall not
influence the merit of the main suit which has yet to be decided. SUBMISSION OF LEARNED
COUNSEL FOR THE APPELLANT
10. Mr. Parveen Kapahi, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff while addressing the arguments
has reiterated the grounds taken in the appeal and has vehemently argued that the deed of further
charge of mortgage of land cum additional mortgage dated 17.02.2014 and mortgage deed dated
06.02.2014 respectively executed by the plaintiff in favour of the Bank is null and void and not
operative/ineffective and legally not enforceable and the same cannot be acted upon by the bank for
alienation, in any manner, whatsoever being nonest in the eyes of law as the same is hit by Section
08 of Agrarian Reforms Act and Section 28A of the aforesaid Act. According to him, the land is not
alienable to any person except the Government or its instrumentality as the same is hit by Sections
26 and 6A of the Agrarian Act 1976. Learned counsel has further submitted that since the plaintiff
has a prima facie case which is deducible from the documents on record and the issues arise so,
according to the learned counsel, trial is warranted and the balance of convenience also lies in his
favour and thus, the plaintiff could not have been divested of his legal right to enjoy usufruct of his
proprietary land. He further submits that the suit which has been filed before the court below, the
plaintiff had not challenged any of the action taken under Securitization and Reconstruction of
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (for short, SARFAESI Act) which
was initiated way back in the year 2017 and had entered into compromise under One Time
Settlement (OTS) Scheme which is under challenge before the Court below. Accordingly, as per Mr.
Kapahi, learned court below has to decide the validity of the mortgage under challenge by way of
suit for declaration simplicitor and the same can be declared only by the Civil Court. He further
submits that court below had wrongly come to the conclusion that plaintiff has yet to prove his case
by leading evidence to support his contention about the validity of the said documents under Section
08 of the Agrarian Reforms Act, whereas in the written statements and the documents placed on
record, it was admitted by the defendant-Bank that the said land was allotted under Section 08 of
the Agrarian Reforms Act. Thus, as per learned counsel, the prima facie case, balance of convenience
and irreparable loss and injury was in favour of the plaintiff and the court below ought to have
considered this aspect of the matter. He further submits that SARFAESI Act is not applicable where
civil rights regarding mortgaged property in question between the parties is involved which flows
from the said mortgage. Thus, as per the learned counsel, principle of estoppel was not applicable in
the instant case as no estoppel applies against the statute because the mortgages in question have
been executed against law. In support of his contention, he placed reliance on Sri Raghavan S. v. Sri
N. B. Rajeev [Regular First Appeal No. 1947 of 2016 decided on 22.01.2020].
SUBMISSION OF LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENTS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 5
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
11. Per contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the defendants, Mr. Jugal Kishore Gupta,
while addressing his arguments and opposing the contention of the plaintiff, has vehemently argued
that the suit filed by the plaintiff was not maintainable because the plaintiff who has executed the
mortgage deeds in favour of the defendants is estopped from challenging the same and has also
questioned the maintainability of the suit and the present appeal on legal grounds. Learned counsel
has further raised the ground of territorial jurisdiction and limitation before the Court below by
pleading that the plaintiff has not approached the court with clean hands and has suppressed the
material facts. Learned counsel has further submitted that on spot the industrial units were exiting
though in the revenue record the nature of the land was mentioned as Agricultural land and after
obtaining permission from the Government vide order dated 25.09.2013, mortgage was executed
and the nature of the land been shown as Gair Mumkin Karkhana and not agricultural land. He
further submits that unit of plaintiff has been classified as NPA and notices under Section 13(2) of
the SARFAESI Act have been issued. Mr. Jugal Kishore Gupta further submits that plaintiff having
failed to obtain any relief against the proceedings before this Court as well as learned Principal
Sessions Judge, Samba has mischievously filed the suit which was not maintainable in the light of
the fact that subject matter of the suit situated in the district Samba and thus, the court below lacks
territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate the same. Learned counsel further submitted that relief under
Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, CPC) flows from the main
relief and when the main relief cannot be granted, no relief under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of
CPC can be granted as no prima facie case existed in favour of the plaintiff on the basis of pleadings
and the balance of convenience was also not in his favour and the court below has rightly passed
order dated 09.05.2023, by virtue of which, the interim direction already passed by the court below
was vacated. He further submits that had the interim injunction been confirmed, then it could have
been caused serious injury to the defendants which could not have been compensated by any means
and rightly so, the Court below has passed the order. To buttress his arguments, Learned counsel
placed reliance on Mardia Chemicals Ltd. v. Union of India [SCC 2004 (4) 311], S. P. Chengalvaraya
Naidu v. Jagannath [1994 (1) SCC 1] and Skyline Education Institute Pvt. Ltd. v. S. L. Vaswani [AIR
2010 SC 3221].
LEGAL ANALYSIS
12. Heard learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
13. It is settled preposition of law that the prayer for grant of an interlocutory injunction is at a stage
when the existence of legal rights asserted by the plaintiff and its alleged violation are both
contested and remained uncertain till they are established at the trial by way of evidence. The Court,
at this stage, while granting the temporary injunction, acts on certain well settled principles of
administration of this form of interlocutory remedy which is both temporary and discretionary. The
very object of granting interlocutory injunction is to protect the appellant against any injury by
violation of his/her rights for which he/she could not be adequately compensated in damages
recoverable in action if the uncertainty were resolved in his/her favour at the trial. The need for such
protection must be weighed against the corresponding need of the defendants to be protected
against injury resulting from his/her having been prevented from exercising his/her own legal rights
for which he/she could not be adequately compensated. At this stage, a duty is cast upon the court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 6
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
below to weigh one need against another and determine where the „balance of convenience' lies.
Thus, it can safely be concluded that interlocutory remedy is intended to preserve in status quo, the
rights of the parties which may appear on a prima facie case.
14. I am fortified by the observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled Gujarat Bottling Co.
Ltd. v. Coca Cola Co. and anr. reported as AIR 1995 SC 2372. It would be profitable to reproduce
paragraph 43 of the aforesaid judgment.
"43. The grant of an interlocutory injunction during the pendency of legal
proceedings is a matter requiring the exercise of discretion of the court. While
exercising the discretion the court applies the following tests - (i) whether the
plaintiff has a prima facie case; (ii) whether the balance of convenience is in favour of
the plaintiff; and
(iii) whether the plaintiff would suffer an irreparable injury if his prayer for
interlocutory injunction is disallowed. The decision whether or not to grant an
interlocutory injunction has to be taken at a time when the existence of the legal right
assailed by the plaintiff and its alleged violation are both contested and uncertain and
remain uncertain till they are established at the trial on evidence. Relief by way of
interlocutory injunction is granted to mitigate the risk of injustice to the plaintiff
during the period before that uncertainty could be resolved. The object of the
interlocutory injunction is to protect the plaintiff against injury by violation of his
right for which he could not be adequately compensated in damages recoverable in
the action if the uncertainty were resolved in his favour at the trial.
The need for such protection has, however, to be weighed against the corresponding need of the
defendant to be protected against injury resulting from his having been prevented from exercising
his own legal rights for which he could not be adequately compensated. The Court must weigh one
need against another and determine where the 'balance of convenience' lies. [see: Wander Ltd.&
Anr. v,. Antox India (P) Ltd., 1990 (supp) SCC 727 at pp. 731-32].
15. Before proceeding further, it would be apt to reproduce below Rule 1 of Order XXXIX of CPC, for
facility of reference.
"1. Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted. Where in any suit it is
proved by affidavit or otherwise:
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or
alienated by any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property with
a view to defrauding his creditors,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 7
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
(c) that the defendant threatens to dispossess, the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury
to the plaintiff in relation to any property in dispute in the suit, the Court may be
order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act, or make such other order for
the purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale,
removal or dispossession of the property or dispossession of the plaintiff, or
otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any property in dispute in the
suit as the Court thinks fit, until till disposal of the suit or until further orders."
16. From a bare perusal of the aforesaid Rule of Order XXXIX of CPC, it is manifestly clear that any
property, which is in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by any
party to the suit or wrongfully sold in an execution of a decree or that the defendant threatens or
intends to remove or dispose off his property with a view to defrauding his creditors or that the
defendant threatens to dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in relation to
any property, which is in dispute in the suit, the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to
restrain such act or make such other order for the purpose of staying and preventing the wasting,
damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the property or dispossession of the plaintiff or
otherwise causing injury until disposal of the suit or until further orders. So grant of temporary
injunction is not put an end to the litigation but it is commencement of the litigation and grant of
temporary injunction is aiming at preserving the property, which is subject matter of the suit
because if the temporary injunction is refused to be granted, it would pave a way for either of the
parties before the court to alienate, sell, dispose of and/or change the nature of the property which is
in dispute in the suit and, in that eventuality, the purpose of litigation would be futile. Thus, grant of
temporary injunction is with the sole object to prevent damage or wastage of any property which is
in dispute in the suit. The basic principle of the grant of an order of injunction is to assess the right
and the need of the plaintiff as against the defendant.
17. Although learned counsel for the defendants has raised the plea regarding the maintainability of
the suit before the court below and the said issue has yet to be adjudicated by the court below and
rightly so, the court below has held that while deciding the application under Order XXXIX Rules 1
and 2 of CPC cannot embark upon the maintainability of the suit and cannot decide the suit on
question of maintainability. The Court below has to confine itself within the parameters as laid
down under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of CPC to see whether the temporary relief of injunction
can be granted during the pendency of the suit or not and while deciding the said application, the
Court below has to be guided by the three essential ingredients i.e. prime face case, balance of
convenience and comparative loss or injury to claim relief of temporary injunction or not. While
granting the temporary injunction by way of interim relief, the same flows from main relief and
cannot be granted if it had nexus with the main relief and at this stage, the court cannot touch the
merits of the case.
18. I have gone through the order passed by the learned court below which is impugned in the
present appeal and I do not find any illegality much less perversity in the same wherein learned
court below after considering the material facts on the record and three cardinal principles i.e.
prima facie case, balance of convenience and comparative loss and injury has vacated the injunction
already granted in favour of the plaintiff. The reasons which have been spelt out in the order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 8
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
impugned are well founded and cannot be interfered with.
19. Having gone through the judgment relied upon by counsel for the plaintiff cannot be justifiably
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case whereas the judgments relied upon by
the learned counsel for the defendants can be applied to the facts of the case.
20. From a bare perusal of the record, it is apparent that the plaintiff has applied to the Government
for according sanction for conversion of the land in question from Agricultural use to
non-agricultural use on the ground that industrial units are existing on the said land and the said
permission was granted by the Government vide order dated 25.09.2013 and this aspect of the
matter has been deliberately concealed by the plaintiff with malafide intention in the suit. The fact
whether the provision of Agrarian Reforms Act applies to the mortgaged property or not, is a subject
matter of the suit and has yet to be adjudicated by the court below. Plaintiff though claims to be
owner in possession of the suit property and asserts that mortgage deeds executed by him are null
and void abinitio because he was not legally competent to execute the aforesaid mortgage deeds and
accordingly, the bank cannot proceed against him. However, the fact of the matter is that plaintiff is
the mortgager of the suit property and by his own conduct, he has mortgaged the said property with
the bank and has secured the loan and now the plaintiff is estopped under law from questioning the
validity of the said mortgage deed by way of suit before the court below and this aspect of the matter
has yet to be adjudicated by the court below.
21. Even the court below has observed that the plaintiff has suppressed the material facts from the
said court to the extent that loan obtained by him from the bank was classified as NPA and notice
under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act was also issued to him which was challenged by him
before the court of learned Principal District Judge Samba and also before this Court and the
plaintiff has failed to seek any relief from both the courts and after having failed, the plaintiff has
very cleverly drafted and filed the suit before the court below with a view to challenge the mortgage
deeds in question notwithstanding the proceedings under the SARFAESI Act set in motion against
him. Record further reveals that suit land has been shown as Ghair Mumkin Kaskhana and not
Agricultural land.
22. It is a classic case where the plaintiff who himself is a party to the execution of the mortgage
deeds has subsequently questioned the execution thereof after drawing loan facility and on the basis
thereof, the plaintiff cannot absolve him of his liability under the SARFAESI Act. Plaintiff after
having failed to seek any relief against the proceedings initiated under the SARFAESI Act before the
court of learned Principal District Judge, Samba has very cleverly and mischievously approached the
court below with unclean hands by suppressing material facts and the court below, after
adjudicating upon the material facts on record, has rightly vacated the interim direction already
granted vide order dated 09.02.2023 by passing detailed order which is impugned in the present
appeal dated 09.05.2023. It is settled preposition of law that one who seeks equitable relief must do
equity also and demonstrate bonafides and a person guilty of suppression of material facts is not
entitled to relief under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of CPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 9
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
23. Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act creates a bar and provides that no injunction shall be granted
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any
power conferred by or under this Act or under the recovery of debts due to the bank and Financial
Institution Act, 1993. Since the account of the plaintiff has become NPA way back in the year 2016,
and the defendant-Bank had threatened to enforce the said mortgages for realization of the alleged
dues, the plaintiff with a view to stall the said process has mischievously filed the suit before the
court below challenging the mortgages so that bank cannot alienate the property. Thus, in the light
of the bar created by Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act even otherwise also no injunction can be
granted even for any action to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred under the aforesaid
Act. The court below thus was totally justified in rejecting application of the plaintiff for temporary
injunction in the light of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled Mardia
Chemicals Ltd. and others v. Union of India and another along with connected matters reported in
2004 (4) SCC 311. The relevant para of the aforesaid judgment is reproduced as under:
"50. ....... The bar of civil court thus applies to all such matters which may be taken
cognizance of by the Debts Recovery Tribunal, apart from those matters in which
measures have already been taken under Sub-section (4) of Section 13."
24. Order VII Rule 11 of CPC also provides that plaint shall be rejected where the suit appears from
the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law. For facility of reference, Order VII rule 11 of CPC
is reproduced as under:
"11. Rejection of plaint.- The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:--
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by
the court to correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the court, fails to do so;
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is written upon paper
insufficiently stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the court to supply the
requisite stamp paper within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;
Provided that the time fixed by the court for the correction of the valuation or supplying of the
requisite stamp papers shall not be extended unless the court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied
that the plaintiff was prevented by any cause of an exceptional nature from correcting the valuation
or supplying the requisite stamp papers, as the case may be within the time fixed by the court and
that refusal to extend such time would cause grave injustice to the plaintiff."
25. From a bare perusal of Section 34 of SARFAESI Act, it transpires that no injunction shall be
granted by any court in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under the said Act and thus, the suit even otherwise also was not maintainable in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 10
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
light of the specific bar as envisaged under Order VII Rule 11 and this aspect of the matter can also
be considered by the court below, while adjudicating the aforesaid suit as a specific objection has
been taken by the defendant-Bank in this regard while filing the written statement.
26. Since the court below has recorded a finding that the plaintiff has not come to the court with
clean hands by concealing the material facts and rightly so, the plaintiff was not entitled to any relief
of temporary injunction, therefore, the observation of the learned court below cannot be faulted in
law in the light of the pleadings of the plaintiff and on the basis of record produced by him before
the court below.
27. In the present case, plaintiff has tried to abuse the process of law by filing a suit with a view to
restrain the bank to alienate the property which was mortgaged on the grounds which are not
sustainable in the eyes of law. It goes without saying that one who comes to the court must come
with clean hands and I have no hesitation in holding in the instant appeal that the plaintiff has tried
to abuse the process of court by filing a suit mischievously and after having failed to get the interim
protection has filed the present appeal on false and flimsy grounds which are not sustainable in the
eyes of law. Thus, a party whose case is based on falsehood has no right to approach this court. In
this regard, I am fortified by observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled S.P.
Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath reported as 1994 (1) SCC 1. The relevant paragraph is reproduced
as under:
"5. The High Court, in our view, fell into patent error. The short question before the
High Court was whether in the facts and circumstances of this case, Jagannath
obtained the preliminary decree by playing fraud on the court. The High Court,
however, went haywire and made observations which are wholly perverse. We do not
agree with the High Court that "there is no legal duty cast upon the plaintiff to come
to court with a true case and prove it by true evidence". The principle of "finality of
litigation" cannot be pressed to the extent of such an absurdity that it becomes an
engine of fraud in the hands of dishonest litigants. The courts of law are meant for
imparting justice between the parties. One who comes to the court, must come with
clean hands. We are constrained to say that more often than not, process of the court
is being abused. Property- grabbers, tax-evaders, bank-loan-dodgers and other
unscrupulous persons from all walks of life find the court-process a convenient lever
to retain the illegal-gains indefinitely. We have no hesitation to say that a person,
whose case is based on falsehood, has no right to approach the court. He can be
summarily thrown out at any stage of the litigation."
28. Needless to emphasize that the suit property stands mortgaged with the bank by the plaintiff
and the said account has been declared as NPS and the bank has proceeded against the plaintiff
under SARFAESI Act by issuing notice under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act and the plaintiff
has failed to obtain any relief against the aforesaid notice issued and after having failed to obtain
any relief, has approached the court below and also this court with unclean hands. It is settled
preposition of law that where the proceedings under SARFAESI Act has been initiated, the suit
would not be maintainable and the remedy for the aggrieved person lies under Section 17 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 11
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
aforesaid Act which is more efficacious and adequate remedy to the party aggrieved. This aspect of
the matter has been settled at naught by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagdish Singh vs. Heeralal and
ors. reported as 2014 (1) SCC 479. Relevant para is reproduced as under:
"24. Statutory interest is being created in favour of the secured creditor on the
secured assets and when the secured creditor proposes to proceed against the secured
assets, sub-section (4) of Section 13 envisages various measures to secure the
borrowers debt. One of the measures provided by the statute is to take possession of
secured assets of the borrowers, including the right to transfer by way of lease,
assignment or realizing the secured assets. Any person aggrieved by any of the
"measures" referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 13 has got a statutory right of
appeal to the Debt Recovery Trribunal under Section 17. The opening portion of
Section 34 clearly states that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which a DRT or an Appellate Tribunal is
empowered by or under the Securitization Act to determine. The expression in
respect of any matter referred to in Section 34 would take in the measures provided
under sub-section (4) of Section 13 of the Securitization Act. Consequently any
aggrieved person has got any grievance against any measures taken by the borrower
under sub-section (4) of Section 13, the remedy open to him is to approach the DRT
or the Appellate Tribunal and not the civil Court. Civil Court in such circumstances
has no jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of those matters
which fall under sub-section (4) of Section 13 of the Securitization Act because those
matters fall within the jurisdiction of the DRT and the Appellate Tribunal. Further,
Section 35 says, the Securitization Act overrides other laws, if they are inconsistent
with the provisions of that Act, which takes in Section 9 CPC as well."
29. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Skyline Education Institute Pvt. Ltd. v. S. L. Vaswani reported as AIR
2010 SC 3221 has also held that once the court of first instance exercises its jurisdiction to grant or
refuse the relief of temporary injunction, the appellate Court should be loath to make any
interference unless the discretion exercised by the court below in refusing to entertain the prayer for
temporary injunction is vitiated by an error apparent or perversity and manifest injustice has been
done, only then interference in such circumstances would warrant.
CONCLUSION
30. For the reasons stated hereinabove and in the light of the aforesaid settled legal position coupled
with the facts and circumstances of the case, no fault can be found with the observation of learned
court below on the cardinal principles of law and facts like prima facie case, balance of convenience
and equity which are based on correct position of law and balanced consideration of various facets
of the case. The appellant has failed to point out any illegality much less impropriety in the well
reasoned order impugned in the present appeal. Consequently, the present appeal, being bereft of
any merit, is dismissed and the impugned order is upheld. The court below is at liberty to proceed
with the suit and decide the same on its own merits and in accordance with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 12
Raj Kumar Gupta vs Bank Of India And Anr on 21 July, 2023
31. Appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) JUDGE Jammu 21.07.2023 (Paramjeet) Whether the order is speaking?
Yes/No Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22783672/ 13
