Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 15.03.2023
Pronounced on: 06.03.2023
CRM(M) No. 133/2021
CrlM No. 392/2021
Rajat Joshi .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
q
Through: Mr. Satinder Gupta, Advocate.
vs
Sita Devi ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. R. P. Sharma, Advocate
Mr. Bhanu Jasrotia, GA.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner has impugned the order dated 19.12.2019 whereby the court of learned Special
Excise Mobile Magistrate, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as the „trial court(cid:129)) has framed the
charge against the petitioner for commission of offence under Section 420 RPC in complaint titled
"Sita Devi Vs. Rajat Joshi". The petitioner has also prayed for quashing of the criminal complaint
filed by the respondent against him.
2. It is stated that the complaint came to be filed against the petitioner by the respondent for
commission of offences under Sections 406, 419 and 420 RPC wherein it was stated that the
respondent had executed a power of attorney in favour of the petitioner on 22.08.2007 in respect of
land comprising Khasra No. 1 Khata No. 106/100/104 and Khewat No. 28/26 situated at village
Majeen Tehsil and District Samba to the extent of her share in the land and the respondent after
getting information that the petitioner had been getting power of attorneys from the other
landholders and was in the habit of misappropriating the sums received from Collector, Jammu,
cancelled the said power of attorney on the next day i.e. on 23.08.2007 by executing a deed of
revocation dated 23.08.2007 which was registered with Sub-Registrar, Samba on the same date. The
respondent claimed to have sent the revocation deed to the petitioner and further that the petitioner
was also personally intimated about revocation of power of attorney. It is also averred in the
complaint that the petitioner with criminal intention to cheat, to cause criminal breach of trust and
to misappropriate the amount of compensation awarded by the collector for acquisition of land,
impersonated the attorney holder before the Collector Land Acquisition, Jammu and by the acts of
cheating induced the Collector to deliver amount of Rs. 4,53,867/- vide cheque No. 022137 dated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76783374/ 1
Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
11.10.2008 to the petitioner. The respondent thus claimed that the petitioner after having received
the cheque, converted the same to his own use. It was also alleged in the complaint that the
petitioner had no authority to collect the cheque on behalf of the respondent, her son and daughters
from the Collector, but he played a fraud not only with the respondent, but also with the Collector
Land Acquisition, Jammu by impersonating as attorney on behalf of the claimant, her son and
daughter to collect the amount of compensation.
3. After the complaint was filed, the same was sent to SSP, Crime Branch, Jammu for enquiry in
terms of Section 202 Cr.P.C. The enquiry report was submitted by the SSP, Crime Branch, Jammu
stating therein that the said lady despite number of telephone calls did not attend the investigation
which created doubts regarding the genuineness of her complaint. In the enquiry report it was
stated that the copies of the cancellation of the attorney were not handed over by the complainant to
the petitioner as well as Revenue Authorities and it also transpired during the enquiry that on the
basis of power of attorney and on the basis of statement made by the respondent, cheque bearing
No. 022137 dated 11.10.2008 was issued in favour of the attorney holder. During the enquiry,
certain witnesses were examined and it emerged that the complainant had received an amount of
Rs. 4,53,800/- from Rajat in their presence and finally it was concluded that no offence is made out,
as the complainant had herself facilitated the release of compensation in favour of Rajat Joshi by
deposing before the Assistant Commissioner Revenue and thereafter received the same amount.
4. The learned trial court after taking into consideration the report submitted by the SSP, Crime
Branch, Jammu and the submission made by the respondent that she never appeared before the
Collector Land Acquisition, Jammu and never made any statement that the petitioner could receive
compensation on her behalf, the learned trial court issued the process against the petitioner for
commission of offence under Section 420 RPC vide order dated 30.05.2011.
5. Thereafter, the pre-charge evidence was recorded by the learned trial court. The respondent
besides examining herself also examined Mohinder Singh Sambyal-Manager J&K Bank Town Hall
Jammu, Narinder Sharma-Junior Assistant Revenue Department, D. C. Office, Jammu and
Varinder Gupta-Probationary Officer J&K Bank, Branch New Plot, Jammu. The learned trial court,
vide order dated 19.12.2019 framed the charge against the petitioner for commission of offence
under Section 420 RPC.
6. The petitioner has impugned order dated 19.12.2019 on the ground that the same has been passed
in a mechanical manner, in utter disregard of the report submitted by SSP, Crime Branch, Jammu
under Section 202 Cr.P.C. It is also stated that the facts laid down by the respondent in her
complaint, the report submitted under Section 202 Cr.P.C. and the evidence brought on record
during the pre-charge stage, even if taken on their face value, no offence is made out against the
petitioner. It is also stated that the learned trail court has failed to give credence to the glaring fact
existing on the file that the respondent never communicated the factum of cancellation of power of
attorney to the petitioner and further that she had presented herself before the Collector Land
Acquisition, Jammu and gave her statement on 11.10.2008. It is also stated that there are glaring
contradictions between the averments made in the complaint filed by the respondent and the
statement made by the respondent before the learned trial court and further that the other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76783374/ 2
Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
co-sharers who had also got compensation along with the respondent had made the statement that
the respondent had received the compensation paid by the Collector.
7. Mr. Satinder Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the respondent has
received the compensation from the petitioner, which is duly substantiated by the enquiry report
submitted by the SSP, Crime Branch, Jammu and the statement of witnesses recorded during the
course of enquiry. He further laid much stress on the fact that the respondent had appeared before
the Collector Land Acquisition, Jammu and she had rather facilitated the Revenue Authorities to
release the compensation. He also pointed out the contradictions between the averments made in
the complaint and the statement made by the petitioner before the trial court.
8. Mr. R. P. Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent vehemently argued that the petitioner had
received the cheque and had deposited the same in his account. This fact is duly substantiated by the
statement of PW-Mohinder Singh. He further submitted that the respondent never appeared before
the Collector Land Acquisition, Jammu for making any statement and the respondent had never
received any compensation from the petitioner as stated in the enquiry report.
9. Heard and perused the record.
10. A perusal of the power of attorney executed in favour of the petitioner by one Ajit Singh and
respondent reveals that the petitioner has been authorised to do or cause to be done various acts for
and on behalf of the executants which included the authority to get the compensation of the said
land according to the share of the executants. The said attorney was admittedly revoked by Sita Devi
but whether the deed of revocation of power of attorney was served upon the petitioner or whether
the petitioner was intimated about the same, remains a disputed question of fact. Further, in view of
the denial by the respondent of making any statement before the Revenue Authorities as mentioned
in the order dated 30.05.2011, further raises a triable issue as to whether the respondent had made
such statement before the revenue authorities or not. From the statement of PW-Varinder Gupta it
stands established that cheque bearing No. 022137 dated 11.10.2008 for an amount of Rs.
4,53,867/- issued by the Assistant Commissioner Revenue has been credited in the account of
petitioner. More so, a perusal of the cheque reveals that the same has been issued in the name of
Adarsh Singh, Jyoti, Isha, Sunita Devi, Tania Devi and Sita Devi (Complainant/respondent) through
Rajat Joshi (Attorney holder). It also remains a mystery as to how the said cheque was credited in
account of the attorney holder and how the cheque could be issued by the revenue authorities in
favour of Attorney Holder vis-a-vis various payees, when he was having attorney of only Sita Devi
and one Ajit Singh. The defence of the petitioner is that he has returned the amount to the
respondent.
11. It would be apt to take note of the provisions contained in sections 253 and 254 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, which are extracted as under:
"253. Discharge of accused.--(1) If upon taking all the evidence referred to in section
252, and making such examination (if any) of the accused as the Magistrate thinks
necessary, he finds that no case against the accused has been made out which, if
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76783374/ 3
Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging
the accused at any previous stage of the case, if, for reasons to be recorded by such
Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless.
254. Charge to be framed when offence appears proved.--If, when such evidence and
examination have been taken and made, or at any previous stage of the case, the
Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent
to try, and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame
in writing a charge against the accused."
12. Thus it is evident that once the evidence is recorded under section 252 Cr.P.C and the Magistrate
finds that it would not result in to conviction even when the evidence remains un-rebutted, then the
Magistrate can discharge the accused. But in the event the Magistrate forms an opinion that there is
ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, then he has to frame a charge
against the accused. The discharge is permissible only when there is in fact no evidence on record
that warrants the framing of charge. In State v. R. Soundirarasu, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1150 , the
Hon(cid:129)ble Apex court has taken note of the provisions contained in Criminal Procedure Code
contemplating discharge of the accused in cases triable by sessions court, warrant cases instituted
on Police report and otherwise than on the police report and has observed that despite the slight
variation in the provisions with regard to discharge under the three pairs of Sections referred to
above, the settled legal position is that at the stage of framing of charge under either of these three
situations, is a preliminary one and the test of "prima facie" case has to be applied, if the trial court
is satisfied that a prima facie case is made out, charge has to be framed.
13. It would also be advantageous to take note of the observations made by the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court
in Rajiv Thapar v. Madan Lal Kapoor, (2013) 3 SCC 330, where in it has been held as under:
"28. The High Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC, must
make a just and rightful choice. This is not a stage of evaluating the truthfulness or
otherwise of the allegations levelled by the prosecution/complainant against the
accused. Likewise, it is not a stage for determining how weighty the defences raised
on behalf of the accused are. Even if the accused is successful in showing some
suspicion or doubt, in the allegations levelled by the prosecution/complainant, it
would be impermissible to discharge the accused before trial. This is so because it
would result in giving finality to the accusations levelled by the
prosecution/complainant, without allowing the prosecution or the complainant to
adduce evidence to substantiate the same. The converse is, however, not true,
because even if trial is proceeded with, the accused is not subjected to any irreparable
consequences. The accused would still be in a position to succeed by establishing his
defences by producing evidence in accordance with law. There is an endless list of
judgments rendered by this Court declaring the legal position that in a case where the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76783374/ 4
Rajat Joshi vs Sita Devi on 6 April, 2023
prosecution/complainant has levelled allegations bringing out all ingredients of the
charge(s) levelled, and have placed material before the Court, prima facie evidencing
the truthfulness of the allegations levelled, trial must be held."
14. The learned trial court has framed the charge against the petitioner after scanning the evidence
brought on record by the respondent and at this stage it cannot be said that the evidence brought on
record by the respondent, if remains unrebutetd would not lead to conviction. This Court would not
like to comment upon the defence of the petitioner as the same may cause prejudice to either of the
parties during the trial and has such has refrained itself from expressing any opinion on the merits
of this case.
15. In view of above, there is no merit in this petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 06.04.2023 Sahil Padha Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76783374/ 5
