Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16 February, 2024
Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16
February, 2024
Author: G. Satapathy
Bench: G. Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
BLAPL No.11879 of 2023
Rajanikanta Pattnaik ... Petitioner
Ms. D. Mahapatra, Advocate
-versus-
Enforcement Directorate, ... Opposite Party
Bhubaneswar
Mr. G.K. Agarwal, Advocate(ED)
CORAM:
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY
ORDER(ORAL)
16.02.2024 I.A. No.141 of 2024 Order No.
04. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual/Physical Mode).
2. This is an application by the petitioner for grant of interim bail to him on the ground of marriage
of his elder son.
3. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. Although, a marriage invitation
card was relied on by the petitioner, but the learned counsel for the ED by producing the photocopy
of receipts of Gangotri Firm House which is stated to be the venue of marriage as per the marriage
invitation card, submits that the Firm House has never been booked by the petitioner or his relative
for solemnization of marriage. Learned counsel for the ED also produced one photocopy of register
showing booking of said Firm House in the name of persons other than the name of the petitioner.
4. In view of the above facts and on consideration of the rival submissions as well as the grounds
advanced for grant of interim bail to the petitioner, this Court is not at all convinced to accept the
ground for grant of interim bail to the petitioner, especially when the submission of learned counsel
for ED could not be validly disputed for the venue of marriage not being booked by the petitioner for
the marriage of his son.
5. Accordingly, the IA stands rejected.
(G. Satapathy) Judge ORDER(ORAL) 16.02.2024 Order No.
05. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual/Physical Mode).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169192836/ 1
Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16 February, 2024
2. This is a bail application U/S.439 of Cr.P.C. by the petitioner for grant of bail in connection with
PMLA Case No.16 of 2023 arising out of Enforcement Case Information Report (ECIR) Case No.
BBZO/34/2021 dated 17.11.2021 pending in the file of learned District and Sessions Judge, Khurda
at Bhubaneswar for commission of offence Under Section 3 of the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002 (in short "PMLA") which is punishable Under Section 4 PMLA.
3. The sequence of events as alleged against the petitioner are, on receipt of credible information, on
21.10.2021 the S.I. of Police and staff of Khallikote Police Station in the district of Ganjam, Orissa
conducted raid in the house of the petitioner in presence of Executive Magistrate and witnesses and
recovered 34Kgs 94 Grams of Contraband Ganja, 10Kgs 010 Grams of Opium, Cash of
Rs.75,09,000/-, 8Kg 596Grams of Golden Ornaments and 253Grams of Silver Articles and
accordingly, Khallikote PS Case No.645 of 2021 was registered against the petitioner for commission
of offences punishable U/Ss.18(b)/ 20(b)(ii)(C)/25/29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (in short "NDPS Act"). Further, the petitioner was arrested and forwarded to
the Court for aforesaid offences and the matter was investigated into by the Investigating Officer of
Khallikote police. On completion of investigation, charge-sheet was placed against the petitioner in
the aforesaid case for commission of the aforesaid offences under the NDPS Act, but subsequently,
the petitioner was granted bail by this Court for the aforesaid scheduled offences in Khallikote PS
Case No.645 of 2021. Since the offences U/Ss.18(b)/20(b)(ii)(C)/25/29 of the NDPS Act being
scheduled offences U/S.2(1)(y) of the PMLA, the officials of local Enforcement Directorate(ED),
Bhubaneswar registered a case bearing No. ECIR/ BBZO/ 34/ 2021 on 17.11.2021 against the
petitioner and others for commission of an offence U/S.3 of the PMLA which is punishable U/S.4 of
the PMLA and the investigation accordingly, commenced by the ED officials and the petitioner was
arrested on 07.09.2023 by the ED Authority by stating to have followed the procedure U/Ss.19(3)
r/w Section 65 of PMLA and Sec. 167 of Cr.P.C. on the allegation that the valuables recovered from
the house of the petitioner in the raid along with his immovable property acquired by him as
"proceeds of crime" within the meaning of Section 2(1)(u) of PMLA and the immovable properties of
the petitioner were provisionally attached U/S.5(1) of PMLA. Accordingly, the proceeds of crime was
calculated at Rs.5,75,29,379/-(Rupees Five Crores Seventy Five Lakhs Twenty Nine Thousand Three
Hundred Seventy Nine). In the course of investigation, the Authorized Officer of ED examined the
petitioner and others U/S.50 of the PMLA and it is ascertained from the petitioner that he was in
illicit trade of Contraband articles and acquired movable and immovable properties in such trade
including the cash. Accordingly, the Assistant Director, ED, Bhubaneswar Zonal Office instituted a
complaint against the petitioner and others in PMLA Case No.16 of 2023 in the Special Court of
learned District and Sessions Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar.
4. The petitioner unsuccessfully moved an application before the learned District and Sessions
Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar for grant of bail which came to be rejected on 14.09.2023. Hence,
the petitioner has knocked the door of this Court for the relief of bail in this bail application.
5. Ms. Deepali Mahapatra, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that although the petitioner
has been released on bail for scheduled offences, but the ED Official has again arrested him for the
self same accusation without considering the trial in NDPS case is yet to commence and the guilt of
the petitioner has not yet been established. She further submits that no doubt, the ED Authority can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169192836/ 2
Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16 February, 2024
proceed against the petitioner, but without the guilt of the petitioner having been established, the
petitioner cannot be arrested and put behind the Bar and the authority has to assign cogent reason
for arrest of the petitioner for commission of offence U/S.3 of the PMLA since the property allegedly
recovered from the house of the petitioner has not yet been established as "proceeds of crime". It is
further submitted that the ED authority has arrested the petitioner without assigning any cogent
and reasonable reason and simply arrested him by intimating to the son of the petitioner. It is also
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the petitioner was granted bail by this
Court in NDPS Case and he having not misused the liberty, there was hardly any need for arrest of
the petitioner in the PMLA complaint. It is also submitted that since the guilt of the petitioner is yet
to be established for the scheduled offence, it cannot be presumed that the petitioner is guilty of the
offence under PMLA and, thereby, the petitioner can be considered to have satisfied the provision of
Section 45 of PMLA for the relief of bail. In summing up her argument, Ms. Mahapatra, learned
counsel for the petitioner prays to grant bail to the petitioner.
6. On the contrary, Mr. G.K. Agarwal, learned counsel for the ED by drawing the attention of the
Court to the averments made in the complaint and the statements of the petitioner and witnesses,
submits that the son of the petitioner is an unemployed youth, but the property and cash stood
against him and in his account are by itself indicative of the acquisition of property and cash by the
petitioner through illicit trade of Drugs, and the recovery of cash of Rs. 75,09,000/- and gold
ornaments of 8Kg 596Grams from the house of the petitioner and the petitioner having failed to
explain the source of acquisition of such huge amount of cash and gold ornaments, prima facie
shows that the movable and immovable properties acquired by the petitioner is nothing, but
"proceeds of crime" and he, thereby, is liable U/S.3 of the PMLA, which is punishable U/S.4 of the
PMLA, but the petitioner having not been able to satisfy the Court the mandatory conditions of
Section 45 of PMLA, cannot be released on bail. Mr. Agarwal, accordingly, prays to reject the bail
application of the petitioner.
7. After having considered the rival submissions upon perusal of record, this Court considers it apt
to refer to the relevant provisions of PMLA at appropriate stage of discussion in the context of the
relief sought for by the petitioner. It is trite law that while considering the bail application of a
person accused of offence, the Court is not required to weigh the evidence collected by the
investigating agency meticulously, nonetheless the Court should keep in mind the relevant
provisions of law while finding out existence of prima facie case against the accused to grant or
refuse bail to him. In this case, the learned counsel for the ED has referred to the statements of the
petitioner and some of the witnesses in the course of his argument, but it seems that Section 65 of
PMLA provides the applicability of Cr.P.C. in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions
of PMLA, to arrest, search and seizure, attachment, confiscation, investigation, prosecution and all
other proceedings under PMLA. On the other hand, the provisions of PMLA have an overriding
effect as provided in Section 71 of PMLA, which prescribes that the provisions of PMLA shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force. According to Section 50(3) of PMLA, all the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend
in person or through authorized agents, as such officer may direct, and shall be bound to state the
truth upon any subject respecting which they are examined or make statements, and produce such
documents as may be required. Further, Section 50(4) of PMLA provides that every proceeding
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169192836/ 3
Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16 February, 2024
under sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. In view of the aforesaid provisions as
contemplated U/S.50 of the PMLA, the statements recorded by ED Authorities in compliance to
aforesaid provisions have got potential value. In the present case, it appears from the complaint
instituted by the ED authority that the petitioner was examined U/S.50 and he has failed to account
for his movable and immovable properties recovered in connection with Khallikote PS Case No.645
of 2021 as "proceeds of illicit trade of Drugs". Further, the son of the petitioner was also examined
U/S.50 of the PMLA where he could not give a proper explanation towards movable and immovable
properties acquired in his name as stated in the complaint. It is also not in dispute that Section
24(a) of PMLA provides for burden of proof, wherein it has been mandated that in any proceeding
relating to "proceeds of crime" under PMLA; in the case of a person charged with the offence of
money-laundering under section 3 of PMLA, the Authority or Court shall, unless the contrary is
proved, presume that such "proceeds of crime" are involved in money-laundering.
8. It is, however, contended that since the petitioner was on bail for scheduled offences under NDPS
Act, he should not have been made an accused under PMLA, but law is very clear that the offence of
money-laundering is not dependent or linked to the date on which scheduled offences or predicate
offences have been committed and the relevant date is the date on which the person indulges in the
process or activities connected with the proceeds of crime. Hence, the involvement of the person in
any of the criminal activities like concealment, possession, acquisition, use of proceeds of crime as
much as projecting it as untainted property or claiming it to be so would constitute the offence of
money-laundering U/S.3 of the PMLA which itself is a standalone offence. This Court considers it
apt to remind itself the law laid down by the Apex Court in Rohit Tandon v. Directorate of
Enforcement; (2018) 11 SCC 46, wherein it has been held that the statement of witnesses/accused
are admissible in evidence in view of Section 50 of the said Act (PMLA) and such statement may
make out a formidable case about the involvement of the accused in the commission of serious
offence of money-laundering. It is also held by the Apex Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and
others v. Union of India and others; (2022) SCC Online SC 929 that the offence of
money-laundering U/S.3 of the Act is an independent offence regarding the process or activity
connected with proceeds of crime which had been derived or obtained as a result of criminal activity
relating to or in relation to a scheduled offence.
9. There appears certain restriction for grant of bail under PMLA which has been provided in
Section 45 of PMLA. One of such restrictions is that where Public Prosecutor opposes the bail
application, the Court is required to be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
the accused is not guilty of such offence and he is unlikely to commit any offence while on bail. With
regard to compliance of Sec. 45 of PMLA, it is, however, argued by learned counsel for the petitioner
by referring to the decision in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) that all the properties recovered or
attached by the investigating agency in connection with criminal activity relating to scheduled
offence under general law cannot be regarded as proceeds of crime within the meaning of Section
2(1)(u) of PMLA. It is true that the possession of unaccounted property acquired by a person
through legal means cannot be regarded as proceeds of crime, but if the same is prima facie found to
be proceeds of crime, the provision of PMLA will get attracted. In the present case, on a conspectus
materials placed on record together with the allegations leveled against the petitioner in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169192836/ 4
Rajanikanta Pattnaik vs Enforcement Directorate on 16 February, 2024
complaint and the admitted facts of the property recovered in relation to commission of scheduled
offence as a "proceeds of illicit Drugs" being attached U/S.68(2) of NDPS Act by Competent
Authority and Administrator SAFEM (FOP) A, 1976, Kolkata which is under challenge before the
Appellate Tribunal for forfeited property, New Delhi in Appeal No.503 of 2022, this Court is of the
considered view that the ED Authorities have collected sufficient materials to show that the property
derived by the petitioner prima facie constitute "proceeds of crime"
which is of course subject to prove in accordance with law in the trial and therefore,
this Court at this stage is unable to record satisfaction of the mandatory conditions of
Section 45 of PMLA to grant bail to the petitioner.
Hence, the bail application of the petitioner stands rejected.
10. Accordingly, the BLAPL stands disposed of.
11. Issue urgent certified copy of the order as per Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA (G.
Satapathy) Judge Kishore
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169192836/ 5
