Rajah Company vs The Inspector General Of Registration on 30 September, 2020
Rajah Company vs The Inspector General Of Registration on 30
September, 2020
Author: G.R.Swaminathan
Bench: G.R.Swaminathan
W.P.(MD)No.10998 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 30.09.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.R.SWAMINATHAN
W.P.(MD)No.10998 of 2020
and
W.M.P.(MD)Nos.9649 and 9650 of 2020
Rajah Company,
Partnership Firm,
Rep by its Partner,
A.Abdul Azeez,
No.64, South Car Street,
Tirunelveli,
Tiruneveli District. ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Inspector General of Registration,
Santhome, Chennai.
2.The District Registrar,
O/o.the District Registrar Office,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
3.The Sub Registrar,
O/o.the Sub Registrar Office,
Pettai, Tirunelveli District.
4.The Tamil Nadu Waqf Board,
Rep. by its District Revenue Officer/
Chief Executive Officer,
No.1, Jaffar Syrang Street,
Vallal Seethakathi Nagar,
Chennai – 1. ... Respondents
1/10
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154171186/ 1
Rajah Company vs The Inspector General Of Registration on 30 September, 2020
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.10998 of 2020
Prayer: Writ petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to call for the records
relating to the impugned order passed by the 4th respondent in his
proceedings in e.f.vz;.461/15/M1/jp.Ntyp dated 06.03.2015 and
consequential impugned order passed by the 3rd respondent in his
proceedings in RFL/Ngl;il/17/2020 dated 19.03.2020 and quash the
same as illegal and consequently to direct the 3rd respondent to register
and release the sale deed executed by the petitioner in respect of property
comprised in Town Survey No.2619/2 to an extent of 30 cents situated at
Tirunelveli, Municipal Corporation, Ward No.44, Samiya Thaika Street,
T.S.No.6, Block No.21, T.S.No.2619/1 now classified as T.S.No.2619/2,
Tirunelveli Town, Tirunelveli District.
For Petitioner : Mr.Ajmalkhan, Senior Counsel,
For M/s.Ajmal Associates.
For Respondents : Mr.K.Sathiyasingh,
Additional Govt. Pleader for R1 to R3.
Mr.S.A.Ajmalkhan for R4
ORDER
Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the writ petitioner, the learned Additional
Government Pleader appearing for the respondents 1 to 3 and the learned standing counsel
appearing for fourth respondent.
http://www.judis.nic.in
2.The writ petitioner claims that they are the owners of the petition mentioned property. They want
to sell the said property in favour Kaja Enterprises Private Limited represented by Mr.K.Abdul
Kabur. The sale deed dated 19.03.2020 was presented for registration before the third respondent.
The third respondent by the impugned communication declined to register the said document and
returned the same. In the impugned check slip, the third respondent had placed reliance on the
objection conveyed by the fourth respondent in their communication dated 06.03.2015. The said
communication issued by the fourth respondent board and the consequential check slip issued by
the third respondent are put to challenge in this writ petition.
3.The learned senior counsel though initially asserted that the petitioner is very much having
absoulte and impeachable title over the petition mentioned properties restricted his contention that
he may be allowed to go before the second respondent and cavass his case in the light of the
direction issued by the Hon'ble Division in the decision reported in 2017 (3) CTC 135 (Sudha Ravi
Kumar v. The Special http://www.judis.nic.in Commissioner & Commissioner, HR & CE
Department). He also draws my attention to a subsequent decision of this Court reported in 2020
(2) CWC 286 (T.A.Hassain Basha v. Tamil Nadu Wakf Board).
4.I make it clear that the communication issued by the Waqf Board need not be interfered with in
this proceeding.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154171186/ 2
Rajah Company vs The Inspector General Of Registration on 30 September, 2020
5.I am of the view that both decisions relied on by the learned senior counsel are squarely applicable
to the case on hand.
6.The Hon'ble Division had held as follows:-
“25. In view of the above discussions, all the writ petitions are allowed and the
impugned orders are set aside with the following directions:
(i) The registering authority before whom the document has been presented shall
cause service of notice on the parties to the deeds and also to the objector / religious
institution, hold summary enquiry, hear the parties and then either register or refuse
to register the document by passing an order having regard to the relevant facts as
indicated above.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(ii) If the registering authority, refuses to register any document by accepting the objections raised
under Section 22-A of the Registration Act, the aggrieved may file a statutory appeal under the Act.
(iii) If the objections raised under Section 22-A of the Act by the religious institution are rejected
and the document is registered, the remedy for the religious institution is to either approach this
Court by way of a writ petition seeking cancellation of the registration or for any other relief or to
approach the civil Court for declaration of the title and for other consequential reliefs.
(iv) If the registering authority refuses to register the document acting on the objections raised by a
religious institution under Section 22-A of the Registration Act, the parties to the deed will be at
liberty to straightaway approach the Civil Court for declaration of title and other relief without
availing the opportunity for filing a statutory appeal.
(v) We further direct that if the deed has already been registered without there being any objection
by the religious institution under Section 22-A of the Act, the document shall be returned to the
parties concerned http://www.judis.nic.in leaving it open for the religious institution to approach
either the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the Civil Court for
appropriate relief as indicated above. At any rate, the registering authority shall not withhold the
deed which has already been registered.”
7.The Hon'ble Single Judge had held as follows:-
“5. It is settled position that the District Registrar cannot decide the title of the
property. However, to ascertain whether the property is Wakf property or not he can
conduct an enquiry. In such view of the matter, I direct the 2nd respondent to
conduct an enquiry to find out whether the property sought to be registered by the
5th respondent is a Wakf property and in the case of the 2 nd respondent comes to
the conclusion that the property is a Wakf property, in such case, the remedy open to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154171186/ 3
Rajah Company vs The Inspector General Of Registration on 30 September, 2020
the petitioner is to approach the Wakf Tribunal. In the case of the District Registrar
finding that the property sought to be registered is not a Wakf property, in such case,
he may register the document, if it is otherwise in order.” http://www.judis.nic.in
8.Respectfully following the aforesaid orders, I relegate the parties namely., the writ petitioner as
well as the fourth respondent to go before the District Registrar. The learned senior counsel pointed
out that though the Hon'ble Division Bench had indicated that the enquiry can be conducted by the
registering authority, he would submit that as per the statutory scheme set out in the Registration
Act, 1908, it is only the District Registrar, who will be competent to hold the enquiry. I sustain this
contention of the learned senior counsel. Therefore, the second respondent/District Registrar will
conduct the enquiry in the light of the directions already said out above. The further course of action
to be chosen by the petitioner as well as the fourth respondent herein will be as laid down by the
Hon'ble Division Bench.
9.In view of the above, the impugned return slip issued by the third respondent is quashed. The writ
petition is partly allowed. The contentions of both the parties are left open namely., that of the writ
petitioner an the fourth respondent. The parties are permitted to place all the supporting materials
to justify their contentions and stand before the District Registrar. The District Registrar will
conclude the enquiry and http://www.judis.nic.in pass final orders within a period of eight weeks
from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. No costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petitions are closed.
30.09.2020 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes/ No ias Note: Issue order copy on 07.10.2020.
In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be
utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the correct
copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned. To:
1.The Inspector General of Registration, Santhome, Chennai.
2.The District Registrar, O/o.the District Registrar Office, Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli
District.
3.The Sub Registrar, O/o.the Sub Registrar Office, Pettai, Tirunelveli District.
http://www.judis.nic.in http://www.judis.nic.in G.R.SWAMINATHAN,J.
ias 30.09.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154171186/ 4
