Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on
13 January, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 103
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No. 671 of 2021
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India.
----------
Rajib Kumar Behera ......... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha and others ......... Opp. Parties
For Petitioner : M/s. P.K. Satapathy,
P. Panda and B. Das,
Advocates
For Opp.Parties : Mr. A.K. Sharma,
Addl. Government Advocate
(Opposite Parties no.1 to 3)
PRESENT:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
DECIDED ON : 13.01.2021
DR. B.R.SARANGI, J. The petitioner, Rajib Kumar Behera, the
then S.I. of Police (IO in Aska PS Case No. 9 of 2013), has filed this writ petition to quash the order
dated 11.11.2020 passed by the Odisha Human Rights Commission, Bhubaneswar in OHRC Case
No.1650 of 2013 under Annexure-1, and further seeks direction to exonerate him from the charges
levelled against him.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 1
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
2. The factual matrix of the case, in hand, is that opposite party no.4-Minakshi Pattnaik, being the
complainant before the Odisha Human Rights Commission (OHRC), filed a petition on 22.05.2013
making certain allegations against the present writ petitioner and his staff, who have been harassing
and inflicting atrocities on her and her family members. She specifically alleged that on
04/05.05.2013, some police personnel came to her house at 2.00 A.M. in the night and forcibly took
her husband to the police station and tortured him physically and mentally.
2.1 On receipt of such complaint dated 22.05.2013, copy of the same was sent to Superintendent of
Police, Ganjam with a request to get the matter enquired into and submit a factual report to the
Commission. In response to the same, a report was received, which was also sent to opposite party
no.4 for her information and response. In the said report it was mentioned that the allegations made
by opposite party no.4 are found to be false. The report which was called for from the
Superintendent of Police, Ganjam would show that he had conducted the enquiry through
Bichitrananda Samal, Ex-IIC, Aska Police Station, who is the same police officer, who was inquiry
officer of the case. Considering the lacuna in the report of the Superintendent of Police, Ganjam and
the allegations made in the complaint being serious in nature, even after five years have lapsed, the
Commission thought it proper to cause an independent enquiry to the allegations. Accordingly,
requested the Addl. D.G. of Police- cum-Director Investigation, OHRC to entrust the inquiry to any
of the officers at his disposal. Consequently, inquiry was conducted by Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Investigation Wing of the Commission, who submitted report to the Commission and in
order to give an opportunity of hearing before passing any order, notice was issued to Bichitrananda
Samal, the then IIC, Aska police station and the petitioner (Rajib Kumar Behera, I.O. in Aska P.S.
Case No.9 of 2013) to appear in person before the Commission on 19.11.2019. 2.2 Pursuant to such
notice, the petitioner appeared before the Commission on 13.12.2019 and copies of the inquiry
report of the investigation wing of OHRC was supplied to him. But he took a plea that opposite party
no.4 had paid a sum of Rs.1,10,000/- to one Manjula Bahadur with an assurance to provide
government job to the daughter of opposite party no.4 in the railway department on oral agreement.
Even after lapse of assured time, there was failure on the part of Manjula Bahadur to provide job.
Therefore, on 22.10.2012 evening at about 6.00 P.M., opposite party no.4 came to Raghunath Nagar
with an auto rickshaw and with dishonest intention lifted the CBZ Xtreme motor cycle of Manjula
Bahadur, without her knowledge and consent, while it was parked in front of the house of
Raghunath Choudhury at Raghunath Nagar, Aska. Opposite party no.4 also threatened with dire
consequences to Manjula Bahadur and demanded to return the cash she paid to her. On
examination of Majula Bahadur, her son and other witnesses, the petitioner registered the case. But
opposite party no.4 was absconded from the locality and this Court in BLAPL No. 1358 of 2013
granted bail and accordingly she was released on bail in obedience to the order of the High Court.
Therefore, being aggrieved by registration of theft case against opposite party no.4 by Manjula
Bahadur, she filed false case against the petitioner.
2.3 On the basis of above reply given by the petitioner and the FIR lodged, the same was referred to
opposite party no.4 for her response to the report of Superintendent of Police, Ganjam, who
enquired into the matter by the same I.O. and submitted a report before the Commission which was
not accepted and, as such, opposite party no.4 denied the same. Thereby, the Commission
conducted an independent inquiry and on the basis of such inquiry report of the investigation wing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 2
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
of the Commission submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, proceeded with the matter by
affording opportunity of hearing to all the parties. The Commission relying upon the judgment of
the apex Court in the case of Nandini Satpathy v. Dani (P.L.), AIR 1978 SC 1025 and after perusal of
records as well as the report submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, investigation wing
of Commission, came to a definite conclusion that there is violation of human rights of Purna
Chandra Pattnaik, the husband of opposite party no.4, for which he is entitled to get compensation.
As such, taking the entire report into consideration, the Commission recommended as follows:-
"(1) A sum of Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupes two lakhs) be paid to the victim Shri Purna
Chandra Pattnaik by the State and the same be recovered from Shri Rajib Kumar
Behera, the then SI of Police (IO in Aska PS Case No.9 of 2013).
(2) Shri Bichitrananda Samal, the then IIC, Aska Police Station be cautioned not to
file statement before the Commission or any other authority which is against the
material available on record.
(3) Let the Director General of Police, Odisha Cuttack issue a circular/advisory to all
the Police Stations in the State to keep the CCTV cameras in fullest operation. Any
plea of non-fucntioning of the CCTV cameras will certainly be viewed adversely
agaisnt the In-Charge of the Police Station. This is a common recommendation.
(4) The Director General of Police, Odisha, Cuttack may consider to take any other
action as deem fit and proper."
The Commission also further directed that compliance be made within a period of two months of
receipt of the order and report compliance be submitted to the Commission by 29.01.2021. Hence
this application.
3. Mr. P.K. Satpathy, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the impugned order dated
11.11.2020 passed in OHRC Case No.1650 of 2013 by the Commission imposing liability on the
petitioner is liable to be set aside as it has not accepted the explanation given by the petitioner and
ignored the vital witnesses as well as committed procedural irregularity, for which the said order
cannot sustain in the eye of law. It is further contended that the Commission, while passing the
order impugned, relied upon the inquiry report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, OHRC and
not taken into consideration the explanation given by the petitioner and also the station dairy
records of Aska Police Station. As such, there was no raid on 04/05.05.2013 in the night for
arresting the accused in Aska P.S. Case No.9 of 2013. It is further contended that the evidence of
Smt. R. Chhatoi, who is the vital witness to the inquiry, has not been taken into consideration by the
Commission in proper perspective. Thereby, he seeks for quashing of the order impugned by
exercising the extraordinary power under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
4. Mr. A.K. Sharma, learned Addl. Government Advocate justifying the action taken by the OHRC
contended that there is no illegality or irregularity committed by the Commission by taking into
consideration the inquiry report submitted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, OHRC, who
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 3
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
conducted an independent inquiry and submitted its report to the Commission on the basis of the
direction given. More so, the petitioner was also given opportunity and having availed the same by
participating in the process of hearing without any objection, if the Commission has passed the
order impugned, that cannot be found to be faulted with so as to cause interference by this Court at
this stage. Therefore, the writ petition has no merit and the same should be dismissed with cost.
5. This Court head Mr. P.K. Satapathy, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A.K. Sharma,
learned Addl. Government Advocate through virtual mode, and perused the record. As the matter is
being decided at the stage of fresh admission, this Court is not inclined to issue notice to opposite
party no.2-Secretary, OHRC or to private opposite party no.4. As it is a certiorari proceeding, on the
basis of materials available on record, this writ petition is being disposed of finally with the consent
of learned counsel for the parties.
6. The facts delineated above are not in dispute. On perusal of the order dated 11.11.2020 passed by
the OHRC it appears that the Commission acted with due diligence to find out the truthfulness of
the allegations and initially though inquiry was conducted by the Superintendent of Police, Ganjam,
who relying upon the inquiry conducted by IIC, Bichitrananda Samal, submitted the report vide
Annexure-3 dated 27.06.2013, in which it has been stated that opposite party no.4 had given a sum
of Rs.1,10,000/- to one Manjula Bahadur of Aska Sugar Factory, Nuagaon as hand loan, but she did
not return the same and, therefore, opposite partyno.4 forcibly kept the motor cycle of Manjula
Bahadur. On the other hand, on the written report of Manjula Bahadur, Aska P.S. Case No.9 of
13.01.2013 under Sections 341/379/506/34 IPC was registered against opposite party no.4 and, as
such, the case is under investigation. The Commission having not satisfied with such report,
requested the Addl. D.G.-cum- Director Investigation to entrust the inquiry to any of the officer at
his disposal. On that basis, the Deputy Superintendent of Police, OHRC conducted inquiry and
examined seven witnesses, one of whom is Purna Chandra Pattnaik, the husband of opposite party
no.4. The inquiring officer also verified the documents like station diary entries and recorded that
CCTV footage of Aska police station of the relevant period was not available. The inquiry officer has
submitted its report in extenso and in the conclusion of the said report, it has been stated as under:-
"CONCLUSION
(i) Sri Rajib Kumar Behera, the then SI of Aska police station and the Investigating
Officer of that PS case No.09 dated 13.01.2013 u/s 341/379/506/34 IPC, being
accompanied by three other staff of that police station, entered into the house of Smt.
Minakshi Pattnaik, the complainant of this OHRC case, located at village Karatali
under Aska Police Station limit of Ganjam District on 05.05.2013 at about 2AM and
forcibly brought her husband Sri Purna Chandra Pattnaik, a senior citizen and old
man, to Aska Police Station and detailed him illegally inside that Police Station till 10
AM on that day, violating his human rights. He was not involved in any case and
there was no reason for such bringing on the part of police. Law does not mandate to
detain any person to effect arrest of his/her spouse, involved in any case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 4
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
(ii) Though Sri Bichitrananda Samal, the then IIC of Aska PS, denied his knowledge
of such illegal detention, his version is not believable in support of the fact that he
was present at the Police Station during that period of detention as per the station
diary of that Police Station. But neither the complainant Smt. Minakshi Pattnaik, nor
her husband Sri Purna Chandra Pattnaik has made allegation against him."
7. After perusal of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, OHRC, the Commission
observed that due to non-functioning of CCTV in the police station and in number of cases, where
allegation of this nature comes to the notice of the Commission, it has been seen that the CCTV is
either gone out order or footage are not available. More so, when the allegation of Section 379 IPC
has been raised against a lady, opposite party no.4 herein, what promoted the police officers to raid
her house at 2.00 A.M., which itself creates a doubt in the mind of Commission to proceed with the
matter. Thereby, the Commission has accepted the report submitted by Deputy Superintendent of
Police, OHRC and relying upon the decision of the apex Court in Nandini Satpathy mentioned supra
has come to a conclusion that there is violation of human rights of Purna Chandra Pattnaik and
made recommendation as has already been quoted hereinbefore.
8. The contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner that the explanation submitted by the
petitioner has not been taken into consideration, is not correct. So far as examination of vital
witnesses are concerned, since the Commission has relied upon the independent inquiry report
submitted by Deputy Superintendent of Police, OHRC, who has taken evidence of seven witness, it
cannot be said that there is procedural irregularity committed by the Commission so as to cause
interference by this Court at this stage. Therefore, the contention so raised cannot sustain in the eye
of law.
9. It is not in dispute that this Court is exercising the power under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India in writ of certiorari.
Relying upon Ryots of Garabandho v. Raja of Paralakhimedi, AIR 1943 PC 164, the apex Court in
T.C. Basappa v. T. Nagappa, AIR 1954 SC 440 held as follows:
"The writ of certiorari is so named because in its original form it required that the
King should "be certified" of the proceedings to be investigated and the object was to
secure by the authority of the superior Court, that the jurisdiction of the inferior
tribunal should be properly exercised."
10. In Halsbury's Law of England, 4th Ed., vol.1, Para 1531 it is stated as follows:
"The order of certiorari issues out of High Court, and is directed to the Judge or
officer of an inferior tribunal to bring proceedings in a cause or matter pending
before the tribunal into the High Court to be dealt with in order to ensure that the
applicant for the order may have the more sure and speedy justice. It may be had in
either civil or criminal proceedings."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 5
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
11. Halsbury's Laws of England, (Fourth Edition) (2001 Re-issue) Vol.1(1) Para-123 have explained
Certiorari (quashing order) is an order of the superior Court by which decisions of an inferior Court,
tribunal, public authority or any other body of persons who are susceptible to judicial review may be
quashed.
The supervision of the superior Court exercised through writs of certiorari goes on two points. One
is the area of inferior jurisdiction and the qualifications and conditions of its exercise; the other is
the observance of law in the course of its exercise. These two heads normally cover all the grounds
on which a writ of certiorari could be demanded.
12. Certiorari, under Article 226, is issued for correcting gross errors of jurisdiction, i.e., when a
subordinate Court is found to have acted (i) without jurisdiction by assuming jurisdiction where
there exits none, or (ii) in excess of its jurisdiction by overstepping or crossing the limits of
jurisdiction, or (iii) acting in flagrant disregard of law or the rules of procedure or acting in violation
of principles of natural justice where there is no procedure specified, and thereby occasioning failure
of justice.
13. In Bharat Bank v. Employees of Bharat Bank, AIR 1950 SC 188, the apex Court held that the
object of the writ of certiorari is to keep the exercise of powers by inferior judicial and quasi-judicial
tribunals within the limits of the jurisdiction assigned to them by law and to restrain from acting in
excess of their authority.
14. A Constitution Bench of seven learned judges in Hari Vishnu v. Ahmad Ishaque, AIR 1955 SC
223, laid down the following propositions as well settled and beyond dispute:
"(1) Certiorari will be issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction, as when an inferior
Court or Tribunal acts without jurisdiction or in excess of it, or fails to exercise it.
(2) Certiorari will also be issued when the Court or Tribunal acts illegally in the
exercise of its undoubted jurisdiction, as when it decides without giving an
opportunity to the parties to be heard, or violates the principles of natural justice.
(3) The Court issuing a writ of certiorari acts in exercise of a supervisory and not
appellate jurisdiction. One consequence of this is that the Court will not review
findings of fact reached by the inferior Court or tribunal, even if they be erroneous.
This is on the principle that a Court which has jurisdiction over a subject-matter has
jurisdiction to decide wrong as well a right, and when the legislature does not choose
to confer a right of appeal against that decision, it would be defeating its purpose and
policy, if a superior Court were to rehear the case on the evidence, and substitute its
own findings in certiorari."
15. In Nagendra Nath Bora v. Commr. of Hills Division, AIR 1958 SC 398, the apex Court held as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 6
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
"The jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is limited to seeing that the
judicial or quasi-judicial tribunals or administrative bodies exercising quasi judicial
powers do not exercise their powers in excess of their statutory jurisdiction, but
correctly administer the law within the ambit of the statute creating them or
entrusting those functions to them. In other words, its purpose is only to determine,
on an examination of the record, whether the inferior tribunal has exceeded its
jurisdiction or has not proceeded in accordance with the essential requirements of
the law which it was meant to administer. Mere formal or technical errors, even
through of law, will not be sufficient to attract this extraordinary jurisdiction.
16. In State of Andhra v. Chitra Venkata Rao, AIR 1975 SC 2151 : (1975) 2 SCC 557, the apex Court
held that since the function of the superior Court in a proceeding for certiorari is supervisory and
not appellate, the superior Court will not review in intra vires findings of the inferior tribunal, even
if they are erroneous.
17. In Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai, (2003) 6 SCC 675 : AIR 2003 SC 3044, relying upon T.C.
Basappa v. T. Nagappa, AIR 1954 SC 440; Province of Bombay v. Khushaldas S. Advani, AIR 1950
SC 222 and Dwarka Nath v. ITO, AIR 1996 SC 81, the apex Court held that a writ of certiorari is
issued against the acts or proceedings of a judicial or quasi- judicial body conferred with power to
determine questions affecting the rights of a subjects and obliged to act judicially. Since the writ of
certiorari is directed against the acts, order or proceedings of the subordinate Courts, it can issue
even if the lis is between two private parties.
This Court has also considered the same in its judgments in the cases of Santosh Kumar Sahoo v.
Secretary, State Transport Authority, Odisha, Cuttack, 2020 (II) OLR 238; General Manager, East
Coast Railway and others v. Surendra Jal and others, 2020 (II) OLR -747 and Bidyut Manjari Sethi
v. State of Odisha and others, 2020 (I) CLR
474.
18. Applying the principles laid down by the apex Court as well as this Court mentioned supra, this
Court is of the considered view that none of the conditions for issuance of writ of certiorari has been
satisfied in interfering with the order impugned passed by the Orissa Human Rights Commission.
19. Apart from the same, the expression 'human rights' has its origin in international law,
appertaining to the development of the status of an individual in the international legal system,
which was originally confined to the relation between sovereign States, who were regarded as the
only persons in international law.
20. The concept of human rights, embodied the minimum rights of an individual versus his own
State. When human rights are guaranteed by a written Constitution, they are called 'Fundamental
Rights' because a written Constitution is the fundamental law of a State.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 7
Rajib Kumar Behera vs State Of Odisha And Others ......... ... on 13 January, 2021
21. Though the concept of human rights is as old as the ancient doctrine of 'natural rights' founded
on natural law, the expression 'human rights' is of recent origin, emerging from (post Second World
War) international Charters and Conventions.
22. India is a party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations on the 16th December, 1966. The human rights embodied in the aforesaid Covenants stand
substantially protected by the Constitution. There has been growing concern in the country and
abroad about issues relating to human rights. Having regard to this, changing social realities and the
emerging trends in the nature of crime and violence, Government has been reviewing the existing
laws, procedures and system of administration of justice; with a view to bringing about greater
accountability and transparency in them, and devising efficient and effective methods of dealing
with the situation. Therefore, an act to provide for the constitution of a National Human Rights
Commission, State Human Rights Commissions in States and Human Rights Courts for better
protection of human rights and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto, the parliament
enacted a law, called "The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993".
23. Human rights are rights available against the State. There must, therefore, be cases of conflict
between the interests of the individual and of the State. Hence, a guarantee of human rights must
necessarily contain the limitations or exceptions; the guarantee of human rights will prevail subject
to these limitations, so that the collective interests may not be jeopardized. The Indian constitution
acknowledges that there cannot be any such thing as absolute or uncontrolled liberty, for that would
lead to anarchy and disorder.
24. In Santokh Singh v. Delhi Administration, AIR 1973 SC 1091, it has been held that liberty has to
be limited in order to be effectively possessed. The question, therefore, arises an each case of
adjusting the conflicting interests of the individual and of the society.
25. In Re Kerala Education Bill, AIR 1958 SC 956, the apex Court held that any element without
which a guaranteed Fundamental Right cannot be 'effectively exercised', cannot be taken away by
the State in exercise of its power to regulate or restrict the exercise of the Fundamental Right.
26. Applying the principles of law, as discussed above, to the present factual position, this Court is of
the considered view that no error has been committed by the Odisha Human Rights Commission by
passing the impugned order dated 11.01.2020 in Annexure-1 so as to cause interference of this Court
in the present proceeding.
Therefore, this Court does not find any merit in this writ petition, which is accordingly dismissed.
No order to costs.
..............................
DR. B.R.SARANGI, JUDGE Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 13th January, 2021
GDS/Alok/Ashok/Ajaya.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/52025196/ 8
