Rajjak Khan vs The State Of M.P. on 27 May, 2019
Rajjak Khan vs The State Of M.P. on 27 May, 2019
1 Cr.A. No.66/2004
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
SINGLE BENCH
Criminal Appeal No.66/2004
Rajjak Khan S/o Nanne Khan
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh
Shri Sanjay Gupta, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri S.K. Bahirani, learned Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
Present: Hon. Mr. Justice Anand Pathak
JUDGMENT
[Delivered on 27th day of May, 2019] The present appeal under Section 374 of Cr.P.C. has been filed
by the appellant against the order dated 23.12.2003 passed by VI Additional Sessions Judge, in
Sessions Trial No.14/2001, whereby appellant has been convicted under Section 8(C)/15 of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (hereinafter referred to as "NDPS Act") and
sentenced to undergo ten years RI with fine of Rs.1,00,000/- with default stipulation.
2. As per the case of prosecution, on 18.08.2001 around 5 pm, Station House Officer, Police Station
Mohna received the tip off from the informant about transportation of Opium (Afeem/Dodachoora)
in vehicle TATA 407, bearing Registration No.MP08 4316 being carried by accused Harkishan
Rathore. Information Panchnama Ex.P/3 was prepared and information was sent to SDOP,
Ghatigaon (Letter and acknowledgment vide Ex.P-19) and thereafter, seal/stamp (yky piM+h) was
taken and vehicle was intercepted. It stopped at some distance and driver was informed about the
information and conveyed him the intention of police to search. Option was given whether he would
like to get the search done in presence of any Magistrate/Gazette Officer or by the Sub-Inspector.
Driver/accused Rajjak and other co-accused Harkishan and Omi @ Omprakash consented for
search by Station House Officer. Consent Panchnamas vide Ex.P/4 to Ex.P/6 were prepared and
search was carried out.
3. Four white plastic bags containing Opium (Afeem/Dodachoora) were found in the cabin for which
search Panchnamas Ex.P/8 and P/9 were prepared and after orally testing it and by burning, it is
found that Dodachora is present in the bags and Panchnama vide Ex.P/10 was prepared. In
presence of accused persons, bags were taken to the flour mill owned by Dhannalal Rathore for
weighing purpose and Panchnama vide Ex.P/11 was prepared about exactness of scale/balance.
After weighing, all four bags, 29 kgs Opium (Afeem/Dodachoora) each. Two samples of 50 grams
from each bag were taken vide A1-A2, B1-B2, C1-C2 and D1- D2 and were sealed as samples.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12044622/ 1
Rajjak Khan vs The State Of M.P. on 27 May, 2019
Panchnama of the process was prepared vide Ex.P/12. Thereafter, all these bags were seized vide
seizure memo Ex.P/13 and all three accused persons were arrested vide Ex.P/13 to Ex.P/16. FIR was
registered vide Ex.P-25 and seized contraband article was given to Malkhana in-charge i.e. head
constable for keeping it in Malkhana custody.
4. Since information was earlier provided to the SDOP, Ghatigaon and Station House Officer, Police
Station Ghatigaon was given assignment of investigation, therefore, seized samples were sent to FSL
examination at Sagar and report was obtained vide Ex.P/29. After investigation, charge-sheet was
filed before Special Judge, NDPS Act.
5. Charge under Section 8(C)/15 and 8(C)/29 of NDPS Act were framed. Appellant abjured their
guilt and took defence of false implication. Co-accused Harkishan and Omi @ Omprakash took
specific defence that before incident Harkishan met an accident and was immobile and could not
move and therefore, he was taken by accused Omi @ Omprakash on handcart to police station
where both were arrested on false pretext. Harkishan in his defence examined himself and three
other witnesses Hakim Singh, Sureshpal and Dr.Abhay Chandak.
6. Evidence was led by the parties and after considering the evidence and submissions of the parties,
trial Court found all accused guilty of offence under Section 8(C) of NDPS Act and sentenced to
undergo 10 years RI with fine of Rs.1,00,000/- with default stipulations. Therefore, against the
judgment of the trial Court, the present appellant has filed this present appeal under Section 374 of
Cr.P.C..
7. It was the submission of learned counsel who is appearing on behalf of appellant that the seized
contraband articles (Poppy Straw) were not produced in the trial Court. Therefore, trial Court had
no occasion to know about the exact nature of contraband articles. He relied upon the judgment
rendered by the Apex Court in the cases of Gorakh Nath Prasad Vs. State of Bihar, (2018) 1 SCC
(Cri.) 711 and Union of India Vs. Jarooparam, (2018) 3 MPLJ (Cri.) SC 11. It is further submitted
that samples, which were taken from the contraband articles, were not seized on the spot and caused
illegality. He relied upon the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in the case of State of Rajasthan
Vs.Gurmail Singh, (2005) 3 SCC 59. It is further submitted that driver of the vehicle i.e. present
appellant Rajjak Khan cannot be convicted unless poppy straw/opium found in the vehicle, was
under the knowledge of the driver. Here, police has not produced any evidence in this regard. He
relied upon the decision rendered by the Apex Court in the case of Gumail Singh Vs. State of Punjab,
2002 CrLJ 201. It is further submitted that independent witnesses have not supported the
prosecution story. Therefore, the prosecution could not prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. He
relied upon the judgment rendered by Apex Court in the case of Gorakh Nath Prasad Vs. State of
Bihar, (Supra) and Union of India Vs. Jarooparam (Supra).
8. Learned Public Prosecutor for the respondent/State, on the other hand, opposed the prayer made
by the appellant while relying upon the paragraphs 5 and 12 of impugned judgment and the
evidence of Dhannalal (PW-1) and Suresh Agarwal (PW-12). It is submitted that story of prosecution
has been proved beyond reasonable doubt. It is further submitted that the presence of independent
witnesses are not necessary. He relied upon the judgment rendered by Apex Court in the case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12044622/ 2
Rajjak Khan vs The State Of M.P. on 27 May, 2019
Babubhai Odhariji Patel and others Vs. State of Gujarat, 2005 (8) SCC 725 and Mohan Singh Vs.
State of M.P. 2013 (2) ANJ 141 (SC). Therefore, he prayed for dismissal of appeal.
9. Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
10. In the case in hand, appellant is facing trial under Section 8(C)/15 of the NDPS Act. Dhannalal
(PW-1) is the flour mill/ grinding machine owner (Aata Chakki) and at his place, bags were weighed.
Although, he supported the prosecution story and did not declare hostile, but at the same time, in
his cross-examination, he stated the fact that he did know what articles were in the bag. He did not
refer the fact that bags were sealed in his presence, rather in paragraph 2, he also admits the fact
that samples were not sealed in his presence nor signatures were taken over the samples. Therefore,
neither the bags were sealed nor the samples were sealed in his presence. The same is the position
with witness Suresh Agarwal (PW-
2) who is also apparently a witness present on the spot and allegedly seen the process of sealing. The
said witness in his cross-examination admits the fact that neither said contraband articles were
sealed, nor goods nor the samples. On the other hand, trial Court while relying upon the testimony
of witnesses namely Dhannalal and Suresh Agarwal (PW-1) and (PW-2) respectively, has arrived to
the conclusion that they have supported the story of prosecution while contraband articles and
samples were sealed. Therefore, perversity is apparent on record.
11. If this fact is looked in juxtaposition to the fact that seized contraband article was not produced
in the trial Court, it appears that contention of the appellant gains ground in respect of search and
seizure and in respect of legal position regarding effect of sample, not being sealed on the spot.
Neither contraband articles were sealed nor the samples and the seized articles were not produced
in the trial Court. This indicates the nature of evidence produced by the prosecution to support its
story. Prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt.
12. Kedar (PW-3) is the seizure witness, but he did not support the prosecution story and declared
hostile. In his cross-examination, he nowhere made any statement which is implicative in nature
qua present appellant. When independent witness did not support the prosecution story regarding
seizure and regarding sealed cover procedure of samples and when other witnesses Dhannalal
(PW-1) and Suresh Agarwal (PW-2) although did not turn hostile, but still did not support the
prosecution story authentically, then story becomes doubtful.
13. Another seizure witness is Banwarilal Rajak (PW-4). He also did not support the prosecution
story and declared hostile. Therefore, the seizure cannot be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Shyamlal Gupta (PW-5) who is the head constable and in charge of Malkhana, admits the fact in
paragraph 3 that samples were returned back from FSL because of some defect in it, but he denied
to elaborate it and on suggestion, he denies the fact that because the samples were not properly
sealed, therefore, FSL returned back the samples. It was the duty of the prosecution to produce the
letter of FSL to show that the seal cover procedure was proper. Here, doubt was created by the
defence and admission of the witnesses indicate that some irregularities were made while sending
the samples to FSL. Therefore, it cannot be assumed automatically that contraband articles were
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12044622/ 3
Rajjak Khan vs The State Of M.P. on 27 May, 2019
seized and sealed properly and sent to the FSL for investigation.
14. Evidence of Investigating Officer J.P.Bhatt (PW-12) nowhere referred the fact that seized
contraband article were ever produced before the trial Court. He also admitted the fact that in
paragraph 18, when he asked the appellant Rajjak Khan about contraband articles found in bags,
then he showed ignorance and information was made that he does not know about the said articles.
He is only the man for driving the vehicle.
15. When seized contraband articles were not produced before the trial Court and samples were not
properly seized on the spot, the facts which are clear from the testimony of Dhannalal (PW-1) and
Shyamlal (PW-5) and specifically when witnesses have not been declared hostile, then prosecution is
bound by their testimony. (See: Mohanlal Gangaram Gehani Vs. State of Maharashtra reported in
AIR 1982 SC 839), Bhagatram and others Vs. State of M.P. reported in 1990 CRLJ 2407, Sukhram
Vs. State of M.P. reported in AIR 1989 SC 772, M.Krishna Reddy Vs. State Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Hyderbad reported in AIR 1993 SC 313, Kunju Muhammed @ Khumani Vs. State of Keral
reported in 2004 SCC (Cri.) 1425.
16. In the present case, actual case property (contraband articles) has not been produced before the
Court, therefore, Court had no occasion to satisfy itself that seal on the case property tallies that the
samples to rule out any possibility of foul play. The guidance given by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of Baldev Singh Vs. State of Haryana reported in 2018 Cr.L.J. (SC) 1158, Mohinder Singh Vs.
State of Punjab reported in (2018) 11 SCC 570 and in the case of Makhan Singh Vs. State of Haryana
reported in (2016) 1 SCC (Cri.) 96 is worth consideration in this regard. Trial Court had no occasion
to tally the seal affixed over the case property vis-a-vis the samples to rule out foul play. This has
rendered the case of prosecution more doubtful.
17. Similarly, independent witnesses did not support the prosecution story and prosecution did not
prove the case beyond reasonable doubt about implication of appellant Rajjak Khan who was the
driver of the vehicle. He knew the fact about that he carried poppy straw/opium under his
knowledge. The decisions in the cases of Gurmail Sing State of Punjab reported in 2002 CRLJ 201,
Kalekhan Vs. State of M.P. reported in 1999 CRLJ 1119 are worth consideration in this regard.
18. Considering the overall facts situation, nature of evidence and the legal position, it appears that
trial Court has wrongly convicted the appellant. Prosecution did not discharge their duties to prove
the case beyond reasonable doubt. Hence, appeal stands allowed and impugned judgment passed by
the trial Court is, hereby, set aside.
19. Appellant is on bail, his bail bond stand discharged. He is set free.
20. The copy of this judgment be sent to the trial Court for information and necessary compliance.
(Anand Pathak) Judge Rashid RASHID KHAN 2019.05.28 11:00:10 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/12044622/ 4
