Rajkumar Prajapati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 May, 2019
Rajkumar Prajapati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 May,
2019
1 CRA-2773-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
CRA-2773-2019
(RAJKUMAR PRAJAPATI Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)
3
Jabalpur, Dated : 13-05-2019
Shri A.D. Mishra, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri C.L. Sethi, learned P.L. for respondent/State.
Heard on the question of admission.
Appeal is admitted for hearing.
Record of the Court below has been received.
Also heard on I.A. No.5884/2019, an application for suspension of sentence and grant of bail to the
appellant.
The appeal has been preferred by the appellant against judgment dated 19.03.2019 passed by the
learned Session Judge, Satna, District-Satna in Session Trial Case No.100244/2012.
Appellant stands convicted for an offence punishable under Section 326 of the IPC and has been
sentenced to undergo RI for 5 years with fine of Rs.10,000/-with default stipulation.
As per prosecution case, on 01.07.2011, complainant-Kallu Prajapati (PW-3) lodged a complaint
against the present appellant and other co- accused persons alleging that nearby his house there is a
garden situated on the land in which 6 mango trees are there and complainant along with Jawahar,
Budawa, Dani Kumhar having equal share on those tree and they sold their shares to the co-accused
Sunder Prajapati. Only the complainant's share is remained left. On 01.07.2011 at about 2:30 pm
when the complainant was watching mango trees of his share then the co-accused Sunder
committed marpeet with his elder son Basant, while he inquired then co-accused Sunder abused
him and in the meantime co-accused Sunder has called his brothers, then the present appellant and
other co-accused persons namely, Chunkai, Chunni, Rajkaran and Lallu came there armed with
Tangi and Sabbal and the present appellant has given a blow of tangi on the head of the son of the 2
CRA-2773-2019 complainant viz Vinod and co-accused Shaitani @ Rajkaran has also assaulted on
backside and head by sabari and co-accused Lallu assaulted with stick on let of the complainant,
co-accused Sunder assaulted with bricks on the head of the complainant's wife and by fists on mouth
of Chunkai bai. After that on their shriek, Chhanga Jain, Rajjan and Kamlesh came there then the
present appellant and other co-accused persons ran away from the spot.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108398937/ 1
Rajkumar Prajapati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 May, 2019
Therafter, on the report of the complainant, a case was registered against the present appellant and
other co-accused persons.
Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the appellant is in jail since 19.03.2019 and he has
been falsely implicated in this case due to previous enmity between the present appellant and
complainant party. Complainant Kallu Prajapati (PW-3) lodged First Information Report at Police
Station Kothi, District-Satna on 01.07.2011 stating that tangi, sabble and axe were kept in Osari of
his house, then the present appellant was picked up the axe and inflicted injury to Vinod Prajapati
(PW-4) on the his head and due to which his parietal bone was fractured. He further submits that it
is evident from the evidence that the complainant party was aggressor party and they committed
marpeet with the present appellant and other co- accused persons, resultantly the incident took
place. Kallu Prajapati (PW-3) has deposed in his deposition before the trial Court that he did not sell
the land or any tree on his possession. At the time of incident, co-accused Sundar assaulted the elder
son of the complainant i.e. Basant then his other son Vinod (PW-4) reached there and Vinod (PW-4)
prevented to the co- accused Sundarlal. Thereafter, co-accused Sundarlal called his brother
Chhunkai Lal, present appellant and other co-accused persons. The present appellant came on the
spot with an axe and other co-accused persons also came there with sticks. They surrounded the
complainant and the present appellant inflicted injury to Vinod (PW-4) on the his head and other
co- accused persons inflicted injury by sticks. Vinod Prajapati (PW-4), Sankhi (PW-5), Basant
(PW-6), Rajjan (PW-7), Chhanga (PW-9) had given the same 3 CRA-2773-2019 evidence in their
deposition before the trial Court. It is also evident from the record that other co-accused Rajkaran
lodged the FIR against the complainant party i.e. Kallu, Vinod and Shankhi and the said FIR was
registered against the complainant party for the offence punishable under Sections 324, 323, 294
read with Section 34 of the IPC. In support of the counter case, the present appellant relied the
judgement dated 19.03.2019 in which the complainant parties have been convicted for the offence
punishable under Sections 324 and 323 of the IPC. He further submits that in support of the present
case, the appellant and other co-accused persons produced defence witnesses before the trial Court
i.e. Sunderlal Prajapati as DW-1 and Harchhatilal Prajapati as DW-2 and they deposed before the
trial Court that the complainant parties assaulted the co-accused Chhunkai lal, Rajkaran and Lallu.
Injury reports of co-accused Lallu Ex.D/8, Rajkaran Ex.D/9 and Chhukailal Ex.D/10 were produced
before the trial Court, but the prosecution witnesses did not explain the said injuries. Dr. A.K. Saraf
(PW-1), Dr.Asha Saxena (PW-2) have been examined before the trial Court. They found incised
wound on the body of Vinod on his left parietal bone. Vinod Prajapati (PW-4) has admitted in his
cross-examination that the said injury was inflicted by sharp object, but no injury was found on the
body of the Vinod by the sharp object and the Doctors have also clarified in this regard that the said
injury was caused by a hard and blunt object. Smt. Sankhi Bai Prajapati (PW-
5) has admitted in her cross-examination that the present appellant reached on the spot and on
calling of the co-accused Sunder, the other co-accused persons also came there. Rajjan Prajapati
(PW-7) has admitted in his cross- examination before the trial Court that the used axe and sabbal
were of the complainant/Kallu. There is material contradictions and omission in the evidence of the
prosecution witnesses and it is not clarified from the evidence of complainant, injured and other
important prosecution witnesses that the axe used in the said incident was of the present appellant
or not. He also submits that other co-accused persons namely, Lallu @ Dayasagar, Rajkaran 4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108398937/ 2
Rajkumar Prajapati vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 May, 2019
CRA-2773-2019 @ Shaitani Prajapati and Chhunilal Prajapati were acquitted on the basis of same
evidence available on record and the present appellant was convicted by the trial Court. Therefore,
the present appellant has been wrongly held guilty and convicted in the present case. There is no
criminal antecedents against the present appellant. On the report of the present appellant and other
co-accused persons, a counter case was also registered against the complainant party for the offence
punishable under Sections 324, 323, 294 read with Section 34 of the IPC in Crime No.109/2011. In
that case, the complainant's party i.e. complainant-Kallu, Shankhi and Vinod have found guilty for
the offence punishable under Sections 323 and 324 of the IPC. There are many contradictions,
omissions and improvements in the version of the prosecution witnesses. He further submits that
there is fair chances to succeed in the case. The final hearing of this appeal will take time. If the
appellant is not released on bail, purpose of filing this application will be futile. Therefore, the
application filed on behalf of the appellant may be allowed and the period of his remaining jail
sentence may be suspended and he may be released on bail.
Learned counsel for the respondent/State has opposed the application for suspension of sentence
and grant of bail to the appellant.
After hearing rival submissions of learned counsel for the parties, looking to the facts and
circumstances of the case and the statements of the prosecution witnesses, but without expressing
any opinion on the merits of the case, I am of the considered opinion that it would be appropriate to
suspend the custodial sentence awarded to the appellant and grant bail to him. Consequently, I.A.
No.5884/2019 is allowed subject to deposit of fine amount, if already not deposited. The custodial
sentence awarded to the appellant shall remain suspended during the pendency of this appeal.
Appellant Rajkumar Prajapati be released from custody subject to his furnishing a personal bond in
the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand) with one solvent surety of the same amount to the
satisfaction of the trial Court. He shall appear and mark his presence before the trial Court 5
CRA-2773-2019 on 17.10.2019 and shall continue to do so on all such future dates as may be given in
this behalf, during pendency of the matter.
List the matter for final hearing in due course.
Certified copy as per rules.
(RAJENDRA KUMAR SRIVASTAVA) JUDGE sp
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108398937/ 3
