Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka
on 8 June, 2020
Author: Hanchate Sanjeevkumar
Bench: Hanchate Sanjeevkumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 8TH DAY OF JUNE, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE HANCHATE SANJEEVKUMAR
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3683/2012
Between:
Rajkumar
S/o Sidaraya Bhairashetty,
R/o Bhatagunaki,
Taluk Indi,
District Bijapur.
... Appellant
(By Sri Shivanand V.Pattanashetti, Advocate)
And:
The State of Karnataka
Represented by
Additional State Public Prosecutor,
Circuit Bench, Gulbarga
(Through Zalaki Police Station)
... Respondent
(By Sri Mallikarjun Sahukar, HCGP)
This Criminal Appeal is filed under Section 374(2) of
Criminal Procedure Code, praying to set aside the judgment
of conviction and order of sentence dated 26.09.2012 passed
by the Principal Sessions Judge and the Special Judge,
Bijapur in Special (NDPS) Case No.08/2011 and acquit the
appellant/accused in the interest of justice and equity.
2
This appeal coming on for final hearing this day, the
Court delivered the following:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 1
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
JUDGMENT
The above appeal is filed challenging the judgment of conviction and order on sentence dated
26.09.2012 passed in Special (NDPS) Case No.08/2011 by the Court of Principal Sessions Judge and
the Special Judge at Bijapur.
2. The brief facts of the case are as follows ;-
PW.1-Complainant who was Deputy Superintendent of Police, Indi on receipt of credible
information that on the land belonging to Rajkumar Bhairshetty of Bhatagunaki (the accused)
besides lemon tree some cannabis plants were cultivated and accordingly he had requested the
Tahasildar (PW-2) to come as pancha while conducting the raid and after informing to his superior
officer, conducted raid along with other officials on 18.02.0211 by going over government Jeep
bearing Reg.No.KA-28-414 and found that a person was watering the plaint on the land and upon
seeing the jeep the said person tried to escape from the spot but he was apprehended and the said
apprehended person is the accused in the present case and taken out his name with full address and
the said apprehend person (the accused) had stated that he is cultivating his father's land and
cultivated cannabis plants amidst of lemon trees and accordingly conducted search of the land and
found that there were 145 ganja plants were cultivated and plucked them from the root itself and
upon weighing the same they weighed totally 28 kilograms and among them five plants were taken
as sample and the weight of the sample plants is 04 kilograms and accordingly packed and sealed
separately both samples and the other plants and conducted panchanama as per Ex.P.1 in presence
of panchas and other officials and thereafter came to the police station and lodged first information
statement (FIS) and then FIR is registered by PW.5. Therefore, on the basis of FIS lodged as per
Ex.P.2 the PW.5 had started investigation and conducted investigation and since sufficient material
found against the accused, therefore, filed charge sheet against the accused for the offence
punishable under Section 20(a) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for
brevity hereinafter referred to as NDPS Act).
The accused was released on bail. After filing of charge sheet the Special Court started trial on case
and framed charges against accused for the offence punishable under Section 20(a) of the NDPS Act
and the accused pleaded not guilty and claims to be tried. After recording his plea the Special Court
had started examination of witnesses and the prosecution has totally examined six witnesses as
PWs.1 to 6 and got marked documents Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.8 and got marked material objects as M.Os.1
and 2.
After completion of evidence of the prosecution, the accused examined under Section 313 of
Criminal Procedure Code and the accused had simply denied the incriminating circumstances stated
before him. The accused did not place any documents and also has not lead any defence evidence
and the accused has totally denied the prosecution case.
The Special Court after conducting trial and hearing the arguments on both sides found that the
accused had committed the offence punishable under Sections 20(a) of the NDPS Act and
accordingly convicted for the offence under Section 20(a) of the NDPS Act and passed order on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 2
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
sentence to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and directed to pay fine of Rs.10,000/-
with default clause further shall undergo simple imprisonment for three months, if fails to pay the
fine amount.
3. Being aggrieved by the judgment of conviction and order on sentence by the Special Court above
stated the accused had preferred the present appeal under Section 374(2) of Criminal Procedure
Code (eventhough there is special provision to prefer appeal under Section 36B of the NDPS Act)
inter alia on the grounds as stated below ;-
• The Special Court had not appreciated evidence correctly regarding search, seizure and recovery of
contraband articles and had not appreciated well on record. Further there is violation of Section 50
of the NDPS Act.
• All the witnesses are the official witnesses and only one witness PW.4 is the independent witness
but who has turned hostile. Therefore, apart from the official witnesses there were no independent
witnesses are available for the prosecution and these officials are being police official cannot be
believed as they are found to be highly interested witnesses. • Further the sentence imposed is harsh
one. Further raised a ground that the Special Court ought to have extended the benefit of P.O.Act to
the accused/appellant.
4. Heard the arguments from both sides and perused all the evidence on record and other materials,
the points that would arise for consideration are as follows ;-
i. Whether judgment of conviction, convicting the accused/appellant for the offence under Section
20(a)(i) of the NDPS Act requires interference by this court ?
ii. Whether the order on sentence passed by Special court requires any interference by this court ?
5. The submissions made by the learned counsel for the accused/appellant and the learned High
Court Government Pleader are considered, placed and discussed in the appropriate place
(paragraphs) considering the points raised by them while going on discussion on reasons in order to
avoid repetition of their submissions.
6. Before adverting to the entire evidence of the prosecution and analyzing them it is just, proper
and necessary to have the cursory look into the role of the witnesses which they played in the
present case.
PW.1 is the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Indi who had conducted raid along with Tahasildar
and other police officials and searched and seized cannabis plants and prepared a panchanama and
also lodged FIS before PW.5;
PW.2 is the Tahasildar who is party to the raid accompanied along with PW.1.
PW.3 is a Constable who had accompanied the raid and assisted PW.1.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 3
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
PW.4 is a panch witness to the panchanama Ex.P.1.
PW5 is the Police Sub Inspector who had received FIS and registered the crime and conducted
investigation and filed the charge sheet.
PW.6 is the Scientific Officer, who had given the report that the sample ganja is the cannabis plants.
ANALYSES
7. Learned counsel for the accused/appellant vehemently argued that in the present case Section 50
of the NDPS Act is not complied with as there is violation. This exercise is on the part of the
Gazetted officer and also by the part of PW.1 enabling the accused to enlighten him regarding the
mandatory legal provision that he is to be searched by the Gazetted officer and this legal provision
must be explained to the accused and then conduct search. But in the present case that is not
followed, since the right of the accused is not explained to him. Thus, submitted there is violation of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
8. The learned counsel for the appellant/accused relied on the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of Arif Khan @ Agha Khan vs. State of Uttarakhand reported in [2018] ACR 461.
Considering this legal position as enumerated in the NDPS Act while applying in the present case on
factual matrix in the present case Section 50 of the NDPS Act is not applicable. Section 50 of the
NDPS Act is applicable wherever there is a 'search of a person'. The word used in Section 50 of
NDPS Act is 'search any person'. Section 50 of the NDPS Act is not applicable for search of
conveyance, vessels lands, buildings etc., and this legal position is settled at rest as promulgated by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in catena of decisions. In the case of Jarnail Singh vs. State of Punjab
((2011) 3 Supreme Court Cases 521), wherein it is held that -
"16. This apart, it is accepted that the narcotic/opium, i.e., 1 kg. and 750 grams was
recovered from the bag (thaili) which was being carried by the appellant. In such
circumstances, Section 50 would not be applicable. The aforesaid Section can be
invoked only in cases where the drug/narcotic/NDPS substance is recovered as a
consequence of the body search of the accused. In case, the recovery of the narcotic is
made from a container being carried by the individual, the provisions of Section 50
would not be attracted.
17. This Court in the case of Kalema Tumba Vs. State of Maharastra ((1999) 8 SCC
257) discussed the provisions pertaining to "personal search" under Section 50 of the
NDPS Act and held as follows: (SCC p.260, para 4);
"4....... if a person is carrying a bag or some other article with him and narcotic drug
or psychotropic substance is found from it, it cannot be said that it was found from
his 'person'."
18. Similarly, in the case of Megh Singh Vs. State of Punjab ((2003) 8 SCC 666), this Court observed
that; (Sc p.670, para 16) "16. A bare reading of section 50 shows that it applies in case of personal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 4
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
search of a person. It does not extend to a search of a vehicle or container or a bag or premises."
19. The scope and ambit of Section 50 was also examined by this Court in the case of State of
Himachal Pradesh Vs. Pawan Kumar ((2005) 4 SCC
350). In SCC paras 10 and 11, this Court observed as follows: (SCC pp.359-60) "10. We are not
concerned here with the wide definition of the word 'person', which in the legal world includes
corporations, associations or body of individuals as factually in these type of cases search of their
premises can be done and not of their person. Having regard to the scheme of the Act and the
context in which it has been used in the section it naturally means a human being or a living
individual unit and not an artificial person. The word has to be understood in a broad
common-sense manner and, therefore, not a naked or nude body of a human being but the manner
in which a normal human being will move about in a civilised society. Therefore, the most
appropriate meaning of the word 'person' appears to be -'the body of a human being as presented to
public view usually with its appropriate coverings and clothing'. In a civilised society appropriate
coverings and clothings are considered absolutely essential and no sane human being comes in the
gaze of others without appropriate coverings and clothings. The appropriate coverings will include
footwear also as normally it is considered an essential article to be worn while moving outside one's
home. Such appropriate coverings or clothings or footwear, after being worn, move along with the
human body without any appreciable or extra effort. Once worn, they would not normally get
detached from the body of the human being unless some specific effort in that direction is made. For
interpreting the provision, rare cases of some religious monks and sages, who, according to the
tenets of their religious belief do not cover their body with clothings, are not to be taken notice of.
Therefore, the word "person" would mean a human being with appropriate coverings and clothings
and also footwear.
11. A bag, briefcase or any such article or container, etc. can, under no circumstances, be treated as
body of a human being. They are given a separate name and are identifiable as such. They cannot
even remotely be treated to be part of the body of a human being.
Depending upon the physical capacity of a person, he may carry any number of items like a bag, a
briefcase, a suitcase, a tin box, a thaila, a jhola, a gathri, a holdall, a carton, etc. of varying size,
dimension or weight. However, while carrying or moving along with them, some extra effort or
energy would be required. They would have to be carried either by the hand or hung on the shoulder
or back or placed on the head. In common parlance it would be said that a person is carrying a
particular article, specifying the manner in which it was carried like hand, shoulder, back or head,
etc. Therefore, it is not possible to include these articles within the ambit of the word "person"
occurring in Section 50 of the Act."
9. Therefore considering the present factual matrix involved into the case herein in the present case
the search is made on the land but not the accused. In case of search is made on the accused i.e.,
personal search of the accused is involved then the compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act is
necessary and mandatory. But here it is the case of the prosecution that the accused was not
subjected to search personally but raid is conducted on the land and land of the accused was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 5
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
inspected. Therefore, the submission made by the learned counsel for the accused/appellant cannot
be accepted under the legal provision and principle of law laid down by the Apex Court above stated.
10. In the present case PW.1 is the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Indi who had conducted the
raid on the land of the accused and found that there were 145 ganja plants were cultivated totally
weighing 28 kilograms and among them 04 cannabis plants were taken out as sample and further
deposed that he has drawn panchanama as per Ex.P.1 along with him PW.2 Tahasildar and PW.3
Police Constable were also present and in presence of them panchanama was conducted ganja
plants were seized and packed and sealed and thus lodged FIS before police as per Ex.P.2 which is
registered by PW.5.
11. PW.1 was elaborately cross-examined regarding going to the route towards the land of the
accused and various plants situated on the land and surrounding the land whoever houses and lands
were situated. On all these aspects cross-examination was done but this exercise of
cross-examination do not discredit the evidence of PW.1 as stated in examination- in-chief.
Therefore, regarding raid conducted and drawing of panchanama by PW.1 is found to be
trustworthy and believable.
12. PW.2 is the Tahasildar who is a Gazetted Officer had deposed in the line of PW.1 that he had
accompanied during the raid along with PW.1 and found that on the land belonged to accused there
was cannabis plants were found and packed them with the roots and PW.1 had drawn panchanama
as per Ex.P.1 and PW.2 had stated as in the line of PW.1.
13. The learned counsel for the appellant has not pointed out anything in the cross-examination to
show that evidence of PW.2 is found to be false one. Upon perusing the entire cross-examination of
PW.2 nothing is elicited that PW.2 is telling falsehood before the court. Hence, evidence of PW.2 is
found to be trustworthy. Therefore, the evidence of PW.1 Deputy Superintendent of Police is
corroborated by the evidence of PW.2 - Tahasildar.
14. PW.3-Police Constable who had accompanied PW.1 during conducting of raid. PW.3 has given
evidence in the line of PW.1. Upon considering the cross-examination of PW.3 there were no
material found to show that PW.3 is telling lie before the court and is not shaken to the fact that the
entire case is false one.
15. It is cross-examined to PW.3 to the effect that regarding what are the plants were cultivated and
surrounding to the land of the accused whichever land and house are situated and distance between
police station and the land but this cross-examination do not discredit the evidence of PW.3.
Therefore, from the evidence of PW.3 it is also found that the raid was conducted and the raid is
genuine one and the entire exercise of raid conducted is in natural course.
16. PW.4 is the panch witness who had turned hostile and his evidence is not helpful to the
prosecution case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 6
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
17. PW.5 is the Police Sub Inspector who gave evidence that PW.1 had lodged FIS, accordingly first
information report was registered as per Ex.P.5 and conducted a procedure of arrest of the accused
and received cannabis plants and also received sample ganja and had recorded the statement of
police officials who have gone to the land for the raid and then made arrangement for sending of
sample to the Forensic Science Laboratory after obtaining permission from the Deputy
Superintendent of Police and then forwarded to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Bengaluru and
after receiving report from the Forensic Science Laboratory found that the sample cannabis plants
are having ganja element and accordingly after completion of investigation found that there are
ample materials against the accused to send him for trial. Therefore, filed charge sheet against the
accused. Therefore, the role of PW.5 is after receipt of FIS, had conducted investigation and filed
charge sheet.
18. The evidence of PW.5 is appreciated whether investigation conducted is having any
embellishment or unfair but found that the investigation conducted is found to be in natural course
and the sequence of events narrated during the course of investigation are in order having genuinity.
Therefore, the investigation conducted is found to be fair one.
19. PW.6 is the Scientific Officer, Forensic Science Laboratory, Bengaluru had stated that he had
received sealed cloth bag on 26.05.2011 and found the sealed bag was intact and later on tested the
sample plants and found that the sample plants are found to be cannabis plant having element of
ganja and accordingly prepared a report and submitted as per Ex.P.6.
20. Therefore, upon considering the entire evidence on record as discussed above, the prosecution is
able to prove that the accused had committed the offence alleged that he has illegally cultivated the
ganja plants on the land belonging to his father.
21. The learned counsel for the accused/appellant argued that the accused/appellant is not
responsible for the offence alleged because on the land in question the plants were seized does not
belong to him but his father is the owner of the land and therefore submitted that the
accused/appellant is liable to be eschewed as he was not having of knowledge regarding the plants
were grown on the land belong to his father. When it is the specific contention of the
accused/appellant that the land belonging to his father and he is not in possession and is not
cultivating the land then this fact could be proved by the accused by placing some material to show
that he was not cultivating the land and he was not in a possession by stating so during the course of
examination under Section 313 of Criminal Procedure Code by way of preponderance of probability.
22. It is the evidence of PW.1 that when the raid was conducted on the land it was found that the
accused was watering the plant and upon seeing the accused/appellant had tried to escape from the
spot but he was apprehended and when this being the evidence of PW.1 then the accused/appellant
atleast could have shown some material during the course of recording of statement under Section
313 of Criminal Procedure Code stating that he is not in any way concerned to the land in question
but upon perusing the trial court records the accused had simply denied the incriminating
circumstances put during the course of cross-examination under Section 313 of Criminal Procedure
Code but had not made ventures even to state that he is not concerned to the land.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 7
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
23. When after completion of evidence of prosecution and during the course of cross-examination
under Section 313 Criminal Procedure Code incriminating evidences are put to the accused then the
accused had every opportunity of freedom not only to deny the incriminating circumstances put to
him but to produce some material showing not concerned to the land in question and that would be
considered by way of preponderance of probabilities. Whatever the defence may be those are to be
considered by way of preponderance of probabilities but not beyond reasonable doubt but even this
benefit is accrued to the accused but has not taken up by the accused. It is for the accused/appellant
to show something by way preponderance of probabilities regarding disproving of his involvement
in the case on the land in question where cannabis plants were grown up and found.
24. The learned counsel for the accused/appellant argued with reference to Section 35 of the NDPS
Act which states regarding "presumption of culpable mental status" and argued that when the land
in question is standing in the name of the father therefore presumption cannot be accrued against
the accused that the accused had committed the alleged offence and in this regard he relied on the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bhola Singh vs. State of Punjab [(2011) 11
Supreme Court Cases 653], wherein it is held that -
"11. Applying the facts of the present case to the cited one, it is apparent that the
initial burden to prove that the appellant had the knowledge that the vehicle he
owned was being used for transporting Narcotics still lay on the prosecution, as
would be clear from the word "knowingly", and it was only after the evidence proved
beyond reasonable doubt that he had the knowledge would the presumption under
Section 35 arise. Section 35 also presupposes that the culpable mental state of an
accused has to be proved as a fact beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its
existence is established by a preponderance of probabilities. We are of the opinion
that in the absence of any evidence with regard to the mental state of the appellant no
presumption under Section 35 can be drawn. The only evidence which the
prosecution seeks to rely on is the appellant's conduct in giving his residential
address in Rajasthan although he was a resident of Fatehabad in Haryana while
registering the offending truck cannot by any stretch of imagination fasten him, with
the knowledge of its misuse by the driver and others."
25. The prosecution has to prove the fact of culpable mental status beyond reasonable doubt then
only presumption under Section 35 of the Act can be raised. In the present case the fact is that as
discussed above, as it is proved the appellant had knowledge regarding cultivating the cannabis
plant on the land then he alone cultivated the cannabis plant on the land. From the discussions
made above while appreciating the evidences on record, it is proved beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused had cultivated cannabis plant in a large number. Therefore the prosecution has
discharged its initial burden of proving the guilt against the appellant beyond reasonable doubt,
then as per Section 35 of the Act presumption of culpable mental status can be raised and
accordingly it is argued in the present case raising presumption of culpable mental status of the
accused of cultivating the cannabis plant. Considering the arguments canvassed by the learned
counsel for the appellant in this regard had prosecution not proved beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused had not cultivated cannabis land on the land and he is not concerned with the land then
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 8
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
presumption cannot be raised. But in the present case, the prosecution has proved beyond
reasonable doubt regarding cultivating the cannabis plant on the land and therefore the argument
canvassed by the counsel for the appellant that presumption of culpable mental status cannot be
raised is not found to be having merit.
26. Further more it is the principle of law laid down in the above stated judgment is that for drawing
presumption of culpable mental status of the accused it is initial burden on the prosecution to prove
the involvement of accused in commission of offence by the accused beyond reasonable doubt but
not only by way of preponderance of probability and only after discharging initial burden by the
prosecution, the prosecution can rely with this legal proposition as enumerated under Section 35 of
the NDPS Act.
27. Considering the entire scenario in the present case what is depicted by both the sides the
prosecution has discharged its burden regarding the involvement of the accused and therefore
presumption of culpable mental status of the accused is drawn in the present case and for rebutting
this presumption the accused/appellant had not lead any evidence even by way of preponderance of
probabilities. For rebutting presumption by the accused it need not be always beyond reasonable
doubt as it is being done by the prosecution while proving guilt against the accused but the accused
has to show some preponderance of probabilities rebutting the presumption but in the instant case
accused failed even to show what is preponderance of probabilities involved in the present case
benefiting him. Therefore, in the present case the prosecution has also an added advantage as per
Section 35 of the NDPS Act.
28. Likewise Section 54 of the NDPS Act also enumerates presumption of possession of illicit
articles. Where the accused fails to give account of possession of contraband articles satisfactorily or
fails to give sufficient explanation of such possession then the presumption can be raised as per
Section 54 of the NDPS Act regarding illicit articles against the accused. In the present case the
accused had not shown any explanation why cannabis plants that too in 145 in number totally
weighing 28 kilograms are cultivated whether for any medical purpose or for any genuine reasons.
The accused had failed to give satisfactory answer and to give satisfactory account for possession of
the cannabis plants on the land which are cultivated. Possession always need not be physical
possession also it may be a constructive possession. But the evidence of PW.1 shows that the accused
was pouring water to the land while raid was conducted and this material evidence borne in the
evidence of PW.1 is not shaken in the course of cross-examination. Therefore even though in the
RTC extract Ex.P.8 the land is standing in the name of the father of the accused but the prosecution
proved that the accused is on constructive possession as well as physical possession over the land.
29. The learned counsel for the appellant even to the question posed by the Court failed to convince
the court where a person's name is found on RTC extract showing who is owner and possessor of the
land as per RTC extract whether can he alone be made as accused. In this regard there is no
satisfactory answer put-forth by the learned counsel for the appellant. Therefore, by making use of
Section 54 of NDPS Act the presumption of possession of illicit articles is also accrued in favour of
the prosecution.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 9
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
30. The learned counsel for the appellant argued that appellant father's name is appearing on the
RTC extract but father is not made as accused but appellant has falsely implicated in the case. It is
argument canvassed that since appellant name is not found in the RTC extract then he cannot be
implicated in the case as accused. Where the prosecution by placing cogent evidence that the
appellant had cultivated cannabis plant on the land even though on revenue record the name of
father of the appellant is mentioned then the appellant alone be made as accused. Just because the
name of father of the appellant is mentioned in the RTC extract and father name is not stated as
accused but appellant is made as accused and implicating the accused in the case even though there
being not the name of appellant in the revenue records, it is ridiculous submission. As discussed
above, the appellant had ample opportunities to deny his role on the land by placing some evidences
even by way of preponderance of probabilities to rebut presumption, but the appellant had not
exercised his right to put- forth his defence even by way of preponderance of probabilities to rebut
presumption. Where the prosecution discharge its initial burden then the onus shifts on the accused
to rebut the said presumption but the appellant failed to rebut the presumption.
31. The learned counsel for the accused/appellant argued that in the present case there is abnormal
delay in sending sample ganja to the Forensic Science Laboratory, thus, it goes to the core of the
prosecution case and is fatal one. In this regard the learned counsel for the accused/appellant places
reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Rajasthan vs. Tara Singh
[(2011) 11 Supreme Court Cases 559] and in the case of Karan Singh vs. State of Punjab and Haryana
[2011 (2) Crimes 329 (P&H)] and argued that the delay in sending sample to the FSL discredit the
prosecution case in its entirety and there is reasonable doubt arises in the mind of the court whether
the sample ganja is really cannabis and the sample is really the material which is extracted at the
time of conducting raid and this creates doubt regarding prosecution case.
32. On the other hand learned High Court Government Pleader argued that there is no delay in the
present case in sending sample ganja to the FSL and stated the chronological events that on
18.02.2011 raid was conducted and sample ganja was drawn and on 26.02.2011 the sample ganja
was reached to the FSL, Bengaluru and in this regard there is no delay in sending sample ganja and
whatever may be the time taken in sending sample ganja which is normal course of transaction
which cannot be attributed as delay in forwarding samples to the FSL for testing purpose.
33. Firstly upon considering the factual matrix involved in Tara Singh's case as referred by the
counsel for the accused/appellant and in that case the Apex court had observed from the record that
the samples remained in some unknown custody from 26.02.1998 to 09.03.1998 and there is no
explanation and evidence by the prosecution in whose custody the samples were in custody for the
said period. The Apex Court had observed the sample were in unknown custody. Therefore, doubted
the prosecution case. But in the present case PW.1 after drawing samples from the place of raid and
packed and put seal and handed over to PW.5 while lodging FIS and PW.5 has taken over the sample
ganja and then wrote a letter to Deputy Superintendent of Police and then forwarded the same to
FSL, Bengaluru and said sample materials reached on 26.02.2011 and it is the evidence of Scientific
Officer PW.6 that the sample seal put on the material were found in tact. Therefore, this factual
matrix makes difference between the cited case and in the present case herein. In the present case
the prosecution has sufficiently explained under whose custody the sample ganja were there during
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 10
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
this interregnum period from 18.02.2011 to 26.02.2011 and therefore from the evidence of PWs.1, 5
and 6 the prosecution explained in whose custody sample ganja were and as per the evidence of
PW.6 the sample seal found are intact. Therefore, this difference of factual matrix between two cases
found that the above said judgment is not applicable in the present case.
34. Learned counsel for the appellant by relying on the judgment of the Hon'ble Punjab and
Haryana High Court in Karan Singh's case (stated supra) and taken this court to the observations
made by the High Court at para No.12, wherein it is observed that -
"12. The alleged recovery was effected from the vehicle on11.04.1996 and thee is an
unexplained delayof six days in sending the sample to the Chemical Examiner.
Learned counsel has rightly pointed out that delay of six days in the office of Forensic
Science Laboratory was not explained and as such possibility of tampering with the
same could not be ruled out. The submission of the learned counsel in this regard
appears to be correct. It is no doubt, that if the other evidence produced by the
prosecution to prove the completion of link evidence, is found to be cogent,
convincing, reliable and trustworthy, then mere delay in sending the sample to the
office of the Forensic Science Laboratory, pales into significance. On the other hand,
if the other evidence produced in this regard is found to be unreliable then certainly
the delay by the prosecution to prove the completion of link evidence besides being
deficient, is neither reliable, nor creditworthy. In these circumstances the
unexplained delay, referred to above in sending the sample to the Laboratory
certainly proved fatal to the case of the prosecution."
35. The Punjab and Haryana High Court had observed that for that 6 days delay in sending the
material to the chemical examination and there was no explanation by the prosecution and also it
was observed that if there is no link evidence and link evidence is not completed and the delay in
sending sample to the chemical examination is fatal to the prosecution case. But considering the
instant case as discussed above, the prosecution has explained in whose custody the sample were
there. From PW.1 to PW.5 after conducting raid and then the PW.5 had made arrangement for
sending samples to the chemical examination after receipt from letter from the Deputy
Superintendent of Police which are all found to be in natural course and quite naturally this time of
8 days taken cannot be said that there is unreasonable delay so as to going to core of the prosecution
case. Further more the prosecution has shown link between each witnesses making full circle
unerringly pointing quiet of the accused and proved that the accused had committed the offence as
alleged. Therefore under these circumstances the judgment delivered by the Punjab and Haryana
High Court is not applicable in the present case as there is difference in factual aspects in that cited
case and in the present case.
36. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that PW.4 is an independent witness who is Pancha
had turned hostile and has not supported the prosecution case and he had not stated that
Panchanama was conducted and then the other witnesses are police officials, Tahasildar and it is by
mere believing the official witnesses it cannot be said that the prosecution has proved the guilt
against the accused. Therefore it is a total submission for the counsel for the accused is that for want
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 11
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
of any other independent witnesses the evidence lead by the official witnesses cannot be believed. In
this regard I place reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court regarding dealing with the
appreciation of evidences on official witnesses, in the case of Surinder Kumar vs. State of Punjab
[(2020) 2 Supreme Court Cases 563], wherein it is held that -
"14. Further, it is contended by learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant
that no independent witness was examined, despite the fact they were available. In
this regard, it is to be noticed from the depositions of Devi Lal, Head Constable
(PW-1), during the course of cross- examination, has stated that efforts were made to
join independent witnesses, but none were available. The mere fact that the case of
the prosecution is based on the evidence of official witnesses, does not mean that
same should not be believed.
15. The judgment in the case of Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab ((2011) 3 SCC 521),
relied on by the counsel for the respondent-State also supports the case of the
prosecution. In the aforesaid judgment, this Court has held that merely because
prosecution did not examine any independent witness, would not necessarily lead to
conclusion that accused was falsely implicated. The evidence of official witnesses
cannot be distrusted and disbelieved, merely on account of their official status.
16. In State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sunil ((2001) 1 SCC 652, it was held as under (SCC
p.655):
'It is an archaic notion that actions of the police officer, should be approached with
initial distrust. It is time now to start placing at least initial trust on the actions and
the documents made by the police. At any rate, the court cannot start with the
presumption that the police records are untrustworthy. As a proposition of law, the
presumption should be the other way round. The official acts of the Police have been
regularly performed is a wise principle of presumption and recognized even by the
Legislature'. "
37. Considering the submissions of the counsel for the appellant and High Court Government
Pleader that in the present case even though PW.4 had turned hostile and other witnesses are
official witnesses who are police, Tahasildar and FSL officer but just because the witnesses are
officials their evidence cannot be rejected in toto.
38. In the present context I place reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court stated supra while
considering and appreciating the evidence of the police officials and other officials. Therefore just
because PWs.1, 3 and 5 are the officials and PW.2 is the Tahasildar and PW.6 is the Scientific Officer
and all these are Government officials their evidence cannot be thrown away mechanically. Unless
evidence of officials found to be biased, vindictive in nature against the accused the evidence of the
official witnesses cannot be brushed aside for the reason they are the official witnesses.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 12
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
39. Therefore upon considering and analyzing the entire evidence on record the prosecution is able
to prove the guilt of the accused by placing cogent and reliable evidence and in this regard the
Special Court has rightly appreciated the evidence on record and there are no reasons to cause
interference in the judgment of conviction rendered by the Special Court. Therefore the recording of
judgment of conviction is perfectly justified and correct.
POINT NO.2 :
40. In the present case the Special Court has convicted the appellant for the offence under Section
20(a)(i) of the NDPS Act. The sentence imposed is rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year
with fine of Rs.10,000/- and with default clause in case of failure of payment of fine amount to
undergo simple imprisonment for three months.
41. Upon considering the nature of sentence imposed and the period of imprisonment as it is only
one year with fine of Rs.10,000/- which is not heavy fine deposit amount, this court is of the opinion
that the nature of sentence imposed is found to be correct and there is no need to cause any
interference in the order on sentence. Therefore the order on sentence rendered by the Special Court
is found to be correct. Therefore upon considering the entire case as discussed above and for the
reasons stated above, the appeal is found to be devoid of merits and is liable to be dismissed,
accordingly dismissed.
42. Section 40 of the Act enumerates power of court to publish names, place of business, etc., of
certain offenders. -
(1) Where any person is convicted of any of the offences punishable under section 15 to section 25
(both inclusive), section 28, section 29 or section 30, it shall be competent for the court convicting
theperson to cause the name and place of business or residence of such person, nature of the
contravention, the fact that the person has been so convicted and such other particulars as the court
may consider to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to be published at the expense of
such person in such newspapers or in such manner as the court may direct.
(2) No publication under sub-section (1) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal
against the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been preferred, or such
appeal, having been preferred, has been disposed of.
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub-
section (1) shall be recoverable from the convicted person as if it were a fine imposed by the court.
43. Under this provision of law whoever convicted for the offence punishable stated thereunder and
after preferring the appeal and appeal is disposed off then the court shall make publication in such
newspapers and such manner as enumerated in Section 40 of the NDPS Act. This mandate of law is
seldom followed by the court. In the present case, the Special Court has convicted the appellant for
the offence punishable under Section 20(a)(i) of the Act and the judgment of conviction and order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 13
Rajkumar S/O Sidaraya Bhairashetty vs The State Of Karnataka on 8 June, 2020
on sentence is confirmed by this court in the appeal. Therefore, it is hereby directed the Special
Court to cause publication in the newspaper as enumerated in Section 40 of the NDPS Act. For the
foregoing discussions made above, I answer Points No.1 and 2 as negative. Hence, I pass the
following ;
ORDER Criminal Appeal No.3683/2012 is hereby dismissed.
The judgment of conviction and order on sentence dated 26.09.2012 passed by the court of Special
Judge/Principal Sessions Judge, Bijapur in Special (NDPS) Case No.8/2011 is hereby confirmed.
Registry is hereby directed to send trial court records along with certified copy of judgment to the
Special Court forthwith.
The Special Court shall secure the appellant/accused to serve the sentence and also shall comply
with Section 40 of the Act.
Sd/-
JUDGE sn
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128332232/ 14
