Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June,
2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
LPASW No. 59/2016
Reserved on: 25.05.2023
Pronounced on :05.06.2023
Ram Niwas Pandey ......Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Anil Sethi, Advocate with
Mr. Rajat Sudan, Advocate.
Vs.
Union of India and others .....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Vishal Sharma, Dy. SGI.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE.
JUDGEMENT
1. The appellant was serving as Head Constable in the Border Security Force (B.S.F) and was on duty
as Night Guard Commander on 04-09-2002 at New Water Pump House, STC, BSF, Udhampur. The
other team of the night guard deployed consisted of Recruit Constable Vinay Kumar, Recruit Partap
Ram, Amar Singh and Mangla Ram. On the allegation that the appellant had attempted an indecent
act against Constable Vijay Kumar, offence report in terms of Rule 43 of the Border Security Force
Rules, 1969 was prepared with regard to commission of offences under Section 24 (a). The appellant
pleaded not guilty to the charge and was accordingly proceeded under Rule 45 of the BSF Rules.
2. After making the charge, the Commandant remanded the appellant for trial by the Summary
Security Force Court (SSFC). The SSFC was convened by the Commandant in which, on his request,
the appellant was provided the services of Shri J. S. Bhandari, Deputy Commandant, STC, BSF
Udhampur, as friend of the appellant. The evidence was recorded in which the appellant was given
opportunity to cross-examine. After conclusion of the prosecution evidence the statement of the
appellant was also recorded. He was given option to lead evidence in defense but he declined. On
conclusion of the proceedings the SSFC recorded a finding of fact that the appellant was guilty of the
charge. After convicting the appellant, he was awarded the punishment of 'dismissal from service'.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 1
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
3. Feeling aggrieved, the appellant, without availing the alternate remedy of appeal provided under
the Act, straight away filed SWP No. 1078/2003, seeking inter alia quashment of the order of his
dismissal from service issued by the Commandant vide his No.2031/Estt/Disc/
SSFC/RNP/02/1098- 0125 dated 23.09.2002. The writ petition was contested by the respondents,
who not only met the factual averments made by the appellant in the writ petition but also produced
original record before the writ Court to corroborate their written version filed in the shape of reply
affidavit. The Writ Court considered the rival contentions in the light of the pleadings of both the
parties and material placed on record and came to the conclusion that the appellant had failed to
make out any ground warranting interference with the order of dismissal passed by the respondent.
The writ petition was, accordingly, dismissed vide order and judgment dated 23.02.2016. It is this
order of the Writ Court which is called in question before us in this appeal.
4. The impugned order is assailed by the appellant inter alia on the ground that the entire trial by
the SSFC was conducted in a hurried manner and concluded within one day and therefore, there was
serious miscarriage of justice, in that, the appellant was not provided an adequate opportunity to
defend himself. The proceedings of SSFC have also been called in question on the ground that the
Commandant, who conducted the proceedings under Rule 45 and directed the trial of the appellant
by the SSFC, ultimately himself became the Judge in the trial. The proceedings of the SSFC by the
Commandant were, thus, not permissible in law and clearly violative of principles of natural justice.
5. Mr. Anil Sethi, learned counsel appearing for the appellant would also urge that having regard to
the nature of the allegations imputed to the appellant, punishment of dismissal from service was
shockingly and strikingly disproportionate.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that there is no infraction of any provision of the BSF Act and the Rules framed
there under while dealing with the case of the appellant.
7. At the instance of Mr. Sethi we have carefully gone through the record produced by the
respondents. Not only the provisions of Chapter VII and Chapter VIII of the BSF Rules, 1969 have
been strictly adhered to but the appellant has also been provided adequate opportunity to
cross-examine the witnesses. On being informed and on his choosing, Mr. J.S.Bandhari, Dy.
Commandant, was appointed as friend of the appellant to defend him during the trial. From the
reading of entire evidence on record, it is firmly established that the appellant had during the night
of 4th September, 2002 committed an act tantamounting to disgraceful act of unnatural kind which
is punishable under Section 24 of the BSF Act, 1968 with a punishment for a term which may extend
to seven years or such less punishment as mentioned in the Act. The provisions of Section 24, which
deal with disgraceful conduct, reads as under:-
"24. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.--Any person subject to this Act who
commits any of the following offences, that is to say,--
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 2
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally
delays his cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily
causes hurt to himself or that person, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court,
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
8. From reading of Section 24, it s evident that if a person subject to BSF Act is found guilty of any
disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind, he shall be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as in the BSF Act mentioned.
The question here is as to whether punishment of 'dismissal from service' is a punishment less than
the punishment of seven years under the BSF Act. For this, we may have to refer to Section 48 of the
BSF Act, which catalogues various punishments under the Act. Section 48, for facility of reference, is
reproduced as under:-
"48. Punishments awardable by Security Force Courts.--(1) Punishments may be
inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted
by Security Force Courts according to the scale following, that is to say,--
(a) death;
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but
excluding imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(c) dismissal from the service;
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank
in the case of an under-officer;
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the
purpose of promotion;
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other
prescribed purpose;
(h) fine, in respect of civil offences;
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an
under-officer;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 3
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an
offence committed on active duty;
(k) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such
dismissal;
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the
offence for which he is convicted is made good.
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be
inferior in degree to every punishment preceding it in the above scale."
9. As is evident from a plain reading of Section 48 (I) that 'dismissal from service' figures at Clause
(c) of sub Section (1) whereas imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody
figures in clause (d). As is apparent from reading of sub Section (2) of Section 48, each of the
punishments specified in sub-Section (1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to every
punishment preceding it in the above scale.
10. Viewed, thus, it is beyond any pale of doubt that in terms of Section 48, the punishment of
'dismissal from service' is inferior in degree to the punishment of imprisonment for a term
exceeding three months. As noted above, under Section 24 of the Act, a person found guilty on
conviction by SSFC is liable to suffer imprisonment for a term, which may extend to seven years or
such less punishment as is mentioned in the Act. The respondents, in their wisdom and having
regard to the nature of the act committed by the appellant, imposed a lesser punishment i.e.
punishment of dismissal from service on the appellant. The decision of the respondents to impose
the punishment of dismissal from service, therefore, cannot be found fault with on the ground that it
is violative of either Section 24 or Section 48 of the Act of 1968.
11. Lastly Mr. Sethi would urge that having regard to the nature of disgraceful act attributed to the
appellant, the punishment of dismissal from service inflicted on the appellant is strikingly
disproportionate to the established misconduct.
12. In view of the settled legal position, this Court while hearing appeal against the order of the Writ
Court passed in the exercise of extraordinary writ jurisdiction does not sit in appeal over the
decision of the disciplinary authority in respect of adequacy of the punishment to be awarded to the
delinquent. It is true that this Court may pass appropriate orders, if it is of the opinion that the
punishment inflicted on the delinquent is shockingly or strikingly disproportionate to the
established misconduct. We have gone through the nature of allegation and the evidence brought on
record to prove such allegations. We are of the considered opinion that indecent conduct of the
appellant is not tolerable in any civilised society and absolutely not in the paramilitary forces where
the jawans live, eat and sometimes sleep huddled in the barracks. We may make it clear that
indecent act of trying to commit unnatural act by the appellant was not consensual but was forced
upon Constable Vijay Kumar. It is on the complaint of Const. Vinay Kumar and his unimpeachable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 4
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
statement recorded during the trial by the SSFC, the appellant came to be convicted and sentenced
to dismissal from service.
13. Viewed from any angle, we do not find that the penalty of dismissal from service imposed upon
the appellant is shockingly disproportionate to the conduct attributed. The SSFC has considered the
evidence on record and has come to the conclusion that the dismissal from service is the befitting
punishment that is required to be imposed on the appellant for the indecent act committed by him.
See V. Ramana vs. A.P.S.R.T.C. & ors, (2005) 7 SCC 338, paras (11) & (12) whereof reads thus:
"11. The common thread running through in all these decisions is that the Court
should not interfere with the administrator's decision unless it was illogical or suffers
from procedural impropriety or was shocking to the conscience of the Court, in the
sense that it was in defiance of logic or moral standards. In view of what has been
stated in the Wednesbury's case (supra) the Court would not go into the correctness
of the choice made by the administrator open to him and the Court should not
substitute its decision to that of the administrator. The scope of judicial review is
limited to the deficiency in decision-making process and not the decision.
12. To put differently unless the punishment imposed by the Disciplinary Authority
or the Appellate Authority shocks the conscience of the Court/Tribunal, there is no
scope for interference. Further to shorten litigations it may, in exceptional and rare
cases, impose appropriate punishment by recording cogent reasons in support
thereof. In a normal course if the punishment imposed is shockingly disproportionate
it would be appropriate to direct the Disciplinary Authority or the Appellate
Authority to reconsider the penalty imposed".
Also in (2011) 10 SCC 244 Commandant 22nd Bn. CRPF vs. Surinder Kumar, the Apex Court has, in
para (15), held as under:
"Moreover, it appears from the impugned order that the High Court has in exercise of
power of judicial review interfered with the punishment of dismissal on the ground
that it was disproportionate. In Union of India vs. R.K. Sharma (AIR 2001 SC 3053),
this Court has taken the view that the punishment should not be merely
disproportionate but should be strikingly disproportionate to warrant interference by
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution and it was only in an extreme
case, where on the face of it there is perversity or irrationality that there can be
judicial review under Articles 226 or 227 or under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Since this is not one of those cases where the punishment of dismissal was strikingly
disproportionate or where on the face of it there was perversity or irrationality, the
Division Bench of the High Court ought not to have interfered with the order of
dismissal from service".
14. The punishment awarded to the appellant for the misconduct he committed is not such as would
shock the conscious of this Court. We, therefore, see no reason or justification to interfere with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 5
Ram Niwas Pandey vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
impugned judgment passed by the Writ Court.
15. The appeal is found to be without merit and is, accordingly, dismissed.
( Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU:
05.06.2023
Anil Raina, Addl. Registrar/Secy
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178513955/ 6
