Ram Kumar Yadav vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
Ram Kumar Yadav vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 1 May,
2025
Author: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
Bench: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68589-DB
Court No. - 29
Case :- SPECIAL APPEAL No. - 110 of 2025
Appellant :- Ram Kumar Yadav
Respondent :- Union Of India And 3 Others
Counsel for Appellant :- Ajeet Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- A.S.G.I.,Manav Chaurasia,Satish Chaturvedi
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar Mishra,J.
Hon'ble Praveen Kumar Giri,J.
1. Heard Ms. Roshni Dwivedi, learned counsel for the appellant, Sri Pankaj Srivastava, learned
counsel for the bank and Sri Manav Chaurasia, learned counsel for respondent no.1.
2. Learned Single Judge has dismissed the appellant's writ petition on the ground of lack of
territorial jurisdiction. Facts of the case are noticed as per which disciplinary proceedings against
the petitioner was conducted at Barmer city at Rajasthan and the order of dismissal was passed by
the competent authority in New Delhi. Consequently it is held that no cause of action has arisen
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13338199/ 1
Ram Kumar Yadav vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
3. Learned counsel for the appellant has taken us through the records of the writ to indicate that the
disciplinary action was initiated against the petitioner while he was working at Etah. The charges in
respect of which such disciplinary action was taken also related to the incidents at Etah. Since the
alleged misconduct, which is the basis of disciplinary action has been committed as per the
employer at Etah, therefore, the part of cause of action is stated to have arisen within the territorial
limits of this Court. It is, therefore, submitted that part of cause of action would arise within the
jurisdiction of this Court and learned Single Judge has erred in dismissing the writ petition for lack
of territorial jurisdiction.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon the judgment of Supreme Court in the
Commissioner of Central Excise vs. Sun Pharmaceuticals 2006 SCC Online Mad 407 (paragraph
nos.8, 9, 12, 13), Sterling Agro Industries Ltd. vs. Union of India and others (Constitution Bench)
2011 SCC Online Del 3162 (paragraph nos.32, 33, 35), Alchemist Ltd. and another vs. State Bank of
Sikkim and others (2007) 11 SCC 335 (paragraph no.37), Arcadia Shipping Limited vs. Tata Steel
Limited (2024) 9 SCC 335 (paragraph nos.26, 29) and Lajwanti Srivastava vs. U.P. State Agro
Industrial Corporation (Special Appeal (D) No.237 of 2022 decided on 9.11.2022).
5. On the strength of the above judgments it is urged that the part of cause of action has arisen
within the territorial limits of this Court and, therefore, the dismissal of writ on the ground of lack of
jurisdiction ought to be interfered with.
6. Learned counsel for the respondent-bank although disputes the proposition canvassed on behalf
of the appellant but it remains undisputed that the misconduct attributed to the appellant was
committed at Etah. It is also not in issue that the appellant was posted at Etah when the offending
act are attributed to have been committed by him which ultimately led to his dismissal from service.
7. We have examined the records and we find that the aspect pressed before us has apparently not
been brought to the notice of learned Single Judge. We are of the view that the issue of jurisdiction
would necessarily require an examination of attending facts and circumstances in order to ascertain
as to whether part of cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction of this Court. Article 226(2) of
the Constitution of India provides as under:-
"(2). The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs to any
Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High Court exercising
jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause of action, wholly or in
part, arises for the exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the scat of such
Government or authority or the residence of such person is not within those
territories."
8. Cause of action is a bundle of essential facts which the plaintiff must prove before he can succeed
in the suit. It gives occasion for and forms the foundation of suit. The question whether the
misconduct has been committed within the territorial limits of this Court and would constitute a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13338199/ 2
Ram Kumar Yadav vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
part of cause of action in the peculiar facts of this case requires examination.
9. In the facts of this case the appellant was posted at Etah under the administrative office of bank at
Agra when he was transferred to Barmer city, under the administrative office at Jaipur vide order
dated 21.11.2012. This order was apparently not complied with as such he was deemed to have
voluntarily vacated his service vide order dated 16.4.2013. This order was challenged before this
Court in Writ-A No.26461 of 2013. He was relegated to the remedy of appeal. A subsequent Writ-A
No.30424 of 2013 was then filed before this Court challenging the transfer order dated 21.11.2012
which was dismissed on the ground of delay. Since the appellant's appeal filed in terms of the liberty
given was not decided as such contempt proceedings were initiated. The respondent-bank allegedly
withdrew the order dated 16.4.2013 as a result of which his appeal was dismissed as having become
infructuous vide order dated 24.7.2014. This order was intimated to appellant on 7.8.2014. The
appellant offered his joining on 12.8.2014 at Barmer city. The bank, nevertheless informed the
appellant that disciplinary proceedings were intiated against him on 19.1.2013 and an inquiry report
dated 24.12.2014 was submitted and served on him vide letter dated 9.1.2025. The appellant was
also dismissed from service vide order dated 24.12.2014 on the strength of ex-parte inquiry
conducted against him by the bank. This order of dismissal has been affirmed in appeal and review
vide orders dated 28.4.2015 and 8.6.2016. Aggrieved by these orders the appellant filed writ petition
before this Court in the year 2016, which is since dismissed on the ground of lack of territorial
jurisdiction.
10. From the facts placed on record it transpires that the appellant was posted at Etah when he was
transferred to Barmer at Rajasthan. He contested his transfer. Initially he was held to have
voluntarily vacated his service vide order dated 16.4.2013. This order was challenged before before
this Court in writ wherein grievance was permitted to be agitated by filing appeal. The appeal came
to be decided holding that the order dated 16.4.2013 was withdrawn. In between pursuant to
ex-parte inquiry the appellant has been dismissed from service. Although the dismissal order as also
the appellate/revisional orders are not passed in U.P., rather are passed at Rajasthan and Delhi, yet,
we find that a part of cause of action has arisen to the appellant before this Court. He was posted at
Etah from where he was transferred to Barmer city. The transfer from Etah and the act of not
joining at Barmer city have ultimately led to his dismissal from service. In between writs and
contempt were filed before this Court. The disciplinary action is also in respect of charges levelled
while the appellant was posted at Etah. In such circumstances, it cannot be said that part of cause of
action has not arisen within the territorial limits of this Court.
11. Though it is settled that insignificant or irrelevant fact would not constitute part of cause of
action but where such facts constitutes material, essential or integral part of cause of action then
even a small fraction of cause of action would vest jurisdiction in the High Court to entertain the
petition. Whether on fact such part of cause of action has arisen within the territorial limits of this
Court is essentially a question of fact. If the facts relied upon to constitute part of cause of action is
shown to have bearing on the lis and the dispute involved in the case the petition would not be
maintainable. In Alchemist Ltd. vs. State Bank of Sikkim (2007) 11 SCC 335 the Supreme Court
observed as under in para 37:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13338199/ 3
Ram Kumar Yadav vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
"37. From the aforesaid discussion and keeping in view the ratio laid down in a
catena of decisions by this Court, it is clear that for the purpose of deciding whether
facts averred by the appellant-petitioner would or would not constitute a part of
cause of action, one has to consider whether such fact constitutes a material,
essential, or integral part of the cause of action. It is no doubt true that even if a small
fraction of the cause of action arises within the jurisdiction of the court, the court
would have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the suit/petition. Nevertheless it must
be a ?part of cause of action?, nothing less than that."
12. In view of the discussions held above as also keeping in view the principles settled in law, we
accept the appellant's contention that part cause of action has arisen in the facts of this case within
the territorial jurisdiction of this Court. The appellant was lastly posted at Etah in U.P.; he was
working under the administrative set up of bank at Agra before he was transferred; the plea of
voluntary vacation of service occurred at Etah; previous writs in the case were entertained by this
Court and contempt petition was also filed before this court and decided without raising any
objection by the bank with regard to this Court's territorial jurisdiction in the matter; all the charges
relates to the appellant's working at Etah etc. We accordingly hold that the part of cause of action in
this case has arisen within the territorial limits of this Court and the writ petition was maintainable
before this Court. Consequently, the judgment and order of learned Single Judge dated 23.1.2025 is
set aside. The matter stands remitted to learned Single Judge for adjudication of cause on merits.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 RA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13338199/ 4
