Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir
And ... on 16 May, 2023
Author: Tashi Rabstan
Bench: Tashi Rabstan
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 15.03.2023
Pronounced on: 16.05.2023.
WP(C)No. 2398/2021
CM No.8368/2021
Ram Paul Sharma
..... Petitioner(s)...
Through:-Mr. Vikas Magotra, Advocate
Vs.
Hon'ble High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh and others
......Respondent(s)...
Through:- Mr. Rajnish Raina and
Mr. Rishu Rajeshwar, Advocates for R-1 to 3
Mr. Vishal Sharma, DSGI for R-4.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE TASHI RABSTAN, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
TASHI RABSTAN-J
1. Through the medium of petition in hand, the petitioner has prayed for grant of the following
relief:-
a. Certiorari, quashing and setting aside, impugned order No.621 dated 04.08.2017,
passed by the respondent no. 2 and 3 in awarding penalty of withholding one annual
increment with non-cumulative effect in favour of the petitioner on the ground that
the same is perverse and not based on facts, being issued contrary to mandate of the
J&K Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 and also being
totally, arbitrary, discriminatory and unsustainable in law, being in violation of the
basic principles of natural justice, beside being illegal and non-est in law.;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 1
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
b. Mandamus, commanding the respondents to pass favorable effective orders for
fixation of seniority of petitioner as Assistant Registrar-l immediately after the
seniority position held by Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid, Assistant Registrar-I and also the
benefits of promotion of petitioner as Section Officer w.e.f. 26.10.2008 and
consequential promotion as Assistant Registrar-II w.e.f. 30.08.2011 & further as
Assistant Registrar-I and other higher posts in line retrospectively along with all
consequential benefits.
c. Direct the respondents to produce all the relevant record including the service record of the
petitioner, record of enquiry proceedings and also other relevant record before this Hon'ble Court.
d. And or any other writ, order or direction which this Hon'ble Court feels fit and proper may also
kindly be passed in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents, keeping in view facts and
circumstances of the present case."
2. Before proceeding further in the matter, it would be necessary to refer to the service profile of the
petitioner, as per the record and the same is tabulated hereunder:-
Service Profile of Petitioner:-
30.04.1988 Petitioner appointed as Junior Assistant. 26.11.1994 Promoted as Senior
Assistant.
27.05.1999 Promoted as Head Assistant (Accountant). 26.10.2008 Adjusted as S.O.
11 (O.P.G) Rs. 6500-10500/- pre revised. 24.11.2008 Adjusted as S.O. 1 (O.P.G) Rs.
7450-11500/-.
2014 Another enquiry initiated in 2014 (stoppage of two increments) 04.08.2017 Impugned order
passed.
10.01.2019 Promotion of petitioner as S.O regularized and also promoted as Assistant Registrar-II
w.e.f 04-08-2018 i.e. a day after the penalty period of one year was over.
Further the relevant dates of the Enquiry proceedings forming subject matter of instant petition are
as under:-
2000 Incident.
03.01.2005 Preliminary enquiry report.
04.01.2005 Charges to be framed against petitioner and Bharat
Bhushan
26.02.2005 Matter dropped against the then Ld. Registrar Judicial
Charges framed and regular enquiry commenced
10.01.2017 Enquiry report submitted
19.07.2017 2nd Show cause notice of the proposed penalty issued
04.08.2017 Impugned order passed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 2
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
3. The case set up by the petitioner primarily hinges around the issue that due to unjustified and
unprecedented delay in conclusion of the enquiry proceedings against him, which started in the year
2005 and concluded in the year 2017, the seniority of the petitioner was distorted and as a result his
right of consideration for further promotions got adversely affected. The direct adverse consequence
of the delayed enquiry proceedings upon the petitioner was that at the time of institution of the
enquiry, the petitioner was working as Head Assistant and as per Order No. 579 dated 24.10.2008
issued in terms of Rule 6 of the J&K High Court Staff (Condition of Service Rules) 1968 whereby the
service conditions and partial avenues for High Court Staff are provided for promotion from the
post of Head Assistant to Section Officer, two years minimum experience is prescribed, similarly for
promotion from Section Officer to Assistant Registrar -II, again minimum service of two years is
prescribed. Likewise for promotion from Assistant Registrar-II to Assistant Registrar-I and from
Assistant Registrar-I to Deputy Registrar and from Deputy Registrar to Joint Registrar, again two
years' service/experience is required in each feeding cadre. The above preposition implies that for
being promoted from Head Assistant to Joint Registrar, a total of eight years of service experience in
all respective feedings cadres is required.
4. The petitioner has urged that had the enquiry initiated against him been concluded within a
reasonable time and even if the impugned punishment / penalty imposed against him was to be
maintained, the petitioner who was initially appointed as Junior Assistant in the year 1988 could
have very easily retired as Joint Registrar in the year 2019, whereas due to unjustifiable delayed
enquiry proceedings, the petitioner got retired as Assistant Registrar-II, whereas his
counterpart/colleague, namely, Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid and others retired on much higher posts
than him.
5. The further case of the petitioner is that vide order No. 476 dated 30.08.2011 issued by the
Registrar General of this Court, the promotion of the petitioner was deferred till conclusion of the
enquiry proceedings pending against him, while as his counterpart, colleague and similarly situated
employee, namely, Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid, was promoted as Assistant Registrar-II in terms of the
same order. However, the said order contained a specific stipulation under Note-II, providing that
the postponement of the consideration of the petitioner for promotion from Section Officer-I in OPG
would not affect his seniority in case the petitioner was considered and appointed as Section Officer
in future. But, the said condition was never followed by the respondents as would be evident from
record.
6. For facility of reference extract of Note-I figuring in order dated 30.08.2011 is reproduced as
under:-
Note:- 1 Promotion of Shri Ram Paul Sharma Section Officer-! ( in OPG) and Ms
Veena Kumari Head Assistant are deferred till conclusion of regular enquiry pending
against them. However, postponement of consideration shall not effect their seniority
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 3
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
in case they are considered and appointed as Section Officer.
7. It is a fact that vide order No. 985/GS dated 29.10.2018, when the promotion of the petitioner as
Section Officer (OPG) was regularized, it was provided that the dates regarding the effect of
promotion shall be notified separately, however, in the year 2019, when the petitioner was promoted
as Assistant Registrar-II vide order No. 1279 dated 10.01.2019, the seniority of the petitioner was
not protected and the date of effect of his promotion was notified as 04-08-2018. The above
discrimination and injustice was meted out to the petitioner despite the fact that he was entitled to
be promoted as Section Officer w.e.f. 26.10.2008 and further for consequential promotion as
Assistant Registrar-II w.e.f. 30.08.2011 on the analogy of his counterpart and colleague - Sh. Bashir
Ahmed Vaid.
8. It was further contended that on one hand, the promotion accruable to the petitioner was
deferred pending enquiry proceedings and on the other hand, all the persons in the High Court
Registry, against whom various enquiry proceedings were pending, were granted promotions
subject to outcome of the enquiry proceedings pending against them. The petitioner has quoted
instances by citing the case of Sh. Bharat Bhushan, the then peon who although was mainly held
responsible for misconduct on all charges in the same enquiry proceedings, yet even during the
currency of the enquiry proceedings, he was promoted and regularized as Junior Assistant vide
order No.1107 dated 26.02.2010, when his services were regularized w.e.f. 12.04.2007 and
subsequently also vide order No.1730 dated 07.09.2018, sanction was accorded for regularization of
promotion of said Sh. Bharat Bhushan as Senior Assistant w.e.f. 31.03.2010 and even First Higher
Standard Pay Scale ( In-situ promotion) of level SL2 as Orderly was granted in his favour w.e.f.
01.01.2007. The above aspect is clear discrimination with the petitioner, who was held to be guilty of
minor charges only in the enquiry report dated 10.07.2017 and even the enquiry officer had duly
acknowledged the injustice meted out to the petitioner in the same enquiry report.
9. Further contention of the petitioner is that the petitioner has been subjected to unwarranted
stagnation in service due to above acts of omission & commission on the part of the respondents and
the practice of stagnation has been deprecated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in catena of
judgments. The petitioner would also contend that the penalty imposed upon the petitioner has
been imposed by a non-speaking order dated 04.08.2017 which is without any justification or
reason. Therefore, not sustainable in law. It is contended that keeping in view the recommendations
of the enquiry officer and otherwise in the totality of circumstances, the punishment/penalty
imposed upon the petitioner was grossly disproportionate and therefore the petitioner seeks the
quashment of the said penalty order dated 04.08.2017.
10. The petitioner, as such, has summarized his contentions by stating that the petitioner has been
deprived of his right of consideration for promotion with the delay in concluding the enquiry at the
first instance and also by not protecting his seniority as decided and further by depriving him
promotion till the conclusion of enquiry proceedings which took twelve long years to conclude.
11. In support of his submissions, the petitioner has relied upon AIR 1998 SC 1833 ( Para 19), AIR
2000 SC 2767 ( Para 5), AIR 2006 SC 207 ( Para 15 and 16) on the issue of prejudice caused to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 4
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
employee with delayed enquiry by the employer. It would be appropriate to reproduce relevant
paragraphs of the aforesaid judgments.
In case titled State of A.P. Vs. N. Radhakishan, reported in 1998 SC 1833, the Hon'ble Surpeme
Court in paragraph No.19 held as under :-
"19. It is not possible to lay down any predetermined principles applicable to all cases
and in all situations where there is delay in concluding the disciplinary proceedings.
Whether on that ground the disciplinary proceedings are to be terminated each case
has to be examined on the facts and circumstances in that case. the essence of the
matter is that the court has to take into consideration all relevant factors and to
balance and weight them to determine if it is in the interest of clean and honest
administration that the disciplinary proceedings should be allowed to terminate after
delay particularly when delay is abnormal and there is no explanation for the delay.
The delinquent employee has a right that disciplinary proceedings against him are
concluded expeditiously and he s not made to undergo mental agony and also
monetary loss when these are unnecessarily prolonged without any fault on his part
in delaying the proceedings. In considering whether delay has vitiated the
disciplinary proceedings the Court has to consider the nature of charge, its
complexity and on what account the delay has occurred. if the delay is unexplained
prejudice to the delinquent employee is writ large on the face of it.
It could also be seen as to how much disciplinary authority is serious in pursuing the
charges against its employee. It is the basic principle of administrative justice that an
officer entrusted with a particular job has to perform his duties honestly, efficiently
and in accordance with the rules. If he deviates from this path he is to suffer a penalty
prescribed.Normally, disciplinary proceedings should be allowed to take its course as
per relevant rules but then delay defeats justice. Delay causes prejudice to the
charged officer unless it can be shown that he is to or when there is proper
explanation for the delay in conducting the disciplinary proceedings. Ultimately, the
court is to balance these two diverse considerations."
In case titled Delhi Jal Board Vs. Mahinder Singh, reported in 2000 (SC) 2767, the Hon'ble Surpeme
Court in pargraph No.5 held as under :-
"5. The right to be considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee is a
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution of India, provided
a person is eligible and is in the zone of consideration. The sealed cover procedure
permits the question of his promotion to be kept in abeyance till the result of any
pending disciplinary inquiry. But the findings of the Disciplinary Enquiry
exonerating the officer would have to be given effect to as they obviously relate back
to the date on which the charges are framed. If the disciplinary inquiry ended in his
favour, it is as if the officer had not been subjected to any Disciplinary Enquiry. The
sealed cover procedure was envisaged under the rules to give benefit oi any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 5
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
assessment made by the Departmental Promotion Committee in favour of such an
officer. if he had been found fit for promotion and it he was later exonerated in the
disciplinary inquiry which was pending at the time when the DPC met. The mere fact
that by the time the disciplinary proceedings in the first inquiry ended in his favour
and by the time the sealed cover was opened to give effect to it, another departmental
enquiry was started by the department, would not, in our view, come in the way of
giving him the benefit of the assessment by the first Departmental Promotion
Committee in his favour in the anterior selection. There is. therefore, no question of
referring the matter to a larger Bench."
In case titled P.V.Mahadevan Vs. M.D., Tamil Nadu Housing Board, reported in 2006 AIR (SC)207,
the Hon'ble Surpeme Court in pargraphs No.15 and 16 held as under :-
15. Section 118 specifically provides for submission of the abstracts of the accounts at
the end of every year and Section 119 relates to annual audit of accounts. These two
statutory provisions have not been complied with at all. In the instant case the
transaction took place in the year 1990. The expenditure ought to have been
considered in the accounts of the succeeding year. In the instant case the audit report
was ultimately released in the 1994-1995. The explanation offered for the delay in
finalising the audit account cannot stand scrutiny in view of the above two provisions
of the Tamil Nadu Act 17. It is now stated that the appellant has retired from service.
There is also no acceptable explanation on the side of the respondent explaining the
inordinate delay in initiating departmental disciplinary proceedings. Mr. R.
Venkataramani, learned Senior counsel is appearing for the respondent.
His submission that the period from the date of commission of the irregularities by the appellant to
the date on which it came to the knowledge of the Housing Board cannot be reckoned for the
purpose of ascertaining whether there was any delay on the part of the Board in initiating
disciplinary proceedings against the appellant has no merit and force. The stand now taken by the
respondent in this Court in the counter affidavit is not convincing and is only an afterthought to give
some explanation for the delay.
16. Under the circumstances, we are of the opinion that allowing the respondent to proceed further
with the departmental proceedings at this distance of time will be very prejudicial to the appellant.
Keeping a higher government official under charges of corruption and disputed integrity would
cause unbearable mental agony and distress to the officer concerned. The protracted disciplinary
enquiry against a government employee should, therefore, be avoided not only in the interests of the
government employee but in public interest and also in the interests of inspiring confidence in the
minds of the government employees. At this stage, it is necessary to draw the curtain and to put an
end to the enquiry. The appellant had already suffered enough and more on account of the
disciplinary proceedings. As a matter of fact, the mental agony and sufferings of the appellant due to
the protracted disciplinary proceedings would be much more than the punishment. For the mistakes
committed by the department in the procedure for initiating the disciplinary proceedings, the
appellant should not be made to suffer."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 6
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
12. The petitioner has further relied upon AIR 2010 SC 2642 (Para 9, 10 and 15), AIR 1990 SC 311 (
Para 7) AIR 1978 SC 851 ( Para 8 ) on the issue of stagnation and delay in promotion.
In case titled Charanjit Lamba Vs. Commanding Officer, Southern Command and others reported in
AIR 2010 SC 2642 , the Hon'ble Surpeme Court in pargraph Nos.9, 10, and 15 held as under :-
9. The doctrine of proportionality which Lord Diplock saw as a future possibility is
now a well recognized ground on which a Writ Court can interfere with the order of
punishment imposed upon an employee if the same is so outrageously
disproportionate to the nature of misconduct that it shocks conscience of the Court.
We may at this stage briefly refer to the decisions of this Court which have over the
years applied the doctrine of proportionality to specific fact situations.
10. In Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh (1983) 2 SCC 442 this Court held
that if the penalty imposed is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct, it
would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
15. That the punishment imposed upon a delinquent should commensurate to the
nature and generally of the misconduct is not only a requirement of fairness,
objectivity, and non-discriminatory treatment which even those form quality of a
misdemeanour are entitled to claim but the same is recognized as being a part of
Article 14 of the Constitution. It is also evident from the long time of decisions
referred to above that the courts in India have recognized the doctrine of
proportionality as one of the ground for judicial review. Having said that we need to
remember that the quantum of punishment in disciplinary matters is something that
rests primarily with the disciplinary authority. The jurisdiction of a Writ Court or the
Administrative Tribunal for that matter is limited to finding out whether the
punishment is so outrageously disproportionate as to be suggestive of lack of good
faith. What is clear is that while judicially reviewing an order of punishment imposed
upon a delinquent employee the Writ Court would not assume the role of an appellate
authority. It would not impose a lesser punishment merely because it considers the
same to be more reasonable than what the disciplinary authority has imposed. It is
only in cases where the punishment is so disproportionate to the gravity of charge
that no reasonable person placed in the position of the disciplinary authority could
have imposed such a punishment that a Writ Court may step in to interfere with the
same."
In case titled Dr. Ms. O.Z.Hussain Vs. Union of India and others reported in AIR 1990 SC 311, the
Hon'ble Surpeme Court in paragraph No.7 held as under :-
"7. This Court, has on more than one occasion, pointed out that provision for
promotion increases efficiency of the public service while stagnation reduces
efficiency and makes the service ineffective. Promotion is thus a normal incidence of
service. There too is no justification why while similarly placed officers in other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 7
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
Ministries would have the benefit of promotion, the non-medical 'A' Group scientists
in the establishment of Director General of Health Services would be deprived of such
advantage. In a welfare State, it is necessary that there should be an efficient public
service and, therefore, it should have been the obligation of the Ministry of Health to
attend to the representations of the Council and its members and provide
promotional avenue for this category of officers. It is, therefore, necessary that on the
model of rules framed by the Ministry of Science and Technology with such
alterations as may be necessary, appropriate rules should be framed within four
months from now providing promotional avenue for the 'A' category scientists in the
non-medical wing of the Directorate."
In case titled Mohinder Singh Gill and another Vs. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and
others reported in AIR 1978 SC 851, the Hon'ble Surpeme Court in paragraph No.8 held as under :-
"8. The second equally relevant matter is that when a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or
otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to
court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought
,out. We may here draw attention to the observations of Bose J. in Gordhandas
Bhanji (1) "Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be
construed in the light of explanations subsequently given by the officer making the
order of what he meant, or of what was in Ms mind, or what he intended to, do.
Public orders made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are
intended to effect the actings and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and
must be construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself."
Orders are not like old wine becoming better as they grow older."
13. The petitioner has also relied upon case titled Ramesh Kumar Vs. Union of India and others
reported in AIR 2015 SC 2904 wherein at paragraphs 12 and 13, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held
that in case it is demonstrated before the Court that an employee has been deprived for
consideration for promotion only due to the inaction/action of the employee, the said employee
shall be entitled to monetary benefits besides other consequential benefits also, as the principle of
no work no pay has been held to be not a thumb rule to be followed in every case without
appreciating above aspect. The petitioner, therefore, contends that since he has already retired from
service in the year 2019, appropriate relief may be granted in his favour as prayed by him in the
prayer part of his petition. It is relevant to reproduce paragraphs 12 and 13 here as under:-
"12. In normal circumstances when retrospective promotions are effected, all benefits
flowing therefrom, including monetary benefits, must be extended to an employee
who has been denied promotion earlier. So far as monetary benefits with regard to
retrospective promotion is concerned that depends upon case to case. In State of
Kerala & Ors. vs. E.K. Bhaskaran Pillai, (2007) 6 SCC 524, this Court held that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 8
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
principle of "no work no pay" cannot be accepted as a rule of thumb and the matter
will have to be considered on a case to case basis and in para (4), it was held as
under:-
"... We have considered the decisions cited on behalf of both the sides. So far as the
situation with regard to monetary benefits with retrospective promotion is
concerned, that depends upon case to case. There are various facets which have to be
considered. Sometimes in a case of departmental enquiry or in criminal case it
depends on the authorities to grant full back wages or 50 per cent of back wages
looking to the nature of delinquency involved in the matter or in criminal cases where
the incumbent has been acquitted by giving benefit of doubt or full acquittal.
Sometimes in the matter when the person is superseded and he has challenged the
same before court or tribunal and he succeeds in that and direction is given for
reconsideration of his case from the date persons junior to him were appointed, in
that case the court may grant sometimes full benefits with retrospective effect and
sometimes it may not. Particularly when the administration has wrongly denied his
due then in that case he should be given full benefits including monetary benefit
subject to there being any change in law or some other supervening factors. However,
it is very difficult to set down any hard-and-fast rule. The principle "no work no pay"
cannot be accepted as a rule of thumb. There are exceptions where courts have
granted monetary benefits also."
13. We are conscious that even in the absence of statutory provision, normal rule is "no work no
pay". In appropriate cases, a court of law may take into account all the facts in their entirety and
pass an appropriate order in consonance with law. The principle of "no work no pay" would not be
attracted where the respondents were in fault in not considering the case of the appellant for
promotion and not allowing the appellant to work on a post of Naib Subedar carrying higher pay
scale. In the facts of the present case when the appellant was granted promotion w.e.f. 01.01.2000
with the ante-dated seniority from 01.08.1997 and maintaining his seniority alongwith his
batchmates, it would be unjust to deny him higher pay and allowances in the promotional position
of Naib Subedar."
14. Per contra, respondents No. 1 to 3 vehemently opposed the petition and urged that the petition is
hit by delay and laches. It is also insisted that the petitioner has been rightly given the punishment
on the basis of the enquiry report. The respondent Nos. 1 to 3 further contend that besides the
impugned punishment, petitioner was also imposed punishment of stoppage of one increment in the
year 2014. Respondents 1 to 3,therefore, prayed for dismissal of writ petition. The counsel for
respondents 1 to 3 has produced the relevant record and has relied upon judgment reported as 1997
(6) SCC 255 on the issue of delay.
15. Last but not the least, respondent No.4 has submitted that his role would only come in case this
Court proceeds to grant relief in favour of the petitioner.
16. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 9
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
17. The case set up by the petitioner revolves around the issue that due to unjustified and
unprecedented delay in conclusion of the enquiry proceedings against him, which started in the year
2005 and concluded in the year 2017, his seniority was distorted and as a result his right of
consideration for further promotions got adversely affected. The grievance of the petitioner is that
had the enquiry initiated against him been concluded within a reasonable time impugned
punishment/ penalty imposed against him even if maintained, still the petitioner who was initially
appointed as Junior Assistant in the year 1988 would have retired as a Joint Registrar in the year
2019, but, due to unjustifiable delay in the enquiry proceedings, the retired as an Assistant
Registrar-II, whereas his counterpart/colleague, retired on much higher posts than him.
18. According to the petitioner he has been subjected to unwarranted stagnation in service due to
delayed enquiry conducted by the respondents which resulted in his stagnation. The petitioner has
also questioned the penalty imposed upon alleging that the same has been imposed by a
non-speaking order which is without any justification or reason besides being disproportionate.
Thus, the petitioner has summarized his contentions by stating that the petitioner has been deprived
of his right of consideration for promotion with the delay in concluding the enquiry at the first
instance and also by not protecting his seniority as decided and further by depriving him promotion
till the conclusion of enquiry proceedings which took twelve long years to conclude. The petitioner
was all along pursuing his cause with the respondents even during the pendency of the enquiry
proceedings and after imposition of penalty upon him, he relied upon his initial representation
dated 17.02.3014, reminder dated 16.12.2017 both of which remained unaddressed and unattended
by the respondents without any reason or justification and the petitioner has further relied upon
representations dated 13.06.2019 and 31.03.2021, submitted by him after imposition of impugned
penalty upon him which too were not decided by the respondents despite there being a legal
obligation.
19. As per the petitioner the delay in disposal of inquiry is attributable to the respondents who kept
the matter pending. Moreover, there is no third- party right which would be effected in the event of
grant of relief to the petitioner. The petitioner has thus prayed that gross injustice has been meted
out to him and this Court is not bound to go into technicalities as has been done by the respondents
while dealing with his case so justice may be done to him.
20. In support of his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Shiv Dass Vs.
Union of India and others reported in 2007 Vol 9 SCC 274 ( see- paras 6 to 10 ) and titled Syed
Sharief-ud-Din reported in 2010 Vol 9 JKJ 876 (see-paras 10-14) which clearly substantiate that the
instant cause of the petitioner is not hit by delay and laches.
In case titled Shiv Dass Vs. Union of India and others, reported in (2007) 9 SCC 274, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in paragraphs Nos. 6 to 10 has held as under :-
6. Normally, in the case of belated approach writ petition has to be dismissed. Delay
or laches is one of the factors to be borne in mind by the High Courts when they
exercise their discretionary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
1950 (in short the 'Constitution'). In an appropriate case the High Court may refuse
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 10
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
to invoke its extraordinary powers if there is such negligence or omission on the part
of the applicant to assert his right as taken in conjunction with the lapse of time and
other circumstances, causes prejudice to the opposite party. Even where fundamental
right is involved the matter is still within the discretion of the Court as pointed out in
Durga Prasad v.
Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and Ors. (AIR 1970 SC 769). Of course, the discretion has to
be exercised judicially and reasonably.
7. What was stated in this regard by Sir Barnes Peacock in Lindsay Petroleum Company v. Prosper
Armstrong Hurd etc., (1874) 5 P.C. 221 at page 239 was approved by this Court in The Moon Mills
Ltd. v. M.R. Meher, President, Industrial Court, Bombay and Ors. (AIR 1967 SC 1450) and
Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation v. Balwant Regular Motor Service, Amravati and
Ors. (AIR 1969 SC 329), Sir Barnes had stated:
"Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an arbitrary or technical
doctrine. Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy either because the
party has, by his conduct done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a
waiver of it, or where by his conduct and neglect he has though perhaps not waiving
that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable
to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases,
lapse of time and delay are most material. But in every case, if an argument against
relief, which otherwise would be just, if founded upon mere delay, that delay of
course not amounting to a bar by any statute of limitation, the validity of that defence
must be tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two circumstances always
important in such cases are, the length of the delay and the nature of the acts done
during the interval which might affect either party and cause a balance of justice or
injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the remedy."
8. It was stated in State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. (AIR 1987 SC 251), that the High Court
in exercise of its discretion does not ordinarily assist the tardy and the indolent or the acquiescent
and the lethargic. If there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner and such delay is not
satisfactorily explained, the High Court may decline to intervene and grant relief in exercise of its
writ jurisdiction. It was stated that this rule is premised on a number of factors. The High Court
does not ordinarily permit a belated resort to the extraordinary remedy because it is likely to cause
confusion and public inconvenience and bring in its train new injustices, and if writ jurisdiction is
exercised after unreasonable delay, it may have the effect of inflicting not only hardship and
inconvenience but also injustice on third parties. It was pointed out that when writ jurisdiction is
invoked, unexplained delay coupled with the creation of third party rights in the meantime is an
important factor which also weighs with the High Court in deciding whether or not to exercise such
jurisdiction.
9. It has been pointed out by this Court in a number of cases that representations would not be
adequate explanation to take care of delay. This was first stated in K.V. Raja Lakshmiah v. State of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 11
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
Mysore (AIR 1967 SC993). There is a limit to the time which can be considered reasonable for
making representations and if the Government had turned down one representation the making of
another representation on similar lines will not explain the delay. In State of Orissa v. Sri
Pyarimohan Samantaray, (AIR 1976 SC 2617) making of repeated representations was not regarded
as satisfactory explanation of the delay. In that case the petition had been dismissed for delay alone.
(See State of Orissa v. Arun Kumar Patnaik).
10. In the case of pension the cause of action actually continues from month to month. That,
however, cannot be a ground to overlook delay in filing the petition. It would depend upon the fact
of each case. If petition is filed beyond a reasonable period say three years normally the Court would
reject the same or restrict the relief which could be granted to a reasonable period of about three
years. The High Court did not examine whether on merit appellant had a case. If on merits it would
have found that there was no scope for interference, it would have dismissed the writ petition on
that score alone.
21. It is settled position of law that as a general rule time limit for filing a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India cannot be more than the time limit prescribed for a civil suit for a
similar relief, but, where there is an extraordinary delay on the part of the petitioner in approaching
the Court, relief should be refused. It is true that petitioner should be vigilant in pursing the remedy,
which is open to him under the Constitution, but in order to determine whether there has been delay
in a particular case, the facts of each case have to be taken into consideration. Mere lapse of time
which does not result in changing the position of other party, does not constitute laches, which is a
word of French origin, viz. lachesse, the roots meaning of which are laxness; remissness or
negligence, and which in legal connotation is understood as unreasonable delay or undue lapse of
time accompanied with negligence in failing to act more promptly while having the opportunity to
act in the vindication of one's right. The doctrine of laches is not like limitation, its mere matter of
time, but principally is a question of the inequity of permitting a claim to be enforced, such inequity
being founded on some change in the condition of relation of the property or the parties. The
essence of laches is estopped rather than limitation or abandonment. In catena of judgements, it has
been held that mere delay by itself is not a ground for rejection of a writ petition and whether there
has been delay or laches in bringing it has to be considered with reference to the facts of each case.
[See: Purshotam Lal and others v. Union of India and another, 19782 All India Services Law Journal
352 (SC); M Ariffuddin Nizami and others v. D.D.Chitale and others, 1973 (2) SLR 119, Rajinder
Parshad and another v. The Punjab State and another, AIR 1966 Punjab 185; and Balbir Singh v.
Union of India, 1968 SLR 221]. The delay cannot operate as an absolute bar to the grant of relief
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and it depends upon the facts and circumstances of
each case whether a citizen should be denied his legal and constitutional right on the ground of
laches alone when an authority admittedly made a patently erroneous order and is not prepared to
listen to the gravamen of aggrieved party, no matter that the cause of the latter was just. It is also
well settled that a time lag which can be explained does not spell laches. Therefore, the judgment
relied upon by the respondents No. 1 to 3 is otherwise not applicable as the same is on entirely
different facts and not applicable in the instant case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 12
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
22. In the present case, the petitioner has been making representations to respondents to redress his
grievance, but, he has been unsuccessful and, in these circumstances, the delay, if any, in the present
case in preferring the writ petition on hand cannot be attributed to the petitioner much less
considered to be fatal to his petition.
23. Viewed thus, the objection raised by the respondents that present petition is hit by delay and
laches is overruled.
24. Reverting to the merits of the present case and legality or otherwise of the impugned order No.
621 dated 04.08.2017 passed by respondents No. 2 and 3, vide which, penalty of withholding one
annual increment with non- cumulative was awarded against the petitioner, it is pertinent to note
that petitioner, at the relevant point of time, was working as Head Assistant. It is an admitted
position of fact on the record that Order No. 579 dated 24.10.2008 came to be issued in terms of
rule 6 of the J&K High Court Staff (Condition of Service Rules) 1968, by virtue of which, the service
conditions and partial avenues for the High Court Staff are provided. As per the said order, two
years minimum experience, in each feeding cadre, is prescribed for promotion; from the post of
Head Assistant to Section Officer, from Section Officer to Assistant Registrar-II, from Assistant
Registrar-II to Assistant Registrar-I, from Assistant Registrar-I to Deputy Registrar and from
Deputy Registrar to Joint Registrar. The obvious implication is that a total of eight years experience
in all respective feeding cadres has been provided for promotion from Head Assistant to Joint
Registrar. According to the petitioner, even if the impugned punishment/penalty of withholding one
annual increment with non-cumulative effect is to be maintained, he having been initially appointed
as Junior Assistant way back in the year 1988 could have retired as Joint Registrar in the year 2019.
Allegation of the petitioner is that it is only due to unjustifiable and uncalled for delay of enquiry
proceedings on the part of the respondents that he was retired as Assistant Registrar-II whereas his
counterparts namely Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid and others superannuated on higher post than him.
Further, grievance of the petitioner is that his promotion was deferred till conclusion of enquiry
proceedings in view of Order No. 476 dated 30.08.2011 issued by Registrar General of this Court
whereas his counterpart and similarly situated employee, namely, Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid was
promoted as Assistant Registrar-II in terms of the same order. Further, the said order stipulated
under Note-II that postponement of the consideration of the petitioner for promotion from Section
Officer-I in OPG would not affect his seniority in case he was considered and appointed as Section
Officer in future, however, said condition was never adhered to by the respondents and his seniority
was not protected.
25. We have carefully gone through the record, whereby it is discerned that promotion of the
petitioner as Section Officer was regularized by the respondents vide order dated 985/GS dated
29.10.2018 by providing that dates regarding the effect of promotion shall be notified separately.
Record further reveals that when petitioner was promoted as Assistant Registrar-II in terms of
Order No. 1279 dated 10.01.2019, seniority of the petitioner was never protected and date of his
promotion was notified as 04.08.2018. It is a clear case of discrimination because petitioner was
entitled to be promoted as Section Officer w.e.f. 26.10.2008 with consequential promotion as
Assistant Registrar-II w.e.f. 30.08.2011 on the principle of parity against his colleague, Sh. Bashir
Ahmed Vaid. Instance quoted by the petitioner that Sh. Bharat Bhushan, Peon, who was held
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 13
Ram Paul Sharma vs Hon'Ble High Court Of Jammu & Kashmir And ... on 16 May, 2023
responsible for misconduct of all the charges in the enquiry proceedings, yet was promoted and
regularized as Junior Assistant and subsequently promoted as Senior Assistant, is well founded.
Petitioner has been treated differently and has been discriminated against by the respondents
without any rhyme or reason.
26. It is a fundamental right of an employee that disciplinary proceedings initiated against him are
concluded without undue delay as, in such circumstances, he is made to undergo mental trauma and
torture and suffer monetary loss without any fault on his part as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in
State of A.P. Vs. N. Radhakishan (Supra). True it is, that whether delay vitiates the disciplinary
proceedings or not is to be considered depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case as
also the nature of charges, however, inexplicable delay defeats justice and causes prejudice to the
charged employee.
27. There is no dispute that monetary benefits with respect to retrospective promotion depends
upon facts and circumstances of each case. However, principle of "no work no pay" cannot be
accepted as a thumb rule as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ramesh Kumar (Supra). Since in the
present case, petitioner has been subjected to unwarranted and unjustifiable stagnation in service
due to inaction on the part of the respondents in general and due to delay in concluding the enquiry
proceedings against the petitioner in particular, therefore, he is held entitled to all the retrospective
monetary benefits.
28. Viewed in the above context, this petition is allowed. The impugned order No.621 dated
04.08.2017, passed by respondents 2 and 3, awarding penalty of withholding one annual increment,
is hereby quashed. The respondents are directed to fix the seniority of the petitioner as Assistant
Registrar-I immediately after the seniority position held by Sh. Bashir Ahmed Vaid, Assistant
Registrar-I and also grant the benefit of promotion to the petitioner as Section Officer w.e.f.
26.10.2008 and consequential promotion as Assistant Registrar-II w.e.f. 30.08.2011 and further as
Assistant Registrar-I and other higher posts in line retrospectively along with all consequential
benefits and his pension be accordingly fixed. Let this exercise be completed within a period of two
months from the date of copy of this order is made available to the respondents against proper
receipt.
29. Disposed of as above along with connected CM(s), if any.
30. Record produced by learned counsel for respondents 1 to 3 is returned to him against proper
receipt.
(Rajesh Sekhri) (Tashi Rabstan)
Judge Judge
Jammu
16.05.2023
(Madan-PS)
Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169616740/ 14
