Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 25.04.2023
Pronounced on : 16.06.2023
CRA No.16/2006
Raman Masih .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Gagan Basotra, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Mohinder Kumar, Advocate
Vs
State of J&K ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. P. D. Singh, Dy. AG
Coram: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
01. This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 14.10.2006 delivered by the court of learned 2nd
Additional Sessions Jammu (hereinafter referred to as „the trial court(cid:128)), by virtue of which the
learned trial court has convicted the appellant for the commission of offences under section 376, 456
RPC and has sentenced him to undergo simple imprisonment for seven years along with fine of Rs.
1000/ for the commission of offence under section 376 RPC and imprisonment of two years along
with fine of Rs. 1,000/ for the commission of offence under section 456 RPC. In default of the
payment of the fine, appellant has been directed to undergo further sentence for a period of two
months.
02. The judgment has been impugned by the appellant on the grounds that the learned trial court
has not appreciated the evidence in its right perspective and has wrongly convicted the appellant
when the medical evidence did not support the prosecution version. It is also stated that once the
appellant was acquitted of the charge for the commission of offence under section 4/25 Arms Act,
the appellant could not have been convicted for the commission of offences under section 376, 456
RPC as the factum of possession of the Kirch by the appellant was not proved, which was a vital fact
in the sequence of events as projected by the prosecution.
Submissions of the Appellant:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 1
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
03. Mr. Gagan Basotra, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant argued that the prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the age of the prosecutrix as 14 years and further the medical evidence has
clearly negated the testimony of the prosecutrix, as the prosecutrix had stated that she suffered
bleeding from private parts whereas the Doctor has clearly stated that there was no injury on any
part of the body of the prosecutrix. He further argued that even the FSL report has demolished the
prosecution story that trousers of the prosecutrix were having stains of blood and semen. Mr.
Basotra further argued that the incriminating evidence against the appellant was not put to him in
accordance with law and it has caused miscarriage of justice to the appellant. Submissions of the
Respondent:
04. Per contra, Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, learned counsel for the respondent argued that
the prosecutrix as well as her family members have clearly deposed in an
unambiguous manner that the appellant entered in the room of the prosecutrix
where her brother and sister were also sleeping and he sexually assaulted the
prosecutrix. He further argued that in view of the statement of the prosecutrix, the
evidence of the Doctor would have no bearing upon the merits of the case.
05. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record including trial court
record.
Prosecution Case:
06. The case projected by the prosecution in the charge-sheet is that the prosecutrix
lodged an oral report with Police Station Ramgarh on 22.07.2012 at 01.15 A.M stating
therein that she along with her brother and sister, was sleeping in the room and her
parents were sleeping in the verandah of the house. The light was on in the room. At
around 12:15 a.m, someone forced entry into the room and gagged her mouth with
his hand. She woke up and was scared. She found that the light was off in the room.
When she tried to get rid of him, he threatened her not to make any noise otherwise,
he would kill her as he was armed with a kirch. She recognized him from his voice as
the appellant, who was residing adjacent to their quarter. He slapped her thrice,
opened the string of her trousers and sexually assaulted her. She raised hue and cry
and her brother as well as sister woke up. His brother switched on the light. After
hearing the noise, her parents also came there. Accused had bolted the door from
inside and after opening the door and by threatening her parents with the Kirch, who
were standing at the door, succeeded in fleeing away from the spot.
Her parents found her without trousers. She disclosed the incident to her parents. On receipt of this
information, FIR No. 33/2002 was registered by the Police Station Ramgarh for commission of
offences under section 456, 376 RPC and for 4/25 of Arms Act. The statement of the prosecutrix and
other witnesses were recorded by the Investigating Officer. The trousers of the prosecutrix having
stains of blood and semen were sent to the FSL for chemical analysis. The prosecutrix was examined
by the medical officer. After the completion of the investigation, the charge-sheet was laid against
the appellant for commission of offences under section 376/456 RPC and 4/25 Arms Act before the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 2
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
JMIC Samba, which was committed to the learned Sessions Court Jammu and was later assigned to
the learned trial court. The learned trial court vide its order dated 24/04/2003 charged the
appellant for commission of offences under section 456/376 RPC and 4/25 of Arms Act. Out of the
16 witnesses cited by the prosecution, 14 witnesses were examined by the prosecution. The appellant
did not examine any witness in his support.
07. The allegations against the appellant are that on 22.07.2002 at 12.15 a.m, he entered into the
room, where the prosecutrix along with her brother and sister was sleeping whereas the parents of
the prosecutrix were sleeping in the verandah of the house. The appellant had allegedly sexually
assaulted the prosecutrix by threatening her that she would be killed if she raised any hue and cry,
as the appellant was armed with the kirch. The prosecutrix has been stated to be 14 years of age. It is
also alleged by the prosecution that her trouser was stained with blood and semen.
Prosecution Evidence:
08. In order to prove the commission of offence of lurking house trespass and rape by the appellant,
the prosecution has mainly relied upon the statements of prosecutrix, father, mother, brother and
sister of the prosecutrix. The prosecutrix stated that the appellant was related to her. About one year
and few months ago, in the night, she was sleeping in a room along with her brother and sister. Her
parents were sleeping in the verandah of the house. The appellant at around 11:45 in the night
entered into her room as the door was open. He entered the room and closed the door. He laid upon
herself and opened her trouser. It was dark in the room. Thereafter the appellant sexually assaulted
her. She cried because of pain and her brother woke up. The appellant thereafter ran away. In the
meanwhile, her parents also woke up and came there. Her parents also saw the appellant running
away. She suffered bleeding from her private parts. The appellant also threatened her that if she
disclosed to anyone, then she would be killed. The appellant was also having knife with him.
Thereafter her parents went to the police station. She went after sometime. The police also came on
spot after an hour. She handed over her trouser and shirt to the police. The same were seized vide
seizure memo (ExpwNK). She was also medically examined by the doctor. She proved the FIR
(ExpwNK1). During cross-examination, she stated that she did not know the name of the appellant.
Being a relative he used to come to their house. She was 16 years of age at the time of recording of
her statement.
09. PW Rita (Mother of the prosecutrix) stated that the appellant was related to her and she was
sleeping along with her husband in the verandah of the house. Children were sleeping inside the
room. The prosecutrix was 14 years of age at the time of incident. The appellant entered the room
and sexually assaulted her daughter. She found her daughter trembling without trousers. She was
scared. The appellant ran away. She was bleeding from her private parts. She went to the police
station. Her husband and prosecutrix went to the police station and FIR was registered. She signed
the FIR (Expw-NK1). Police arrived on spot at around 12. The trousers were handed over to the
police and she signed the seizure memo (EXPW- NK-1). Her husband also put his thumb impression
on the same. The prosecutrix was examined by Doctor and was taken to Jammu for x-ray. During
cross examination, she stated earlier her daughter was studying in the school and she had read up to
2 nd/3rd class. She came to know that the accused was in the room and accused stated that he had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 3
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
not done anything. The accused was having khokhri. The residents had gathered on spot. Three
houses belonged to appellant and one house belonged to them. The mother, sister-in-law and the
wife of the accused also came there. The statement of sister-in-law of the accused was recorded. The
trousers of the prosecutrix was blood stained. The clothes were taken by the police in the night only.
10. PW Gopal Masih (Father of the prosecutrix) stated that the appellant was related to him and the
prosecutrix was his daughter. Two years ago he was sleeping in the courtyard along with his wife.
Children were sleeping inside the room. The prosecutrix was also sleeping in the room. The accused
entered the room and bolted the door from inside. The prosecutrix was undressed. The children
raised noise. The prosecutrix also made a noise. He woke up and found the accused running away
from the spot. The prosecutrix told her that the accused had undressed and raped her. The
prosecutrix was bleeding from her private parts. He went to the police station. Prosecutrix also went
to the police station at around 12 in the night. Police immediately came to their house. The accused
had absconded from his house. Police took the trousers of the prosecutrix. He put his thumb
impression on the seizure memo (Expw-NK). He also put his thumb impression on the FIR (Expw
NK1). The accused had stated in the police station that he had thrown the kirch in the store. He put
his thumb impression on the disclosure statement (Expw-GM). kirch was also seized vide seizure
memo (Expw-GM1). The prosecutrix was also examined by the doctor. During cross-examination he
stated that he saw the accused in his verandah and he was about to attack his wife. After hearing the
noise, the mother, the sister- in-law and the wife of the accused also came on spot. The residents
who were residing in front of the quarter also gathered on spot.
11. PW Vikram (Brother of the prosecutrix) stated that his sister was raped and she was 14 years of
age. She was studying in 7th Class. She was sexually assaulted by the appellant almost one year ago.
His sister was sleeping on the bed and his younger sister was also sleeping along with her. His
parents were sleeping outside. At around 12 in the night, the accused came and slept on bed along
with prosecutrix. He heard the cries of his sister and woke up. His sister was completely nude and
her clothes were taken off by the accused. Raman (accused) asked him to sleep. He went to open the
door as the door was bolted from inside but the accused himself opened the door as he (witness)
could not open the bolt. His sister was trembling and was bleeding. He did not see but the salwar
was blood stained. After opening the door, his mother came there and younger sister also woke up.
His mother woke up his father who also came on spot and in the meantime, the accused ran away.
Thereafter, he along with his parents and prosecutrix went to the police station at 12.30. The Police
came to their house and seized blood-stained trousers of the prosecutrix and took away with them.
During cross-examination, he stated that the accused had switched off the light but he had not seen
him switching off the light. When he woke up, the accused was standing alongside the bed. His sister
was sitting on the bed at that time and was crying. She was nude. The accused had assaulted her
sister when he woke up. When he woke up, the accused had laid himself upon his sister. The
prosecutrix was trying to get rid of the accused. He had made similar statement to the Police that his
sister was raped and he had not used the word wrong act. He cannot say as to how the Police
mentioned the same in his statement. The Police had recorded the statements of only the family
members and not of others. His father had not seen the occurrence. He had gone to the Police
Station along with his parents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 4
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
12. PW-Deepa stated that the accused resided near their residence. Prosecutrix was her sister. The
accused had committed wrong act with her sister. It was night. She alongwith her sister and brother
were sleeping in the same room. Her parents were sleeping outside. The door of the room was open,
where they were sleeping. Her sister was crying and after hearing cries, she also woke up. When she
heard the cries, the light was off and her brother switched on the light. Sister was not wearing
trousers and the accused was also without pant. The accused had laid himself upon her sister.The
accused opened the door and ran away. They made noise and after hearing noise, her parents woke
up and came inside and when they were about to enter inside, the accused ran away. Her sister was
crying. Thereafter, her parents and the prosecutrix went to the Police Station. The Police came to
their house. She had told the Police that the accused was armed with one kirch. During
cross-examination, she stated that all the brothers and sisters sleep together after closing the door
but on that day, the door was open. When she woke up, the accused had laid himself upon her sister
and he was not wearing any clothes.
13. PW Dr. Reva Sharma, Gynecologist stated that on 22.07.2002, she was posted as Gynecologist at
SDM, Samba. Prosecutrix was brought to her by SHO Ramgarh. She examined the victim and as per
her opinion, on examination, there was no evidence of sexual intercourse. She proved the report
(ExPW/RS). She further stated that on the basis of examination of the victim, there was no presence
of spermatozoa on the smears. During cross examination, she stated that she cannot say whether the
victim could resist or not.
14. PW Dr. Amarjit Singh stated that he examined one Raman Masih son of Sadiq Masih, who was
brought before him at 6:15 PM by the police on 29.07.2002. He was having pain and was advised for
treatment. During cross- examination he stated that he examined Raman Masih son of Sadiq Masih
but not Raman Masih son of Gopal Masih.
15. PW Tarsam Masih stated that the accused was arrested by the Police. Nothing was seized in his
presence. The accused was related to him. He denied the contents of the disclosure statement.
16. PW-Gulzar and Joginder Masih were declared hostile and during cross- examination, no
incriminating material could be extracted from them by the APP during their cross-examination.
17. PW-Rasal Singh resealed the packet and issued the certificate (ExPW RS).
18. PW-Arjun Singh and PW-Kaka Ram proved the supurdnama (ExPW AS).
19. PW Sanjeev Singh, Investigating Officer stated that he conducted the investigation and after the
completion of the investigation, he filed the charge sheet against the accused for commission of
offences under sections 376 and 456 RPC and 4/25 Arms Act. During cross-examination, he stated
that he went on spot. There was double bed in the room. He had not seized the bed sheet. The
prosecutrix was a student but he did not collect any marks list or date of birth from the school. He
had obtained one report from the doctor. The accused was arrested on 28.07.2005.
Appreciation of Evidence:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 5
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
20. Before this court examines the prosecution evidence, this Court deems it proper
to observe that the incriminating evidence brought on record by the prosecution has
not been put to the appellant in accordance with law. As per the mandate of section
342 of the Criminal Procedure Code (Section 313 of the Central Code), the
incriminating evidence brought on record is required to be put to the accused, so as
to seek his explanation and in fact this provision is an embodiment of the principle of
natural justice that no one should be condemned unheard. The learned trial court in
the instant case has put the incriminating material to the appellant in following
manner:
21. Question: Whether you have heard the statements of the prosecution witnesses?
Answer: Yes.
Question: Whether you have committed an offence?
Answer: No Question: The prosecution witnesses, namely, prosecutrix, Gopal Masih, Reeta, Vikram
Masih, Deepa Masih, Tarsem Massih, Gulzar Massih and other witnesses have deposed against you?
Answer: All the witnesses are related to Gopal Masih and witness No. 1 is his daughter. He was
having enmity with Gopal Masih and because of enmity, statements have been made against him.
Question: Whether you want to say anything in respect of the allegations?
Answer: The allegations are false. Because of enmity, these allegations have been leveled against
him.
Question: Whether you want to lead any evidence in their support? Answer: Yes.
22. From the perusal of the statement of the appellant recorded under section 342 Cr.P.C., it is
evident that no incriminating evidence with specific reference has been put to the appellant and in
one question only the appellant has been asked to explain why these witnesses have deposed against
him and he was not confronted with the incriminating statements made by those witnesses. Further
from the perusal of the record, this Court finds that PW Joginder Masih, PW Gulzar Masih and PW
Tarsem Masih have not deposed against the appellant but despite that the appellant was asked to
reply as to why these witnesses have made statements against the appellant. In „Maheshwar Tigga v.
State of Jharkhand(cid:128) 1 the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court considered the importance of examination of the
accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and observed as under:
"7. A bare perusal of the examination of the accused under Section 313 CrPC reveals it
to be extremely casual and perfunctory in nature. Three capsuled questions only were
asked to the appellant as follows which he denied:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 6
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
"Question 1. There is a witness against you that when the informant V.
AnshumalaTigga was going to school you were hiding near Tomra canal and after
finding the informant in (2020) 10 SCC 108(cid:128) isolation you forced her to strip naked
on knifepoint and raped her.
Question 2. After the rape when the informant ran to her home crying to inform her parents about
the incident and when the parents of the informant came to you to inquire about the incident, you
told them that "if I have committed rape then I will keep her as my wife".
Question 3. On your instruction, the informant's parents performed the "Lota Paani" ceremony of
the informant, in which the informant as well as your parents were present, also in the said
ceremony your parents had gifted the informant a saree and a blouse and the informant's parents
had also gifted you some clothes."
8. It stands well settled that circumstances not put to an accused under Section 313 CrPC cannot be
used against him, and must be excluded from consideration. In a criminal trial, the importance of
the questions put to an accused are basic to the principles of natural justice as it provides him the
opportunity not only to furnish his defence, but also to explain the incriminating circumstances
against him. A probable defence raised by an accused is sufficient to rebut the accusation without
the requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt.
9. This Court, time and again, has emphasised the importance of putting all relevant questions to an
accused under Section 313 CrPC. In Naval Kishore Singh v. State of Bihar [(2004) 7 SCC 502] , it
was held to be an essential part of a fair trial observing as follows :
"5. The questioning of the accused under Section 313 CrPC was done in the most
unsatisfactory manner. Under Section 313 CrPC the accused should have been given
opportunity to explain any of the circumstances appearing in the evidence against
him. At least, the various items of evidence, which had been produced by the
prosecution, should have been put to the accused in the form of questions and he
should have been given opportunity to give his explanation. No such opportunity was
given to the accused in the instant case. We deprecate the practice of putting the
entire evidence against the accused put together in a single question and giving an
opportunity to explain the same, as the accused may not be in a position to give a
rational and intelligent explanation. The trial Judge should have kept in mind the
importance of giving an opportunity to the accused to explain the adverse
circumstances in the evidence and the Section 313 examination shall not be carried
out as an empty formality. It is only after the entire evidence is unfurled the accused
would be in a position to articulate his defence and to give explanation to the
circumstances appearing in evidence against him. Such an opportunity being given to
the accused is part of a fair trial and if it is done in a slipshod manner, it may result in
imperfect appreciation of evidence."
(Emphasis Added)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 7
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
23. In its latest pronouncement in case, titled, Raj Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi)2, the Hon(cid:128)ble
Apex Court has held as under:
17. The law consistently laid down by this Court can be summarized as under:
(i) It is the duty of the Trial Court to put each material circumstance appearing in the
evidence against the accused specifically, distinctively and separately. The material
circumstance means the circumstance or the material on the basis of which the
prosecution is seeking his conviction;
(ii) The object of examination of the accused under Section 313 is to enable the
accused to explain any circumstance appearing against him in the evidence;
(iii) The Court must ordinarily eschew material circumstances not put to the accused
from consideration while dealing with the case of the particular accused;
(iv) The failure to put material circumstances to the accused amounts to a serious
irregularity. It will vitiate the trial if it is shown to have prejudiced the accused;
(v) If any irregularity in putting the material circumstance to the accused does not
result in failure of justice, it becomes a curable defect. However, while deciding
whether the defect can be cured, one of the considerations will be the passage of time
from the date of the incident;
(vi) In case such irregularity is curable, even the appellate court can question the
accused on the material circumstance which is not put to him; and
(vii) In a given case, the case can be remanded to the Trial Court from the stage of
recording the supplementary statement of the concerned accused under Section 313
of CrPC.
(viii) While deciding the question whether prejudice has been caused to the accused
because of the omission, the delay in raising the contention is only one of the several
factors to be considered.
24. So far as instant case is concerned it appears that the learned Trial Court without even perusing
the statements made by the prosecution witnesses put the same to the appellant without referring
the incriminating evidence to the appellant and it has no doubt caused prejudice to the appellant.
Without referring the incriminating evidence to the appellant and seeking any explanation from the
appellant, the appellant could not have been convicted by the learned trial court by placing reliance
on that evidence. Another issue that 2023 SCC OnLine SC 609 crops up before this court is as to
whether the matter is required to be remanded for compliance of the provisions contained under
section 342 Cr.P.C after 21 years of the occurrence, as the learned trial court has in fact not complied
with the provisions contained under section 342 Cr.P.C as the learned Trial Court has merely
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 8
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
completed the formality of recording the statement of the accused. In this regard, the judgment in
Raj Kumar(cid:128)s case (supra) is very relevant, where the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex court observed that „Even
assuming that the defect or irregularity was curable, the question is whether today, the appellant-
accused can be called upon to explain the said circumstance. More than 27 years have passed since
the date of the incident. Considering the passage of time, we are of the view that it will be unjust
now at this stage to remit the case to the Trial Court for recording further statement of the appellant
under Section 313 of CrPC. As such this court finds that it would be unjust at this stage to remand
the matter for examination of the appellant after 21 years of the occurrence.
25. While examining the evidence brought on record by the prosecution this court finds that the
prosecutrix and all her family members have deposed against the appellant. The statement made by
PW-Dipa (Sister of the prosecutrix) is very material, as in her cross examination, she has stated that
the brother and sisters used to sleep together after closing the door, but on the day of occurrence,
the door was not closed. It is not forthcoming from the evidence as to how the appellant came to
know that the children including the prosecutrix were sleeping in the room and the door was open
on that day. PW Vikram has made a statement which is unbelievable as he stated that the accused
entered their room and slept along with his sister. He heard the cries of his sister and then woke up
and the accused asked him to sleep. It is improbable to believe that the appellant would know that
the prosecutrix was sleeping in the room with doors open on that day only and also that the
appellant would go to the house of the appellant where the parents of the prosecutrix were also there
and would sexually abuse the prosecutrix on a bed where her brother and sister were sleeping with
her. The prosecution story appears to be not only doubtful but also improbable. In Tameezuddin v.
State (NCT of Delhi),3 the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has held as under:
"9. It is true that in a case of rape the evidence of the prosecutrix must be given
predominant consideration, but to hold that this evidence has to be accepted even if
the story is improbable and belies logic, would be doing violence to the very
principles which govern the appreciation of evidence in a criminal matter. We are of
the opinion that the story is indeed improbable."
(Emphasis Added)
26. Though the prosecutrix has alleged that the prosecutrix was 14 years of age at the time of alleged
occurrence but there is no documentary evidence in the form of date of birth certificate or school
certificate, demonstrating the date of birth of the prosecutrix.The Investigating Officer PW Sanjeev
Singh has stated that the prosecutrix was a student but he did not collect any record from her school
in respect of her date of birth but he admitted that he got the prosecutrix examined from a doctor.
Though the prosecution has not proved the certificate issued by the Radiologist, GMC, Jammu but
as per report of the Radiologist, the bone age of the prosecuturix was between 14 to 18 years. There
can be error of 2 or 3 years on either side. In view of this, the benefit must go to the accused and the
prosecutrix cannot be considered as minor. (2009) 15 SCC 566 Reliance is placed upon the decision
of the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex court in Rajak Mohammad v. State of H.P, 4 where in it was held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 9
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
"8. On the other hand, we have on record the evidence of Dr Neelam Gupta (PW 8), a
Radiologist working in the Civil Hospital, Nalagarh who had given an opinion that
the age of the prosecutrix was between 17 to 18 years.
9. While it is correct that the age determined on the basis of a radiological
examination may not be an accurate determination and sufficient margin either way
has to be allowed, yet the totality of the facts stated above read with the report of the
radiological examination leaves room for ample doubt with regard to the correct age
of the prosecutrix. The benefit of the aforesaid doubt, naturally, must go in favour of
the accused.
10. We will, therefore, have to hold that in the present case the prosecution has not
succeeded in proving that the prosecutrix was a minor on the date of the alleged
occurrence. If that is so, based on the evidence on record, already referred to, we will
further have to hold that the possibility of the prosecutrix being a consenting party
cannot be altogether ruled out."
(Emphasis Added)
27. As this court has already observed that the prosecution story appears to be doubtful and
improbable as such now this court would examine whether the other attending circumstances lends
any credence to the prosecution story. It is true that much importance is not to be given to the
medical opinion when the prosecutrix has deposed about the commission of offence of rape by the
accused, but equally true is that when it is the positive case of the prosecution that the prosecutrix
suffered bleeding from her private parts, then the medical evidence would be of some significance.
PW Dr. Reva Sharma stated that there was no mark of violence on the body of the victim and also
that there was no evidence of sexual intercourse. It assumes significance as the prosecutrix was
examined by the Gynaecologist on 22.07.2002 at 11 a.m whereas the time of occurrence has been
mentioned as 12.15 AM on 22.07.2002, meaning thereby that the prosecutrix was examined within
10-11 hours of the alleged commission of offence of rape. Had there been any injury, the doctor
would (2018) 9 SCC 248 obviously have mentioned the same in the report. In this regard, it would
be apt to take note of the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in YerumallaLatchaiah v. State of
A.P.5, wherein it was held as under:
"3. In the present case, age of the victim was only eight years at the time of alleged
occurrence. Immediately after the occurrence, she was examined by Dr. K. Sucheritha
(PW 7) who has stated in her evidence that no injury was found on any part of the
body of the victim, much less on private part. Hymen was found intact and the doctor
has specifically stated that there was no sign of rape at all. In the medical report, it
has been stated that vaginal smears collected and examined under the microscope
but no sperm detected. The evidence of the prosecutrix is belied by the medical
evidence. In our view, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the High
Court was not justified in upholding the conviction."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 10
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
(Emphasis Added)
28. In Dilip v. State of M.P. 6 , the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court acquitted the accused who was convicted by
the trial court and whose appeal was dismissed by the High Court by observing as under:
"14. The age of the prosecutrix was around 16 years, maybe a little more. The fact
remains that she was not just a child who would have surrendered herself to a forced
sexual assault without offering any resistance whatsoever. Without going into testing
the truthfulness of the explanation offered by the prosecutrix that because of being
overawed by the two accused persons, she was not able to resist, the fact remains that
the "probabilities factor"
operates against the prosecutrix. The gang rape is alleged to have been committed at about 2 p.m.,
in her own house, situated in a populated village by the side of the main road where people were
moving on account of Holi festival. The prosecutrix did raise a hue and cry to the extent she could
and yet none was attracted to the place of the incident. The prosecutrix is said to have sustained
injuries, also bleeded from her private parts staining her body as also the clothes which she was
wearing. This part of the story, is not only not corroborated by the medical evidence, is rather belied
thereby. The presence of bloodstains is not confirmed by the Forensic Science Laboratory or by the
doctors who examined the prosecutrix. Her own maternal aunt to whom the story of sexual assault
has been narrated by the prosecutrix gives a version which does not tally with the version of the
prosecutrix as given in the court. The learned counsel for the State relied on Section 114-A of the
Evidence Act, 1872 which provides that in a trial on a charge under Section 376(2)(g) IPC on the
prosecutrix stating that she was not a consenting party, the court shall presume absence of consent
of the woman alleged to have been raped. Suffice it to (2006) 9 SCC 713 2001 AIR(SC) 3049 observe
that we should not be misunderstood as recording a finding that the prosecutrix was a willing party
to the sexual intercourse by the accused persons. The Court is finding it difficult to accept the
truthfulness of the version of the prosecutrix that any sexual assault as alleged was committed on
her in view of the fact that her narration of the incident becomes basically infirm on account of
being contradicted by the statement of her own aunt and medical evidence and the report of the
Forensic Science Laboratory. The defence has given suggestion in cross- examination for false
implication of the accused persons which, however, have not gone beyond being suggestions merely.
It is not necessary for us to dwell upon further to find out the probability of truth contained in the
suggestions because we are not satisfied generally of the correctness of the story as told by the
prosecutrix. We find it difficult to hold the prosecutrix in the case as one on whose testimony an
implicit reliance can be placed.
(Emphasis Added)
29. In Bibhishan v. State of Maharashtra7, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has held as under:
"6. We have gone through the judgment of both the courts below and also perused
the necessary record. As per the evidence of the doctor, there was no injury on the
body of the prosecutrix Anita. There was no sign of semen on the private part of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 11
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
body. Neither her clothes were torn nor there was any presence of hair of the accused
on the private part of the prosecutrix. The doctor after examining the prosecutrix
deposed that the girl was habituated to sexual intercourse. In view of this evidence,
we are of the opinion that the High Court as well as the trial court has not correctly
appreciated the evidence and has wrongly convicted the appellant-accused. The
accused who has been charged under Section 376 read with Section 511 IPC is entitled
to benefit of doubt."
(Emphasis Added)
30. In Dola v. State of Odisha8, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has held as under:
"6. It is well-settled law that if the version of the prosecutrix is believed, basic truth in
her evidence is ascertainable and if it is found to be credible and consistent, the same
would form the basis of conviction. Corroboration is not a sine qua non for a
conviction in a rape case. The evidence of a victim of sexual assault stands on a par
with the evidence of an injured witness and is entitled to great weight, absence of
corroboration notwithstanding. If the evidence of the victim does not suffer from any
basic infirmity and the "probabilities factor" does not render it unworthy of credence,
as a general rule, there is no reason to insist on corroboration, except from medical
evidence, where, having regard to the circumstances of the case, medical evidence
can be expected to be forthcoming.
(2007) 12 SCC 390 (2018) 18 SCC 695 When a grown up and married woman gives
evidence on oath in court that she was raped, it is not the proper judicial approach to
disbelieve her outright."
(Emphasis Added)
31. Another fact, which creates doubt about the prosecution story, is that in the FSL report, it has
been observed by the Scientific Officer that the printed Salwar was apparently not stained with any
semen/ blood like stains and after the chemical and microscopical examination, it did not reveal the
presence of semen/human spermatozoa/blood. Though the prosecution has not proved this report
but once it has been placed on record by the Investigating Officer himself, then the same can be
referred to by the accused to establish his innocence. Besides, the recovery of weapon from the
accused has not been proved and the appellant was acquitted by the learned trial court of the charge
for commission of offence under section 4/25 Arms Act.
32. This court has examined the judgment passed by the learned trial court and finds that the
learned trial court has not appreciated the evidence in its right perspective. The learned trial court
has wrongly determined the age of the prosecutrix to be below 16 years of age and further has
erroneously rejected the report of the Forensic Science Expert. The learned trial court has further
held that the appellant has made a vague allegation in his statement recorded under section 342
Cr.PC that witnesses have deposed against him because of enmity but at the same time, the learned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 12
Raman Masih vs State Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
trial court miserably failed in its statutory duty to put incriminating evidence to the appellant in
accordance with law, which has caused serious prejudice to the appellant. The evidence led by the
prosecution is not trustworthy and the story projected by the prosecution is improbable as such it
would not be safe to convict the appellant. The learned trial court instead of granting the benefit of
doubt to the appellant-accused has granted the same to the prosecution which is against the settled
principle of criminal law. In such circumstances the appellant was in fact entitled to the benefit of
doubt.
33. In view of above, the judgment of the conviction and the sentence dated 14.10.2006 passed by
the court of learned 2 nd Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu in challan titled "State vs. Raman
Masih" arising out of FIR NO. 33/2006 of P/S Ramgarh is not sustainable in the eyes of law and is
accordingly set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charge for commission of offences under
sections 376, 456 RPC. The challan shall stand dismissed. The appellant is on bail. His personal and
surety bonds stand discharged.
34. The record of the trial court be sent back forthwith alongwith a copy of this judgment.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 16.06.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No.
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98043926/ 13
