Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on
3 March, 2025
Author: Ajit Kumar
Bench: Ajit Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29505
Court No. - 4
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 1899 of 2025
Petitioner :- Rameshwar Dayal Sharma
Respondent :- The State Of U.P.And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Ambuj Maurya,Atipriya Gautam,Devesh Mishra
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Ajit Kumar,J.
1. Heard Sri Vijay Gautam, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Ms. Atipriya Gautam, learned
counsel for the petitioner and learned Standing Counsel.
2. Petitioner is aggrieved by the order passed by Senior Superintendent of Police, Bulandshahr, the
disciplinary authority dated 1st August, 2024 in a disciplinary proceeding, whereby, petitioner's
integrity is directed to be withheld for one year. Being aggrieved, petitioner filed an appeal against
the punishment order which was rejected on 16th September, 2024. Thereafter, he filed a revision
against appellate order, however, the same has also been rejected on 18th October, 2024.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 1
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
3. It is argued on behalf of the petitioner that this punishment order which has been passed
described as is not punishment as such under the order impugned but it is directed at the same time
that it may be considered for the purpose of determination of satisfactory service. He submits that
either in a disciplinary proceeding, disciplinary authority after due inquiry can either hold the
petitioner guilty of the charges and impose punishment of any nature major or minor prescribed
under the rules or shall absolve the petitioner from the charges. The disciplinary authority, it is
argued, is not empowered to make out a third case to impose punishment which is not prescribed
under the Rules.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that this controversy of the power of disciplinary
authority to impose a punishment not prescribed under the Rules is no more res integra. He submits
that in the matter of Surendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P. & Ors, 2013 (11) ADJ 346 followed by a
concurrent bench of this Court in Writ - A No. 10597 of 2021, Rajiv Kumar Tomar v. State of U.P. &
2 Others decided on 26.08.2021 it has been held that a punishment that is not prescribed as such,
cannot be imposed. The relevant paragraph is reproduced hereunder:
"Learned counsels for parties are ad idem that the impugned order would not sustain
in light of the decision rendered in Surendra Kumar Singh Vs. State of U.P. And
Others [2013 (11) ADJ 346]. That decision was dealing with an issue of whether
withholding of integrity was a punishment which was contemplated under the
relevant rules. Dealing with the aforesaid issue, the learned Judge held thus:
6. It is not in dispute that disciplinary proceeding of a police officer of subordinate
rank is now regulated by Rules, 1991, which have been framed in exercise of power
conferred under Section 46(2) and (3) read with Sections 2 and 7 of Police Act, 1861
(hereinafter referred to as the "Act, 1861"). It thus also cannot be disputed that, if, as
a result of disciplinary proceeding, a punishment is to be awarded, such punishment
must be prescribed in Rules, 1991 and then only can validly be imposed upon a police
officer of subordinate rank. The various kinds of punishments which can be imposed
are prescribed in Rule 4. It is admitted between the parties that withholding of
integrity is not one of the punishment prescribed in Rule 4 of Rules, 1991.
7. The question, whether a punishment, which is not prescribed in Rules, can be
imposed, came to be considered by Apex Court in Vijay Singh (supra) and returning
in negative, in para 11 thereof, the Court said: "11. The issue involved herein is
required to be examined from another angle also. Holding departmental proceedings
and recording a finding of guilt against any delinquent and imposing the punishment
for the same is a quasi-judicial function and not administrative one. (Vide: Bachhittar
Singh v. State of Punjab & Anr., AIR 1963 SC 395; Union of India v. H.C. Goel, AIR
1964 SC 364; Mohd. Yunus Khan v. State of U.P. & Ors., (2010) 10 SCC 539; and
Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Coal India Ltd. & Ors. v. Ananta Saha & Ors.,
(2011) 5 SCC 142).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 2
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Imposing the punishment for a proved delinquency is regulated and controlled by the statutory
rules. Therefore, while performing the quasi-judicial functions, the authority is not permitted to
ignore the statutory rules under which punishment is to be imposed. The disciplinary authority is
bound to give strict adherence to the said rules.
Thus, the order of punishment being outside the purview of the statutory rules is a nullity and
cannot be enforced against the appellant."
.......
9. In view of above noticed overwhelming authorities, it leaves no scope for this Court but to hold
the impugned order patently illegal and without jurisdiction, being a punishment, not prescribed in
Rules.
10. However, before parting I would also like to notice the stand taken by respondents with respect
to various Government orders dealing with the matter of "withholding of integrity".
11. In administrative matters an employee is supposed to be watched by superior officers regularly
and his work and performance is annually assessed and put on record by superior officers every
year, which process, normally is called as recording of Annual Character Roll or Annual Confidential
Report (hereinafter referred to as the 'ACR'). The normal hierarchy for recording of ACR at initial
level is the just superior officer termed as "Reporting Officer", who assess the work and performance
of officer concerned and the aforesaid assessment recorded by "Reporting Officer" is subject to
acceptance and review by "Accepting Authority", who is the next in hierarchy to the "Reporting
Officer" and then to the another next officer in hierarchy called Reviewing Officer. In a very few
matters the process of recording of ACR is two tier level consists of Reporting Officer and Accepting
Officer. Besides, other traits, certification of integrity is one of the part, integrally connected, with
the assessment of work, performance and conduct of officer concerned and, therefore, it is a regular
feature of ACR. This aspect is fortified from the various Government orders referred to in the
counter affidavit as noticed above, copies whereof have been filed collectively as Annexure-1 to the
counter affidavit.
12. The Government Order dated 28.12.1959 would clearly demonstrate that initial certification of
integrity has to be made by "Reporting Officer". The guidelines have been laid down in para 2 for the
benefit of Reporting Officer as to how he should deal with the matter of certification of integrity of
subordinate officers in respect of whose work and performance he has to record ACR. The
consequence of non-certification of integrity or withholding of integrity is provided in para 5. It says
that the officer concerned shall stand held up at the stage of crossing of efficiency bar or even his
annual increment would stand deferred until he gets integrity certified again.
13. In the Government Order dated 07.10.1966 one of the important aspect stated in para 3 is that
the certification of integrity when denied by Reporting Officer, such Government servant should be
posted elsewhere and should not be continued under/with the same Reporting Officer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 3
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
14. The next Government Order dated 03.07.1979 clarify that withholding of integrity being part of
ACR would relate back to the year for which it was to be certified and for different year it has to be
dealt with separately, without being influenced by previous year.
15. The Government Order dated 15.12.1980 only gives few illustrations for the guidance of officers
telling them the manner in which they should record their views regarding certification of integrity
of a subordinate officer.
16. The Government Orders dated 16.05.1981 and 21.12.1993 only reiterate that in cases where
conduct of Government servant is suspicious or under inquiry, it should be closely watched and in
case of inquiry, this fact should be mentioned and certification of integrity should be deferred till
inquiry is concluded.
17. These Government orders, therefore, only deal with the manner of certification/withholding of
integrity in ACR but by no means upgrade "withholding of integrity" to the status or extent of
punishment, minor or major, as the case may be. It leaves no doubt that whenever the question of
punishment would arise as a result of disciplinary proceeding, the competent authority will have to
look into and abide to the relevant rules prescribing punishment and cannot invent/ discover a new
punishment by itself which has not been prescribed in the statute by rule framing authority. The
reference to aforesaid Government orders, therefore, in the context of present case, is wholly
misconceived and it appears that either the respondents do not understand the nature of
certification of integrity or have no idea of difference between a punishment and recording of ACR.
The defence taken by respondents, therefore, is wholly out of context and does not them.
18. In view of above, the writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 14.03.2011 is hereby
quashed. However, this order shall not preclude the disciplinary authority from passing any fresh
order in accordance with law after giving due opportunity of hearing to all concerned parties.
In view of the aforesaid, writ petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 21 October 2019 is
hereby quashed. The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential reliefs."
(emphasis added)
5. Upon perusal of Rule 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Police Officers of the Subordinate Ranks
(Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1991 only following punishment has been prescribed as major
punishment and minor punishment. The rules are reproduced hereunder:
"4. PUNISHMENT - (1) The following punishments may, for good and sufficient
reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed upon Police Officer, namely --
a) Major Penalties ---
(i) Dismissal from service.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 4
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
(ii) Removal from service.
(iii) Reduction in rank including reduction to a lower - scale or to a lower stage in a
time scale.
(b) Minor penalties:
(i) Withholding of promotion
(ii) Fine not exceeding one months pay.
(iii) Withholding of increment, including stoppage at an efficiency bar.
(iv) Censure.
(2) In addition to the punishments mentioned in sub-rule (1) Head Constable and
Constables may also be inflicted with the following punishments --
(i) Confinement to quarters (this term includes confinement to Quarter Guard for a
term not exceeding fifteen days extra guard or other duty).
(ii) Punishment Drill not exceeding fifteen days.
(iii) Extra guard duty not exceeding seven days.
(iv) Deprivation of good conduct pay.
(3) In addition to the punishments mentioned in sub rules (1) and (2) Constables may
also be punished with Fatigue duty, which shall be restricted to the following tasks.:
(i) Tent pitching;
(ii) Drain digging;
(iii) Cutting grass, cleaning jungle and picking stones from parade grounds;
(iv) Repairing huts and butts and similar work in the lines;
(v) Cleaning Arms."
6. Upon a pointed query being made to learned Standing Counsel as to how the order impugned
passed by the disciplinary authority can be justified, he submits that the competent disciplinary
authority can be directed to pass order afresh in the light of law laid down by this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 5
Rameshwar Dayal Sharma vs The State Of U.P.And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
7. In view of the above, the order passed by disciplinary authority dated 1st August, 2024, order
passed by the appellate authority dated 16th September, 2024 & the order of revisional authority
dated 18th October, 2024 are hereby quashed with all consequential benefits. The matter is remitted
to the authority to take decision afresh. The order of consequential benefits shall abide by the final
order to be passed by the authority concerned.
8. Petition stands allowed as indicated above.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Atmesh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168492458/ 6
