Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6
November, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C ) No.2406/2021
Reserved on 15.09.2023
Pronounced on 06.11.2023
1. Ramnik Singh aged 30 years son of S. ..... petitioners (s)
Bhajan Singh resident of Ward No. 3 House
No. 103 Near Dak Bangalow, Poonch.
2.Riyaz Ahmad Malik aged 32 years son of
Mohd Amin Malik resident of Lurgam Tehsil
Tral Pulwama at present House No. 217
Sector 2 Palli Hill Colony Channi Rama
Jammu
Through :- Mr. Ravi Abrol Advocate
V/s
.....Respondent(s)
1 . UT of Jammu and Kashmir th. Financial Commissioner Health and Medical
Education Department Civil Secretariat Jammu
2. Principal, GMC, Rajouri.
3.Principal, GMC, Anantnag.
4. J&K Service Selection Board Sehkari Bhawan Jammu
5. Chairman, J&K Service Selection Board, Sehkari Bhawan Jammu
6. Anies Ahmad son of Shabir Ahmad resident of Badhoon near Jamola Bridge
Rajouri
7. Junaid Ahmad Baba son of Ali Mohd Baba resident of Shrine Dastigeer
Sahib Srinagar South Srinagar.
Through :- Mr. Raman Sharma AAG
Mr. Abhinav Sharma Sr. Advocate
with Ms. Saba Atiq Advocate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 1
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
2
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar J.
1 This petition by the petitioners filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is directed
against an order and judgment dated 25.10.2021 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Jammu Bench, Jammu in T.A No. 61/606/2020 titled „Ramnik Singh vs UT of Jammu and Kashmir
and others, whereby the T.A. filed by the petitioners herein challenging the selection of respondent
Nos. 6 and 7 as Audio-visual Technician/Technician in Audio-visual Aids in Government Medical
College, Rajouri and as Telephone Supervisor as well as Audio-visual Technician in GMC, Anantnag
respectively has been dismissed.
2 Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by learned counsel for the petitioners in
support of their petition, we deem it appropriate to give brief resume of the factual antecedents
leading to filing of this petition. 3 Pursuant to a requisition received from respondent Nos. 1 to 3, the
respondent No.4 issued two Advertisement Notices in the year 2019. Advertisement Notice
No.03/2019/001 to 03/20/401 dated 01.02.1919 was pertaining to the selection of various
non-gazetted posts borne on Divisional cadre Jammu of Government Medical College, Rajouri.
Amongst the posts notified for selection for GMC, Rajouri, one post of Audi-visual
Technician/Technician in Audi-visual Aids, Photographer and Artist (item No.
25) under open merit category and one post of Telephone Supervisor under open merit category
(item No. 38) were also included. Similarly, for Government Medical College, Anantnag,
Advertisement Notification No. 01/2019/001 to 01/2019/041 dated 01.02.2019 was issued by
respondent No.4 for making selection to various posts which included one post of Audi-visual
Technician/Technician in Audio-visual Aids under open merit category (item No.25) and one post of
Telephone Supervisor under open merit category (item No.38). As per the Advertisement
Notifications, following was the qualification prescribed for the posts in question:
Name of the post Prescribed qualification
Audi-visual Diploma in Electronic
Technician/Techn and Communication
ician in Audio from any recognized
Visual Aids, institute
Photograph and
Artist
Telephone Diploma in Electronic
supervisor and Communication
from any recognized
institute.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 2
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
4. Apart from various terms and conditions of the Advertisement Notifications (supra), some of the
salient conditions laid down therein are relevant and are, therefore, set out here-in-below:
1 (i) Online applications are invited from the eligible candidates for participating in
the selection process for Divisional cadre posts shown against unique Advertisement
numbers mentioned in the Annexure "A" to this notification;
(ii)........................................................................
(iii)...are in possession of the prescribed academic/professional/technical qualifications as shown in
the Annexure "A" by or before the last date of submission of application forms i.e 27.02.2019
2. (i)..........
(ii)................
(iii)............
(iv.................
(v).................
(vi)...............
(vii)...........
(viii).............
(ix).......
(x).........
(xi) Candidate need to click on Clock Here to apply link to apply for the advertisement.
(xii). On clicking on Clock here to apply link, system checks candidate(cid:129)s eligibility with respect to
eligibility criteria required for the advertisement. If candidate does not fulfill eligibility, appropriate
message of ineligibility will be displayed by system.
(xiii) Only the Application of candidate fulfilling eligibility conditions as per the profile submitted by
the candidates will be accepted by system.
(xiv)................................................
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 3
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
(xv)................................................. (xvi).............................................. (xvii).....................................
(xviii)............................................. (xix)........................................... (xx).......................................
(xxi)........................................
(3)............................................. (4)...................................
(5). The prescribed qualifications reflect the bare minimum requirement of the job and mere
possession thereof shall not entitle a candidate to be called for different stages of selection process.
(6.)...................................
(7).....................................
(8)......................................
(9)....................................
(10).....................................
(11)...................................
(12).........................................
(13).......................................
(14)........................................
5. The petitioners herein, who were possessing qualification of Bachelor(cid:129)s Degree in Electronics and
Communication, submitted their separate applications for the posts of Audio-visual
Technician/Technician in Audio Visual Aides, Photograph and Artist and Telephone Supervisor
under open merit category for Government Medical College, Rajouri and Government Medical
College, Anantnag. The applications submitted through online mode were entertained by
respondent No.4 and the petitioners along with other eligible candidates including respondent Nos.
6 and 7 were permitted to participate in the written examination which was held on 04.07.2019.
Both the petitioners qualified the written test and were shown in the final list of shortlisted
candidates issued by the respondent no.4 The petitioner No.1 figured at S.No.4 in the said list for the
post of Audio-visual Technician/Technician in Audio-visual Aids, Photograph and Artist (item
No.25) as well as the in list of candidates shortlisted for the post of Telephone Supervisor ( item
No.38). Similarly, petitioner No. 2 figured at S.No.1 in the list of candidates shortlisted for the posts
of Audio-visual Technician/Technician in Audio visual Aids, Photograph and Artist (item No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 4
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
25) and as well as in the list of candidates shortlisted for the posts of Audio- visual
Technician/Technician in Audio visual Aids, as well as in the list of candidates shortlisted for the
posts of Telephone Supervisor (item No.38) for GMC Anangnag.
6 Since the process of selection did not prescribe any viva voce or interview and, therefore, the list of
shortlisted candidates was finalized and the same was published on the website of the
respondent-Board on 25.02.2020. Respondent No.6 was indicated to have been selected for the post
of Audi- Visual Technician/Technician in Audio visual Aids, Photograph and Artist (item No.25) for
GMC Rajouri, whereas, respondent No.7 was shown to have been selected for the post of
Audi-Visual Technician/Technician in Audio visual Aids, Photograph and Artist (item No.38) for
GMC, Anantnag. Both the petitioners, however, did not find their name in the final select list. As is
pleaded, the petitioners, on enquiry, were informed that they could not be selected and placed in the
final select list because of their ineligibility to hold the posts.
7 Feeling aggrieved by their non-selection and declaration of their candidature as ineligible, the
petitioners filed a writ petition before this Court which was later on transferred to the CAT on
coming into operation of the J&K Re-organization Act, 2019. Before the Tribunal, a short point was
urged by the petitioners that they being Bachelor(cid:129)s in Electronics and Communication cannot be
held ineligible for the twin posts in question, for, the Degree in Electronics and Communication
presupposes the acquisition of Diploma in Electronics and Communication which, as per the
Advertisement Notifications, is a minimum prescribed qualification for the posts in question. 8 The
writ petition was contested by the official as well as the private respondents. In the objections filed
by respondent Nos. 4 and 5, the claim of the writ petitioners was contested on the ground that the
prescribed qualification for the posts in question was "Diploma in Electronics and Communication"
and that both the petitioners possessing the qualification of Degree in Electronics and
Communication were not holding the prescribed qualification and, therefore, ineligible to
participate in the selection process or for appointment to the notified posts in questions. To the plea
of the petitioners that they with their qualification as Degree in Electronics and Communication
were allowed to participate in the selection process without any objection, the reply of respondent
No.4 and 5 was that the participation of a candidate in the written test or interview or the fact that
his name appears in the merit list would not alter the situation and make an ineligible candidate as
eligible for the post. 9 The selected candidates i.e respondent Nos. 6 and 7 also filed their objections
and took a similar stand before the Tribunal. They, however, brought out in their objections that the
petitioners, by suppression of material information and providing wrong information succeeded in
uploading their online application forms, though they did not possess the eligibility qualification. It
was, thus, submitted that the mere fact that the petitioners succeeded in participating in the
selection process by withholding of relevant information/ uploading wrong information, disentitles
them to claim estopple against the selection body, nor can they be heard by the Court exercising
equitable jurisdiction.
10. The matter was considered at length by the Tribunal. The Tribunal, relying upon the judgments
of Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme Court in the cases of University of Mysore and Another vs. C.D.Govinda
Rao, AIR 1965 SC 491, J. Ranga Swamy vs Government of Andhra Pradesh and others, (1990) 1 SCC
288, Official Liquidator vs Dayanand and others (2008) 10 SCC 1, Zahoor Ahmad Rather vs Sheikh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 5
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
Imtiyaz Ahmad (2019) 2 SCC 404, Yogesh Kumar vs. Government of NTC, Delhi (2003) 3 SCC 548,
Puneet Sharma vs Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limtied, AIR 2021 SC 2221, concluded
that prescription of a particular qualification is a matter of recruitment policy and, therefore, it is for
the employer to prescribe a particular qualification as a condition of eligibility. Once the
qualification prescribed by the employer is clear and unambiguous, it is no part of the role or
function of the judicial review to expand upon the ambit of the prescribed qualifications. The
Tribunal, thus, held that in the instant case, for both the posts in question, the prescribed
qualification was Diploma in Electronics and Communication and, therefore, it was not open for the
Court to add to or subtract from or read into any qualification other than the prescribed. The claim
of the petitioners that they being Degree-holders in Electronics and Communication shall be
deemed to possess the prescribed qualification of Diploma in Electronics and Communication, was
rejected. The petition was, accordingly, dismissed vide judgment which is impugned in this petition.
11. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the decision of this writ petition turns on the determination of following
issue:
"Whether a Degree in Electronics and Communication is a higher qualification in the
same line than the Diploma in Electronics and Communication and, therefore,
acquisition of degree qualification presupposes the acquisition of Diploma
qualification in the same line"
12 The issue that has cropped up for determination in this petition is not free from difficulties, for,
there are several judgments of the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court pronouncing on the same issue, though
in the context of different fact situations. There is no denial of the fact that the law is well settled
that it is not for the Court to lay down qualification for the post. The prescription of qualification, as
is held in the case of Zahoor Ahmad Rather (supra), is a matter of recruitment policy and the State
as the employer is entitled to prescribe a particular qualification as a condition of eligibility.
Undoubtedly, the State is entrusted with the authority to assess the needs of its public services and,
therefore, it clearly fall within the domain of administrative- decision making as to what
qualification should be laid down for a particular post having regard to the nature of job associated
with the post and other socio-economic perspectives. Having said that, we do not want to survey the
case law on the aforesaid point in issue. However, for the purpose of discussion on hand, we first
need to determine as to what is the qualification prescribed for the posts in question. Apparently,
looking at the Advertisement Notification(s), the prescribed qualification is „Diploma in Electronics
and Communication'. Whether the prescribed qualification is the fixed qualification, leaving no
room for a candidate with the higher qualification in the same line to apply for the post, is a
question to be pondered over. Be it noted that the Government order prescribing qualifications does
not put any embargo on the candidates possessing qualification higher than the prescribed
minimum qualification.
13. Indisputably, with the creation of various Medical Colleges in the Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir in addition to the Government Medical College, Jammu and GMC,Srinagar, several posts,
both in the gazetted and non-gazetted cadre have been created. As is usual with the Government, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 6
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
process of selection for the posts in the newly established Medical colleges has been taken up on war
footing without, however, making any effort to notify the statutory recruitment rules. To fill up the
gap created by non-issuance of statutory rules, the Administrative Department i.e the Department of
Health and Medical Education vide Government Order No. 680-HME of 2018 dated 10.12.2018 has
laid down the minimum qualifications prescribed for direct recruitment in respect of certain
categories of non-gazetted/class-IV posts created in the newly established Government Medical
Colleges-Anantnag, Doda, Baramula,Rajouri and Kathua. The operative portion of the Government
Order dated 10.12.2018 (supra) is set out below:
"Now, therefore, in partial modification of Government Orders No. 130-HME of
2018, 131-HME of 2018, 132-HME of 2018, 133-HME of 2018 and 134-HME of 2018
dated 19.02.2018, the minimum qualification prescribed for direct recruitment in
respect of certain categories of non- gazetted/class- IV posts as contained in Schedule
-II annexed to these Government Orders is hereby modified/revised and recast as per
the details given in Annexure-A to this Government Order."
14 The posts in question figure at S.No.30 and 60 of Schedule-II. Going strictly by the Government
Order No. 680-HME of 2018 (supra), it is abundantly clear that the qualification prescribed for the
twin posts in question i.e Diploma in Electronics and Communication is the minimum qualification
prescribed for the posts meaning thereby a person having a qualification higher than the minimum,
cannot be held ineligible and debarred from participating in the selection process, provided the
qualification higher than the minimum is also in the same line.
15 It is true that, in the absence of any material on record, it would be difficult for a Court to come to
a conclusion that the Degree in Electronics and Communication is a qualification higher than the
minimum prescribed qualification i.e Diploma in Electronics and Communication and is in the same
line. We will, however, advert to this aspect a little later and find our answer on the basis of
material, if any, on record. Suffice it to say that the Tribunal has not gone into this aspect of the
matter. We make it clear that if, we ultimately come to a conclusion that the Degree in Electronics
and Communication is a qualification in the same line and higher than the minimum prescribed
qualification i.e Diploma in Electronics and Communication, then we have no doubt in mind that
the qualification possessed by the petitioners herein presupposes the acquisition of Diploma in
Electronics and Communication and, therefore, they cannot be declared ineligible to hold the posts
in question.
16. Before we advert to the aforesaid aspect of the matter, we need to clear the mist surrounding the
legal issue determined by the Tribunal in the light of various judgments of the Supreme Court.
Needless to say that the judgment in each case even on a question of law has invariably turned on
the factual matrix presented in the case decided by the Court. The issue, as to whether a higher
qualification presupposes the acquisition of minimum prescribed qualification, cropped up for
discussion before the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in P.M. Latha vs State of Kerala and others, (2003) 3
SCC 541. The issue that was raised in said case was; whether the qualification „Trained Teachers
Certificate(cid:129) (TTC) required for the post of Primary School Teachers in the School Education
Department of State of Kerala, would be included in the qualification of B.Ed. held by some of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 7
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
aggrieved candidates who were declared ineligible to participate in the selection process for the
aforesaid posts.
17. The Supreme Court, after analyzing the issue in the context of material on record, concluded that
the B.Ed. qualification could not be considered as a higher qualification than TTC given the fact that
TTC qualification was a distinct requisite qualification imparted to teach the small children (primary
classes), whereas the qualification of B.Ed. was a training imparted to educate the students of higher
classes. In a nutshell, the qualification of B.Ed. was not held to be a qualification higher than the
qualification of TTC in the same line. This view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in the case of
Yogesh Kumar (supra) which again was a case in respect of qualifications of TTC and B.Ed. Jyoti
K.K. vs. Kerala Public Service Commission (2010) 5 SCC 596 is a judgment of the Supreme Court
which is mostly relied upon by the aggrieved candidates holding higher qualifications like Degree in
Engineering, who are not allowed to participate in selection for the posts prescribing „Diploma(cid:129) as a
minimum qualification. Though the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court, inter alia, rendered the judgment in
the context of Rule 10 (a) of the relevant Recruitment Rules, yet the proposition of law that was laid
down in the case of Jyoti K.K.(supra) case was that a qualification of Degree in Engineering in a
particular discipline presupposes the acquisition of lower qualification of Diploma in the same line
and, therefore, even where the minimum prescribed qualification is Diploma in particular line of
Engineering, a person possessing Degree in the same line cannot be held ineligible to apply for the
post. This judgment was, however, distinguished in the case of State of Punjab vs. Anita and others,
(2015) 2 SCC 201, though the case was entirely different from the present one. In Anita's case
(supra), the Court was concerned with recruitment to the posts of JBT/ETT Teachers for which the
minimum qualification prescribed was two years in Junior Basic Teacher training course and those
with the higher qualifications, like B.Ed/M.A.M.Sc/M.Com. etc. were held ineligible.
18 The Supreme Court, having regard to the nature of job required to be performed for teaching
primary classes, came to the conclusion that the higher qualifications like B.Ed. was not a
qualification presupposing the acquisition of two years junior basic teachers training (JBT) which
was entirely a different training meant for achieving different objective. Similarly, Zahoor Ahmad
Rather's case was also distinguishable on its facts. In Zahoor Ahmed Rather's case (supra), the post
in question was Technician-III in the Power Development Department for which the qualification
prescribed was Matric with ITI in the relevant trade. The J&K Service Selection Board held that the
candidates possessing Diploma in Electrical Engineering were ineligible. The aggrieved Diploma
holders went to the Court and the matter ultimately landed before the Supreme Court. What was
held by the Supreme Court is reproduced hereunder:
"Under the above provisions as well as in the advertisement which was issued by the
Board, every candidate must possess the prescribed academic/professional/technical
qualification and must fulfil all other eligibility conditions. The prescribed
qualifications for the post of Technician-III in the Power Development Department is
a Matric with ITI in the relevant trade. The Board at its 116th meeting took notice of
the fact that in some districts, the interviews had been conducted for candidates with
a diploma in Electrical Engineering while in other districts candidates with a diploma
had not been considered to be eligible for the post of Technician-III. Moreover,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 8
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
candidates with an ITI in diverse trades had also been interviewed for the post. The
Board resolved at its meeting that only an ITI in the relevant trade namely the
Electrical trade is the prescribed qualification specified in the advertisement".
19. Apart from the judgments to which reference is made by us hereinabove, there is plethora of case
law dealing with the issue in the context of fact situations presented in each case. The position of law
which, we can say with some amount of certainty, shall have universal application, is clearly laid
down in Jyoti K.K's case (supra) and followed in the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Puneet Sharma (supra) .
20 The Supreme Court has surveyed the entire case law on the issue and the factual context in which
the judgments in each case have been rendered by the Supreme Court and has concluded that where
State as an employer prescribes a particular minimum qualification for the post, the candidates
possessing qualification higher than the prescribed minimum qualification, are eligible, provided
the higher qualification is in the same line. In other words, if the higher qualification possessed by a
candidate presupposes the acquisition of lower qualification in the same line, such candidate cannot
be held ineligible for the post on the ground that it does not possess the minimum prescribed
qualification. It would be complete fallacy and contradiction to say that the candidate possesses a
higher qualification which presupposes the acquisition of the prescribed minimum qualification, but
does not possess the „prescribed qualification(cid:129). In such situation, the Courts may not be required to
substitute or read into a qualification other than the one prescribed .However, such finding can be
returned by a Court only when there is sufficient material on record to indicate that the higher
qualification claimed by a candidate to participate in the selection process, is in the same line as is
the prescribed minimum qualification. Before we look for the material available on record to come
to such a conclusion in the instant case, we are also required to deal with two other aspects
highlighted by learned counsel for the respondents, which are as under:
(i) to cull out the correct ratio of the judgment in Puneet Sharma(cid:129)s case (supra); and,
(ii) the misrepresentation, if any, made by the petitioners while submitting their
online application forms which allowed them to participate in the selection process.
21 So far as the judgment in Puneet Sharma's case is concerned, the Supreme Court, having regard
to the Recruitment Rules for Himachal Pradesh Electricity Board which made no distinction
between Diploma and Degree qualification in Electrical Engineering/Electrical and Electronics
Engineering held in Paragraphs (31) to (38) as follows:
"31. This Court is conscious that the issue in question is whether the minimum
qualification of a diploma in electrical or electronic engineering or other prescribed
qualifications includes a degree in that discipline. However, the rules have to be
considered as a whole. So viewed, the two sub-quotas are:
(1) 5% enabling those diploma holders who acquire degree qualifications during
service as Junior Engineers; and (2) 5% enabling among those who hold degrees
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 9
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
before joining as Junior Engineers;
32. The latter (2) conclusively establishes that what the rule making authority undoubtedly had in
mind was that degree holders too could compete for the position of JEs as individuals holding
equivalent or higher qualifications. If such interpretation were not given, there would be no
meaning in the 5% sub-quota set apart for those who were degree holders before joining as Junior
Engineers- in terms of the recruitment rules as existing.
33. The court's opinion is fortified by the latest amendment brought about on 03.06.2020. This
clarifies beyond doubt that even for the post of Junior Engineers, those individuals holding higher
qualifications are eligible to compete. In the opinion of this Court, though the amending rules were
brought into force prospectively, nevertheless, being clarificatory, they apply to the recruitment that
is the subject matter of the present controversy. Such a position (i.e. clarificatory amendments
operative retroactively, despite their enforcement prospectively) has been held in several previous
judgments of this court. In Zile Singh v. State of Haryana, this Court examined the various
authorities on statutory interpretation and concluded:
"13. It is a cardinal principle of construction that every statute is prima facie
prospective unless it is expressly or by necessary implication made to have a
retrospective operation. But the Rule in general is applicable where the object of the
statute is to affect vested rights or to impose new burdens or to impair existing
obligations. Unless there are words in the statute sufficient to show the intention of
the legislature to affect existing rights, it is deemed to be prospective only ' Nova
Constitutio Futuris Formam Imponere Debet, Non Praeteritis' a new law ought to
regulate what is to follow, not the past. (See Principles of Statutory Interpretation by
Justice G.P. Singh. It is not necessary that an express provision be made to make a
statute retrospective and the presumption against retrospectivity may be rebutted by
necessary implication especially in a case where the new law is made to cure an
acknowledged evil for the benefit of the community as a whole.
14. The presumption against retrospective operation is not applicable to declaratory
statutes.... In determining, therefore, the nature of the Act, regard must be had to the
substance rather than to the form. If a new Act is 'to explain' an earlier Act, it would
be without object unless construed retrospectively. An explanatory Act is generally
passed to supply an obvious omission or to clear up doubts as to the meaning of the
previous Act. It is well settled that if a statute is curative or merely declaratory of the
previous law retrospective operation is generally intended.... An amending Act may
be purely declaratory to clear a meaning of a provision of the principal Act which was
already implicit. A clarificatory amendment of this nature will have retrospective
effect.
34. In Vijay v. State of Maharashtra16, this court held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 10
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
"12. The appellant was elected in terms of the provisions of a statute. The right to be
elected was created by a statute and, thus, can be taken away by a statute. It is now
well settled that when a literal reading of the provision giving retrospective effect
does not 15(2004) 8 SCC 1 16(2006) 6 SCC 289 produce absurdity or anomaly, the
same would not be construed to be only prospective. The negation is not a rigid rule
and varies with the intention and purport of the legislature, but to apply it in such a
case is a doctrine of fairness. When a law is enacted for the benefit of the community
as a whole, even in the absence of a provision, the statute may be held to be
retrospective in nature. The appellant does not and cannot question the competence
of the legislature in this behalf.
35. Likewise, in Manish Kumar v Union of India17, it was held that:
"Declaratory, clarificatory or curative Statutes are allowed to hold sway in the past.
The very nature of the said laws involve the aspect of public interest which requires
sovereign Legislature to remove defects, clarify aspects which create doubt. The
declaratory law again has the effect of the legislative intention being made clear. It
may not be apposite in the case of these Statutes to paint them with the taint of
retrospectivity."
36. It would also be relevant to notice that in the appeal, it has been specifically averred that the
HPSEB has been making contractual appointments from amongst degree holders in the cadre of
Junior Engineers, and that an order was issued upon the recommendation of the Screening
Committee, which through its meeting held on 11.04.2018 had cleared the regularization of 28 such
candidates. These degree holders are equivalent to Junior Engineers, and had been working for
periods ranging between 4 to 6 years. A copy of that order has been produced as Annexure P- 10 in
the Special Leave Petition.
37. The considerations which weighed with this court in the previous decisions i.e. P.M. Latha,
Yogesh Kumar, Anita (Supra) were quite different from the facts of this case. This court's
conclusions that the prescription of a specific qualification, excluding what is generally regarded as a
higher qualification can apply to certain categories of posts. Thus, in Latha and Yogesh Kumar as
well as Anita (supra) those possessing degrees or post- graduation or B.Ed. degrees, were not
considered eligible for the post of primary or junior teacher. In a similar manner, for
"Technician-III" or 17(2019) 8 SCC 416 18 SLP (C) 10533-37 of 2020 lower post, the equivalent
qualification for the post of Junior Engineer i.e. diploma holders were deemed to have been
excluded, in Zahoor Ahmed Rather (supra). This court is cognizant of the fact that in Anita as well as
Zahoor (supra) the stipulation in Jyoti (supra) which enabled consideration of candidates with
higher qualifications was deemed to be a distinguishing ground. No such stipulation exists in the
HPSEB Rules. Yet, of material significance is the fact that the higher post of Assistant Engineer
(next in hierarchy to Junior Engineer) has nearly 2/3rds (64%) promotional quota. Amongst these
individuals, those who held degrees before appointment as a Junior Engineers are entitled for
consideration in a separate and distinct sub-quota, provided they function as a Junior Engineer
continuously for a prescribed period. This salient aspect cannot be overlooked; it only shows the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 11
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
intent of the rule makers not to exclude degree holders from consideration for the lower post of
Junior Engineers.
38. As noticed previously, in addition to the above considerations, an amendment to the rules was
made on 03.06.2020 declaring that those with higher qualifications are also entitled to apply or be
considered for appointment. This amendment was brought in to clear all doubts and controversies
and, in that sense, the amending provisions should be deemed to have been inserted from
inception".
22. The observations made and the conclusions drawn in the aforesaid paras clearly fortify the legal
position which we have brought out in our discussion hereinabove.
23. In view of the clarity of legal position arrived at by us with the support of judgment rendered in
Puneet Sharma's case (supra), we now venture to allude to some of the salient features of the instant
case which go a long way to fortify our conclusion that, in the instant case, the Degree in Electronics
and Communication clearly presupposes the acquisition of Diploma in Electrical and
Communication which is the prescribed qualification indicated in the Advertisement Notifications
in question. These are as under:
(i) That the Advertisement notifications have been issued pursuant to a formal
requisition made by the Department of Health and Medical Education for making
selection strictly in terms of the recruitment norms. In absence of statutory
recruitment rules, the Department of Health and Medical Education has laid down
recruitment norms by issuing an Executive order i.e Government Order No.
680/HME of 2018.
The qualification prescribed for various posts included in Annexure-A of the Government order are
the minimum qualifications prescribed for direct recruitment in respect of such posts. The
prescription of qualification in the Government order is, therefore, required to be read into the
Advertisement Notifications. If we do so, the irresistible conclusion would be that the qualification
of Diploma in Electronics and Communication prescribed for the posts in question is the minimum
prescribed qualification and not the only prescribed qualification;
(ii) The same employer i.e the Government of Jammu and Kashmir in the Department of Health and
Medical Education has, by issuance of Government Order No. 456-JK (HME) of 2023 dated
02.06.2023 laid down minimum qualification in respect of non-gazetted and class-IV posts for
Government Medical College, Srinagar and for the posts of Telephone operators, the minimum
qualification prescribed for direct recruitment is 10+2 or above with Diploma/Degree in Electronics
and Communication from any recognized institute. Interestingly, the post of Telephone Supervisor
in GMC, Srinagar is a promotional post, to be filled up from the post of Telephone Operator. It
clearly indicates that the employer i.e Department of Health and Medical Education is well aware
that, for the post of Telephone Operator/Telephone Supervisor, the qualification of Diploma in
Electronics and Communication is a requisite qualification. In other words, the same employer
equates the two qualifications i.e Diploma and Degree for direct recruitment to the post of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 12
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
Telephone Operator/ Telephone Supervisor; and,
(iii) That there is a clarification issued by the Department of Health and Medical Education vide its
communication dated 30.01.2020 in response to a letter of the Service Selection Board dated
24.12.2019 indicating to the Board that the qualification prescribed for the post in the indent
describes the minimum qualification required for the post and the candidates with higher
qualifications cannot be debarred from applying/selection for the post advertised. This
communication fortifies the position that the qualification notified in the advertisement
notifications in terms of the indent placed by the Department of Health and Medical Education is
the minimum prescribed qualification and not the only prescribed qualification.
24. So far as the question of suppression of material facts by the petitioners is concerned, although
in the reply affidavit filed by the official respondents, in particular the Service Selection Board, there
is no allegation of any misrepresentation or suppression of material facts, yet from the reply filed by
the private respondents, it comes to fore that with a view to upload their application forms to the
official website of the Board, the petitioners, in addition to their claim of possessing the degree
qualification, also clicked „tick(cid:129) on the qualification of Diploma in Electronics and Communication.
The explanation by the petitioners is that they all along believed that the qualification of Degree in
Electronics and Communication presupposes the acquisition of Diploma qualification and therefore,
to avert the rejection of their application forms, they did mention their qualification as Diploma as
well. They submit that this was done under a bona fide impression and having regard to the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in Jyoyti K.K's and Puneet Sharma's cases (supra). Be that as it may, we
have considered this aspect of the matter and do not find any deliberate misrepresentation or
suppression of any material information so as to defraud the SSB or the Government. Their
mentioning of diploma qualification was under a bona fide belief that they possess that qualification
as well having done their degree in the same discipline.
25. We may note here that the judgment relied upon by the respondents in the case of Aijaz Ahmad
Ahanger and others vs. UT of Jammu and Kashmir (WPC No. 2251/2021, decided on 16.11.2021) has
been decided in the context of fact situation obtaining in the said case and, therefore, cannot be
taken to have laid down a proposition of law of universal application that a candidate possessing
qualification higher than the minimum prescribed qualification in the same line, is ineligible and,
therefore, can be debarred from participating in the selection process. The fact that the qualification
indicated in the Advertisement Notification(s) as prescribed qualification was the minimum
prescribed qualification as is clearly laid down in the executive order laying down the norms of
recruitment and prescribing qualification for various posts, has not been brought to the notice of the
Division Bench. The Division Bench has also not considered the issue as to whether or not, a
candidate possessing a qualification higher than the minimum prescribed, is eligible, provided the
higher qualification possessed by such candidate is in the same line and having equal relevance for
the post in question.
26. In view of the discussion made above and having regard to the legal position adumbrated in
Puneet Sharma's case (supra), we hold that, for the purposes of case in question, the qualification of
Degree in Electronics and Communication held by the petitioners, is necessarily a higher
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 13
Ramnik Singh Aged 30 Years Son Of S vs Respondent(S) on 6 November, 2023
qualification than the minimum qualification prescribed in the Advertisement Notifications i.e
Diploma in Electronics and Communication and that the higher qualification possessed by the
petitioners is in the same line. We further clarify and hold that the qualification of Degree in
Electronics and Communication presupposes the acquisition of Diploma in Electronics and
Communication which is the minimum qualification prescribed for the twin posts in question. The
petitioners were, thus, eligible to participate in the selection process. The Tribunal has not correctly
appreciated the position of law and has wrongly held the petitioners ineligible for the posts in
question. As a result, we allow this petition and set aside and quash the order of Tribunal impugned
in this petition by issuing a writ of certiorari. A writ of mandamus is issued to the respondent- Board
to redraw the merit for the posts in question having regard to the fact that both the petitioners are
eligible for the posts in question and, accordingly, frame the final select list afresh. The
respondent-Board shall do well to issue the select list within two months so that the selected
candidates are appointed without any further loss of time. We further provide that in case it is
possible to accommodate the writ petitioners without disturbing the selection made, the official
respondents may proceed accordingly, judgment passed by us today notwithstanding.
(PUNEET GUPTA) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
06.11.2023
Sanjeev Whether order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128052296/ 14
