Ranjeet Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 31 January, 2025
Ranjeet Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 31 January,
2025
Author: Manoj Kumar Gupta
Bench: Manoj Kumar Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14511-DB
Court No. - 21
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 144 of 2025
Petitioner :- Ranjeet Pandey
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 4 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Upendra Kumar Pandey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Manoj Kumar Gupta,J.
Hon'ble Anish Kumar Gupta,J.
1. The instant petition has been filed praying for a writ of mandamus commanding respondent no. 2
to release the property of the petitioner, i.e. one-sixth share in Gata No. 183, area 0.214 hectare or
pay compensation along with interest as per current market value and to comply with the order of
Deputy Secretary, Government of U.P., Lucknow, dated 13.7.2024, passed on the application of the
petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145741337/ 1
Ranjeet Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 31 January, 2025
2. The case of the petitioner is that his father, namely Sita Ram and his brother Banwari, were
original tenure holders of Gata No. 183, area 0.0214 hectare (new Gata No. 916). Banwari sold his
half share by means of registered sale deed in favour of various persons. Remaining half share in the
said land belonging to Sita Ram was inherited by his sons, namely Ranjeet (the petitioner herein),
Shivasharya and Ramasharya. Each had one-sixth share in the said property. On 1.7.2006,
Ramasharya sold his one-sixth share in favour of the State Government for construction of
Government Medical College and Super Speciality Hospital. The State Government, under garb of
the said sale deed, took possession of the entire land. The petitioner has been making request for
handing back possession of his share of land, or to pay compensation therefor to the him, but to no
avail. He moved an application before the State Government on 15.5.2024. The Deputy Secretary,
Government of U.P., Lucknow vide communication dated 16.7.2024, addressed to District
Magistrate, Azamgarh, directed him to take required measures. It is submitted that despite the said
direction, the respondents have neither restored possession of the share of the petitioner in the land,
nor has paid him any compensation.
3. Learned Standing Counsel has placed on record the written instructions received from the
Principal, Government Medical College, Azamgarh. It is admitted therein that one-sixth share of the
brother of the petitioner in Gata No. 916 was purchased by the State. It is also mentioned that in
respect of remaining land, no acquisition was ever made and therefore, there is no question of
payment of any compensation. It is further stated that no application for payment of compensation
has been received in his office so far.
4. Sri Rajiv Gupta, learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel, submits on basis of said instructions,
that since the respondents have only obtained sale deed with respect to the share of the brother of
the petitioner and the share of the petitioner has not been acquired, therefore, there is no question
of payment of compensation. Thus, according to him, the remaining land continues to be owned by
the petitioner. He further submits that the State would ensure that the remaining land belonging to
the petitioner is demarcated so as to set at rest the entire controversy.
5. Having regard to the stand taken in the written instructions and the submissions made by learned
Additional Chief Standing Counsel, we dispose of the instant petition by providing that the share of
the petitioner in the remaining land shall be demarcated in presence of the petitioner and other
co-sharers within twelve weeks from the date of communication of the instant order to the District
Magistrate, Azamgarh (respondent no. 2).
(Anish Kumar Gupta, J.) (Manoj Kumar Gupta, J.) Order Date :- 31.1.2025 Jaideep/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145741337/ 2
