Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4
February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15364
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 44659 of 2024
Applicant :- Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Nitin Sharma
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Nitin Sharma, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Ram Mohit Yadav, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. As informed by learned AGA, notice to the informant has been served on 04.12.2024 but none is
present on behalf of the informant even in the revised call.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154505258/ 1
Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
4. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 205 of 2024, under Sections 376 I.P.C. and Section 5L/6 of
the POCSO Act, Police Station Kotwali Dehat, District Mirzapur, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
5. The applicant is stated to have committed rape with the victim on the false promise of marriage.
The applicant is even stated to have terminated the pregnancy of the victim twice and subsequently
refused to comply with the said promise of marriage.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
6. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
7. The allegations are per se false.
8. The victim by her looks seems to be major, although, at the time of her statement recorded under
section 183 B.N.S.S., she has told her age to be 19 years, as such her age, at the time of offence, has
come up to be 17 years.
9. As per High School Certificate, her date of birth is stated to be 10.03.2005.
10. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
11. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
28.09.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE :
12. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
13. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154505258/ 2
Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
14. The Supreme Court in the case of Sushil Kumar vs. Rakesh Kumar, (2003) 8 SCC 673, has
opined that it is more often in the Indian Society that person shows the age of their wards much
below than their actual age. In the case of Brij Mohan Singh Vs. Priya Brat Narain Sinha, AIR 1965
SC 282, this Court, inter alia, observed that in actual life it often happens that persons give false age
of the boy at the time of his admission to a school so that later in life he would have an advantage
when seeking public service for which a minimum age for eligibility is often prescribed.
15. The Supreme Court passed in the case of Pramod Suryabhan Pawar Vs. State of Maharashtra and
another reported in 2019 (9)SC 608 and Ansar Mohammad Vs. State of Rajasthan and another
reported in 2022 SCC OnLine SC 886, has stated that entering into any kind of corporeal
relationship with a person on the false promise to marry, cannot be termed as rape.
16. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
17. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
18. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate
of Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
19. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of
bail to the applicant.
20. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at
the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
21. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
22. Let the applicant-Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma involved in aforementioned case crime number be
released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154505258/ 3
Ranjit Kumar Vishwakarma vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
23. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
24. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154505258/ 4
