Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on
23 November, 2021
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
W.P(C) NO. 16906 of 2020
And
W.P.(C) No. 18877 of 2021
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
AFR In W.P.(C) No. 16906 of 2020 Rashmi Rekha Dash ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha & another ..... Opp. Parties
For Petitioner : M/s. B.S. Tripathy-1,
A. Tripathy and A. Sahoo,
Advocates
For Opp. Parties : Mr. A.K. Mishra,
Addl. Government Advocate.
In W.P.(C) No. 18877 of 2021
Santosh Kumar Muduli &
another ..... Petitioners
-Versus-
State of Odisha & others ..... Opp. Parties
For Petitioners : M/s. B.P. Satapathy & S.Roy,
Advocates
For Opp. Parties : Mr. A.K. Mishra,
Addl. Government Advocate.
// 2 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 1
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI Date of Hearing: 08.11.2021 Date of Judgment:
23.11.2021 DR. B.R. SARANGI, J. The petitioner in W.P.(C) No.16906 of 2020 seeks the following
relief:-
"i) direct the opp. Party no.2 to issue a formal order regularizing her services as Data
Entry Operator in the establishment of Local Fund Audit Organisation under opp.
Party no.2 with effect from 17.09.2013 in the scale of pay PB-1- 5200-20200/- + GP Rs.1900/- with
usual allowances admissible from time to time as per GA Department Resolution dt.17.09.2013
(Annexure-12 on her completing six years of satisfactory service as Data Entry Operators as
01.03.2013 and in the same manner as has been allowed to similarly situated outsourced contractual
Data Entry Operators in various State Government Departments and other various Govt.
establishments with all consequential service and monetary benefits vide Annexure-14 series, 18, 21,
22 an d23 with all consequential service and monetary benefits;
ii) pass such other order (s) as would be deemed fit and proper in the interest of justice and fair
play"
Similarly, the petitioners in W.P.(C) No. 18877 of 2021 seek the following relief:-
"(i) Why the action of the Opposite Parties in going to fill up the post of Data Entry
Operator prior to considering the claim of the petitioners for their
absorption/regularization as against the said post in the facts and circumstances of
the case will not be declared as illegal; and
(ii) Why the Opposite Parties will not be directed to regularize the services of the
petitioners as Data Entry Operators prior to taking any decision basing on the
recommendation dated 03.06.2021 of the O.P. No.3 under Annexure-11."
2. In both the writ petitions, the petitioners, who are working as Data Entry Operators, essentially
seek for direction to issue formal order of regularization // 3 // in the scale of pay of
PB-1-5200-20200/- + GP Rs.1900/- with usual allowances admissible from time to time as per G.A.
Department Resolution dated 17.09.2013, on completion of six years of satisfactory service, as has
been allowed to similarly situated outsourced contractual Data Entry Operators in various State
Government Departments and other various Government establishments, with all consequential
service and monetary benefits. Thereby, both the writ petitions are similar to each other and
consequentially they were heard together and are disposed of by this common judgment.
3. For just and proper adjudication of the case, the factual matrix of W.P.(C) No. 16906 of 2020 is
taken into consideration.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 2
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
3.1 Due to increase of workload in the undivided Local Fund Audit Organization during the financial
year 2006-07 covering audit in favour about 5000 institutions, including 314 Panchayat Samities,
101 Urban Local Bodies, 9 Universities, 453 Aided colleges, // 4 // 2199 Aided High Schools, 398
Endowments and other institutions, including B.Sc., CHSE (208 Schools and +2 Colleges) and 6234
Gram Panchayats, a proposal was moved by the Government in Finance Department for
computerization of all the Audit Offices for their efficiency by abolition of all the existing base level
ministerial posts and vacancies with consequential creation of 60 Data Entry Operators. Finally, the
proposal was approved by the then Finance Minister on 01.06.2006 with creation of 30 Data Entry
Operators at a consolidated amount of Rs.4000/- per month on contractual basis. Accordingly, the
Finance Department requested one outsourcing agency, M/s Mind Mart, vide letter dated
15.02.2007, to provide suitable 20 numbers of Data Entry Operators to be engaged in different
offices of Local Fund Audit organization. The minimum educational qualification for Data Entry
Operators, as prescribed by the opposite party no.1, was Graduate in any discipline with PGDCA and
having a typing speed of 40 words per minute in // 5 // English and well conversant with Computer
and essential knowledge in MS Office, Internet and Lan functioning and should not be below 18
years and above 40 years of age. Pursuant thereto, the service provider M/s. Mind Mart conducted
selection by way of Walk-in-Interview for preparation of a panel of Data Entry Operators through a
selection process. Upon completing the selection process, a panel was prepared and communicated
to the Finance Department for issuance of the engagement order in favour of the 20 numbers of
Data Entry Operators in different offices of Local Fund Audit Organisation under the Finance
Department. The petitioner was selected and the service provider issued order of deployment in
favour of her as Data Entry Operator under Local Fund Audit Organisation and allowed her to join
in the office of the District Audit Officer, LFA, Cuttack. Subsequently, the petitioner was transferred
and re-deployed at various Audit Offices and ultimately posted in the Directorate of Local Fund
Audit, Bhubaneswar. Thereafter, the // 6 // service book in the name of each of the Data Entry
Operators was opened. The Local Fund Audit Organization was restructured and one independent
Head of the Department under the Finance Department, namely directorate of Local Fund Audit
headed by the Director, Local Fund Audit was created vide Finance Department Resolution dated
11.07.2012, for which contractual Data Entry Operator posts were also created, vide Finance
Department Resolution dated 11.07.2012. Initially, for continuance of 30 number of Data Entry
Operators created during the Financial Year 2006-07 and further 4 number of Data Entry Operators
were created, vide letter dated 11.07.2012, and 13 number of base level posts of Junior Grade Typist
were abolished vide letter dated 05.12.2014. The tenure of contract of the Service Provider, namely,
M/s Mind Mart was expired with effect from January, 2013. Thereafter, opposite party No.2 had
assigned the engagement of Data Entry Operators including the petitioner to another agency, // 7 //
namely M/s. Bharat Security Services, which was selected through open bidding process. While
providing work order vide letter dated 28.01.2013 direction was given to the said agency to supply
requisite manpower to 11 organisations with effect from 01.02.2013 with the specific conditions as
prescribed under Clause-8 of the work order dated 28.01.2013, which reads as follows:-
"8. You have to sponsor at least double or triple nos. of candidates as per the
requirement of the Director, LFA. After assessing the suitability of the sponsored
candidate, suitable persons will be selected for engagement."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 3
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
3.2 Basing upon this condition, name of the petitioner was sponsored by the new agency and after
assessing her suitability based on past service experience and performance, opposite party no.2 vide
letter dated 13.01.2013 allowed her to continue in job as DEO in the establishment under opposite
party no.2. Even though there was change of agency, but all the DEOs, including the petitioner, were
continuing uninterruptedly in the Local Fund Audit Organisation.
// 8 // Though the petitioner was engaged through outsourcing agency, but she was discharging her
duty under the Local Fund Audit Organisation. Thereby, the nature of the duties discharged by the
petitioner is governmental and the petitioner has acquired the status of a government servant by
discharging the government functions only for the opposite parties 1 and 2 in the interest of Local
Fund Audit work in the State. More particularly, the mode of engagement of Data Entry Operators
through outsourcing agency has been as per the orders of the Government. The Government took a
decision in the minutes of meeting held on 28.04.2012 to the following effect:-
"i) Data Entry Operators engaged on contractual basis in Tahasils should continue
and should not be disengaged till a decision regarding regularization is finalized.
ii) Govt. is contemplating to frame policy on regularization of contractual Data Entry
Operators in various Departments;
iii) The Policy so framed shall be applicable to outsourced Data Entry Operators."
3.3 During continuance of the petitioner as contractual outsourced Data Entry Operator, the
Government of Odisha promulgated a policy for // 9 // regularization of services of the existing
contractual Group-C and Group-D employees working under the State Government vide G.A.
Department Resolution No. 26108 dated 17.09.2013. As per the said policy, for regular appointment
a gradation list of such contractual employees shall be prepared by the appointing authority on the
basis of their date of appointment and regular appointment of those categories of contractual
employees shall be made on the date of completion of six years of service or from the date of
publication of the resolution, whichever is later, in the order in which their names appear in the
gradation list prepared under Para-1. The period of six years shall be counted from the date of
contractual appointment prior to publication of the resolution. As per para-2 thereof, on the date of
satisfactory completion of six years of contractual service or from the date of publication of the
resolution, whichever is later, they shall be deemed to have been regularly appointed and a formal
order of regular appointment // 10 // shall be issued by the appointing authority. Consequent upon
regular appointment under the contractual post, if any, they shall get re-converted to regular
sanctioned post. In case the person concerned has crossed the upper age limit, the appointing
authority shall allow relaxation. But subsequently the Government of Orissa in G.A. Department
issued another resolution on 16.01.2014 expressly clarifying the resolution of the GA Department
dated 17.09.2013 that proposal of regularization of contractual appointment/ engagements as per
the resolution dated 17.09.2013 shall be considered and approved by the High Power Committee to
be constituted under the Chairmanship of the concerned department. 3.4 Basing upon the
resolution dated 17.09.2013 various other departments of the Government have already
implemented the said resolution for Data Entry Operators in their respective posts with effect from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 4
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
17.09.2013 in PB-1 Rs.5200- 20,200/- with GP Rs.1900 and/or Rs.2400/-. In the // 11 //
meantime, the G.A Department has also formulated Odisha Group-"C" and Group-"D" Posts
(Contractual Appointment) Rules, 2013. Such Rules have got no application to the cases covered
under the resolution of the Government dated 17.09.2013. The Data Entry Operators, including the
petitioner, upon completion of six years of continuous contractual service on outsourcing basis
submitted a detailed representation before opposite party no.2 for regularization of their services.
The Joint Director of opposite party no.2 in his letter dated 07.06.2014 forwarded the said
representation of the Data Entry Operators to opposite party no.1 with a request for consideration of
their cases for regularization as Data Entry Operators, but to of no response. Consequentially, the
Data Entry Operators working under the opposite party no.2, including the present petitioner,
submitted a detailed representation on 07.09.2015 to opposite party No.1 in the grievance cell with a
prayer for being paid their remuneration directly by opposite party no.2 instead of // 12 // service
provider. Opposite party no.1, considering the grievance of the Data Entry Operators, including the
petitioner, referred the matter to opposite party no.2, vide letter dated 30.09.2015 of the Under
Secretary to Government, Finance Department, with a request to examine the grievance of the Data
Entry Operators as per Rules and to submit its views to the Department for further necessary action.
Some of the outsourced employees, who are similarly situated with the petitioner, have been
regularized as per the orders of the government, as is evident from the information obtained under
RTI Act vide letter dated 29.01.2016 of the Under Secretary to Government of Odisha, Department
of Higher Education, in which the said department has confirmed that two Data Entry Operators
engaged through the service providers were made as direct contractual in 2008 and were
regularized in 2014. It has been also confirmed in the said letter that the employees those who are
engaged as outsourcing/contractual as per the provisions and // 13 // guidelines prescribed by G.A.
Department as well as Finance Department are made regular. Therefore, the appointment of the
petitioner as Data Entry Operator, which was made through outsourcing, is also as per the
provisions and guidelines prescribed by G.A. Department as well as Finance Department be
regularized. Similarly, the Data Entry Operators working in another wing of the Finance
Department, namely, CT&GST Organization, who were initially engaged through outsourcing in
2005-07 and were brought as direct contractual in February, 2008, had approached the Odisha
Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench Cuttack in O.A. No. 2172 (C) of 2015 (Jatin Kumar Das and
others v. State) and batch for their regularization as per the G.A. Department resolution dated
17.09.2013. The said batch of Original Applications were allowed by the order of State
Administrative Tribunal by judgment dated 17.05.2017. The State carried the same to this Court in
W.P.(C) No. 6661 of 2018, which was dismissed vide // 14 // judgment dated 10.05.2018. Being
aggrieved, the State challenged the same in the apex Court in SLP (C) No. 18642 of 2018, which was
also dismissed vide order dated 06.08.2018. Thereafter, all Data Entry Operators working in
CT&GST Organization were regularized. The service of said Jatin Kumar Das was regularized vide
order dated 15.09.2018. The petitioner, being stood in the same footing, is entitled to get the similar
benefit as has been granted to the Data Entry Operators of the CT&GST Organization. The annual
agreement with the service provider M/s Bharat Security Services was extended with effect from
01.02.2020 to 31.07.2020. As an austerity measure due to COVID-19 the Finance Department
issued an office memorandum dated 07.07.2020 communicating inter-alia the following decision of
the Government:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 5
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
" i) Persons who are engaged on outsourcing basis, are to be paid their entitlement as
per the terms and conditions of the engagement till contract period ends. If the
contract period ends within the lock down period, then the entitlements to be paid till
the end of the contract period."
// 15 // 3.5 As the petitioner has required eligibility criteria and on being duly selected through a
selection process appointed against sanctioned posts and continue to work for more than 10 years
satisfactorily with unblemished performance and without intervention of the orders of the Courts or
Tribunals, is entitled to be regularized based on the judgment of the apex Court in the cases of
Secretary State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1, State of Kantaka vs. M.L. Keshari,
(2010) 9 SCC 247 and Sheo Narain Nagar Vs. State of UP, AIR 2014 SC 233 and all other subsequent
judgments dealing with such regularization. As the engagement of the petitioner was not at all an
illegal appointment and can be said to be irregular appointment, thereby she is entitled to be
regularized in service as an one time dispensation. The petitioner has completed more than 13 years
of service on outsourced contractual basis and as per the G.A. Department Resolution dated
17.09.2013 her service is deemed to have been // 16 // regularized with effect from 17.09.2013, on
completion of six years of service. Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to a direction to opposite
party no.2 to issue a formal order regularizing her services as Data Entry Operator in the
establishment of Local Fund Audit Organization in the scale of pay of PB-1- Rs.5200- 20200/- + GP
Rs.1900/- with usual allowance admissible from time to time, as such benefit has been extended to
the similarly situated outsourced contractual Data Entry Operators in various Government
departments. Hence this writ petition.
4. Mr. B.S Tripathy-1, learned counsel for the petitioner in W.P.(C) No.16906 of 2020 admitting the
fact that the petitioner was engaged by outsourcing agency, emphatically urged that she has been
rendering service to the Local Fund Audit Organization for more than 13 years continuously and
that though essentially she is discharging the nature of duties assigned to government service, but
she is being paid by outsourcing agency. Such an action is nothing but a // 17 // camouflaged
approach made by the State authorities to the service rendered by the petitioner just to deprive her
of the benefits of contractual employment, as per resolution dated 17.09.2013 passed by the
Government in G.A. Department and subsequent Rules framed in 2013. It is also contended that
even though the petitioner is engaged on outsourcing basis, she is discharging her duties and
responsibility of the State and, therefore, she is entitled to get regularization in terms of the
Government resolution dated 17.09.2013 and rules framed in 2013, as have been referred to above.
It is further contended that the petitioner's appointment may be considered to be irregular one, but
cannot be said to be illegal, as she has come through the process of selection as per Clause-8 of the
work order dated 28.01.2013. Consequentially, she is entitled to get the benefit of contractual
appointment in terms of G.A. Department resolution dated 17.09.2013 and subsequent Rules
framed in 2013. It is further contended that even though the petitioner is employed // 18 // through
outsourcing agency, there exists master- servant relationship between the petitioner and the
opposite parties, thereby, she is entitled to get regularization. More so, if the services of similarly
situated persons have already been regularized, the petitioner cannot be discriminated and
therefore, her claim for regularization on contractual basis has to be considered by the Government
in proper perspective.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 6
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
To substantiate his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon Secretary, State of
Karnataka v. Umadevi(3), (2006) 4 SCC 1; State of Karnataka v. M.L. Kesari, (2010) 9 SCC 247;
Sheo Narain Nagar v. State of UP, AIR 2014 SC 233; Hussainbhai, Calicut v. Alath Factory
Thozhilali, (1978) 4 SCC 257; Nihal Singh v. State of Punjab, (2013) 14 SCC 65; G. Srinivasa Chary v.
State of Telangana (W.P. No.47675 of 2018 & I.A. No.1 of 2019 disposed of on 07.08.2020); Sushil
Kumar Nayak v. State of Orissa, 2014 (Suppl.1) OLR // 19 // 917 & Sanatana Sahoo v. State of
Odisha, 2017(II) ILR-CUT-1059.
5. Mr. B.P. Satapathy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in W.P.(C) No.18877 of 2021,
while adopting the argument advanced by Mr. B.S. Tripathy-1, learned counsel for the petitioner in
W.P.(C) No.16906 of 2020 contended that since there exists master-servant relationship between
the petitioners and opposite parties, the petitioners are entitled to get the benefit of regularisation
on contractual basis.
To substantiate his contention, he has relied upon the judgment of the apex Court in Dharangadhara
Chemical Works Ltd. v. State of Saurashtra, AIR 1957 SC 264; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Audh Narain
Singh, AIR 1965 SC 360; V.P. Gopala Rao v. Public Prosecutor, AIR 1970 SC 66; and Andhra
Pradesh & State of Gujarat v. Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni, AIR 1984 SC 161.
// 20 //
6. Per contra, Mr. A.K. Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate argued with vehemence
that since the petitioners are arbitrarily engaged by the outsourcing agency and they are being paid
by outsourcing agency, there is no existence of master-servant relationship between the petitioners
vis-à-vis the State. It is further contended that though the petitioners are being engaged by
outsourcing agency and are performing their duties and responsibility under the State authority,
they cannot claim regularization of their services or absorption on contractual basis. More so, their
appointment having not been made against any sanctioned posts, they are not entitled to get any
regularization. It is further contended that sympathy and sentiments cannot be grounds for passing
of order of regularization in absence of any legal right.
To substantiate his contentions, he has relied upon Nishan Singh v. State of Punjab, 2013 SCC
OnLine P & H 20720; Rajiv Kumar v. State of // 21 // Punjab, 2018 SCC OnLine P & H 6948; Union
of India v. Ilmo Devi, 2016 SCC OnLine SC 1933; Union of India v. Ilmo Devi, 2021 OnLine SC 899;
and Odisha Power Transmission Corp. Ltd v. Sushil Kumar Nayak, Civil Appeal No.8415 of 2017
(arising out of SLP (C) No.11569 of 2014 disposed of on 05.07.2017)
7. This Court heard Mr. B.S. Mishra-1, learned counsel for the petitioner in W.P.(C) No.16906 of
2020; Mr. B.P. Satapathy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in W.P.(C) No.18877 of
2021 and Mr. A.K. Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate for the State opposite parties
by hybrid mode. Pleadings have been exchanged between the parties and with the consent of learned
counsel for the parties, the writ petitions are being disposed of finally at the stage of admission.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 7
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
8. From the factual matrix and the rival contentions as narrated above, it is unraveled that the
petitioners, having been undisputedly engaged by outsourcing agency, are discharging their duties
and // 22 // responsibility in different offices under the Govt. of Odisha as Data Entry Operators.
Six posts were created by the Government, against which the petitioner in W.P.(C) No. 16906 of
2020 is continuing with a meager sum of money being engaged through outsourcing agency. But,
essentially, the nature of work has been discharging by the petitioners for the Government and of
the Government and payments have been made to them through outsourcing agencies by the
Government. Even if they are discharging their duty as Data Entry Operators for the Government, of
the Government and by the Government, the benefit of regularization on contractual basis also
accrued to them in terms of nature of duty discharged by them, even though they have been engaged
in a camouflaged manner through service providers. More so, recruitment rules have already been
framed by the Government bringing them into the fold of regular contractual posts. But, in the name
of financial crunch or by adopting some plea or the other, the Government // 23 // even though is a
model employer, is not making their appointment as regular contractual by following due procedure
or rules governing the field for recruitment to the regular posts. Many a times, it is observed that the
Government is engaging the people through outsourcing agencies and by paying a paltry sum of
money is extracting the work similarly to regular employees of the Government. Thereby as a model
employer, the Government is exploiting the employees, those who have been engaged by
outsourcing agencies, by depriving them of getting their legitimate dues in terms of regular
employment or in terms of contractual employment as per rules applicable to them. The
Government in the name of technological development depriving the manpower utilization for its
betterment. No doubt, technology has got its own place for growth of the State, but that does not
mean it will not create any employment causing a massive inconvenience to the youth of the
country. Consequentially, there is brain drain of multi-laundering the persons to the // 24 //
country and outside the country. Therefore, the Government should be careful that the eligible
persons are not denied employment in the name of technological development. It is easy to utilize
the outsourcing agencies for supply of manpower, but that itself amounts exploiting the young
generations upon whom the future of the state as well as the country rests. Once youth is exploited,
frustration grows up and ultimately it will have tremendous adverse effect on the growth of the
state, resulting in creating disastrous conditions, which should be taken care of by the Government
as a model employer. But instead of doing so, as it appears, steps are being taken from time to time
to cause harassment to the youths by generating unemployment, which will have grave
repercussions on the State and at that time the State cannot control the situation.
9. In Rajiv Kumar (supra), the Single Bench of High Court of Punjab and Haryana, at pragraphs-6
and 7 of the judgment held as follows:-
// 25 // "6. Admittedly, Petitioners are working as contractual employees under an
outsourced manpower agency till the year 2016-17 and it is for the first time for the
year 2017-18, that petitioners were offered contractual employment under the
respondent-Corporation vide appointment letter/s Annexure P-3. To understand the
matter in right perspective, it is necessary to go into the background of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 8
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
7. It is seen that respondent-Corporation is totally dependent upon the policies and
decisions taken by the Department of Local Government, Punjab who is entrusted
with the work of regulating Corporations like respondent no.3, as all the funds for
working of the Corporations are released by said Department.
On 21.05.1999, respondent no.1-Department took a conscious decision to the effect that all private
employees of all Corporations would be engaged through a manpower agency/contractor, who
would be responsible for engaging the employees and paying them their salaries etc and the
Corporations shall be paying the manpower contractors a lump- sum amount. It is further evident
that the said practice 4 of 7 CWP No.13348 of 2018(O&M) #5# continued for the year 2016-17 as
well, and respondent-Corporation had also invited tenders through open bids and the contract for
the year 2017 stood awarded to various contractors i.e. Markanda Khurad Co-op L/C Society
Limited, M/s Kamal Electrical and The Capital Co-op L/C Society Ltd. In the meantime, respondent
no.1-Local Government, Punjab had promulgated the Punjab Ad hoc, Contractual, Daily Wage,
Temporary, Work Charged and Outsourced Employees Welfare Act, 2016 (in short the Act of 2016)
vide Notification dated 24.12.2016, under which a criteria was laid down for Group A, B, C and D
employees working on contractual/temporary/daily wages etc under the State Government and its
entities. The said Notification/Act, 2016 was adopted by the Corporation vide resolution dated
26.12.2016 and accordingly, the petitioners were directly engaged as contractual employees for one
year i.e. 2017 by the Corporation. However, said appointment was subject to approval by the
respondent no.2-Director Local Government, Punjab of the resolution dated // 26 // 26.12.2016, as
the Corporation is bound by approval from the Local Government Department."
10. In Ilmo Devi (supra) the apex Court at paragraph-13 of the judgment observed as follows:-
"It is further submitted that the directions issued by the High Court to sanction the
posts can be said to be a policy decision, and, therefore, the High Court is not
justified in issuing the Mandamus and/or direction to create and sanction the posts.
It is submitted that the High Court has not properly appreciated the facts that even
the O.M. dated 11.12.2006 and subsequent regularization policy dated 30.06.2014
were absolutely in consonance with the decision of this Court in the case of Umadevi
(supra). It is submitted that in the case of Umadevi (supra) it has been specifically
observed that the High Court, in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, should not ordinarily issue direction for absorption,
regularization or permanent continuance unless the recruitment was itself done
regularly and in terms of constitutional scheme."
11. In Odisha Power Transmission (supra), the apex Court has considered the proposal given by the
appellant, which was passed basing on the observation made by the apex Court in Ashok Kumar and
Another vs. State of Bihar and others, 2017 (4) SCC 357 and accordingly disposed of the appeal in
terms of the proposal.
// 27 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 9
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
12. The sum and substance of the submissions made by Mr. A.K. Mishra, learned Additional
Government Advocate for the State is that the petitioners, having been appointed through
outsourcing agencies, there does not exist any master- servant relationship, for which, they are not
entitled for contractual appointment and subsequent regularization, as they have not been selected
by following due process of selection, particularly when the policy decision is for regularization of
service of the contractual employees, who were appointed after fulfilling the eligibility criteria as per
the proper procedure. Thereby, the claim as has been made by the petitioners in these writ petitions
is to be denied.
13. As it appears, while passing the judgment by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Rajiv Kumar
(supra) which was relied upon by the State Counsel, the important guidelines issued by the apex
Court in other judgments in the said context have not been taken into consideration. Thereby the
said judgment is // 28 // per incurium and cannot be relied upon for the purpose of adjudication of
these cases.
14. In Dharangadhara (supra), the Constitution Bench of the apex Court while considering the case
under Section 2 (s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 observed that, test with regard to master and
servant relationship has been laid down and it is held that the essential condition of a person being a
workman within the terms of the definition in Section 2
(s) is that he should be employed to do the work in the industry, that there should be, in other
words, an employment of his by the employer and that there should be the relationship between the
employer and employee or master and servant. Unless a person is thus employed there can be no
question of his being a workman within the definition of the terms as contained in the Act. Prima
facie test for the determination of the relationship between master and servant is the existence of
the right in the master to supervise and control the work done by the servant not // 29 // only in the
matter of directing what work the servant is to do but also the manner in which he shall do his work.
The nature or extent of control which is requisite to establish the relationship of the employer and
employee must necessarily vary from business to business and is by its very nature incapable of
precise definition. The correct method of approach, therefore, would be to consider whether having
regard to the nature of the work there was due control and supervision by the employer. A person
can be a workman even though he is paid not per day but by the job. The fact that Rules regarding
hours of work, etc. applicable to other workmen may not be conveniently applied to them and the
nature as well as the manner and method of their work would be such as cannot be regulated by any
directions given by the Industrial Tribunal, is no deterrent against holding the persons to be
workmen within the meaning of the definition, if they fulfill its requirement. The Industrial Tribunal
would have to very well consider what relief, if any, // 30 // may possibly be granted to them having
regard to all the circumstances of the case and may not be able to regulate the work to be done by
the workmen and the remuneration to be paid to them by the employer in the manner it is used to
do in the case of other industries where the conditions of employment and the work to be done by
the employees is of a different character.
15. In Audh Narain Singh (supra), the apex Court held that a Government Treasurer is entitled to
appoint Tahvildars in the cash Department in the State of Uttar Pradesh to assist him in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 10
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
discharge of his duties, but the appointment is made with the approval of the District Collector.
Even after the posts of Tahvildar were abolished the Government of Uttar Pradesh did not adopt a
consistent attitude and from time to time issued orders which indicate that a considerable degree of
control was maintained by the District Officers upon the Tahvildars in the matter of appointment,
removal from service, suspension and transfers and in the matter of payment of // 31 //
remuneration, dearness allowance and making available certain medical benefits. Tahvildars were
treated on a par with other civil servants of the State. It is from these circumstances that the
relationship between the Government of Uttar Pradesh and Tahvildars has to be ascertained.
Whether in a given case the relationship of master and servant exists is a question of fact, which
must be determined on a consideration of all material and relevant circumstances having a bearing
on that question. In general selection by the employer, coupled with payment by him of
remuneration or wages, the right to control the method of work, and a power to suspend or remove
from employment are indicative of the relation of master and servant. But co-existence of all these
indicia is not predicated in every case to make the relation one of master and servant. In special
classes of employment, a contract of service may exist, even in the absence of one or more of these
indicia. But ordinarily the right of an employer to control the // 32 // method of doing the work, and
the power of superintendence and control may be treated as strongly indicative of the relation of
master and servant, for that relation imports the power not only to direct the doing of some work,
but also the power to direct the manner in which the work is to be done. If the employer has the
power, prima facie, the relation is that of master and servant. The work of the Government
Treasurers has to be conducted according to the Rules and Regulations framed by the Government,
and directions issued from time to time. The Government Treasurer holds a post in a public
employment and he is assisted by Tahvildars in the performance of his duties. The Tahvildar acts
not on behalf of the Treasurer in performing his duties, but on behalf of the State.
16. Relying upon the judgment of the apex court in the case of Audh Narain Singh, the apex Court in
the case of V.P. Gopala Rao (supra) while considering the matter of relationship between the master
and // 33 // servant with reference to the meaning attached to Section 2(1) of the Factory Act, 1948,
held that a "worker" within meaning of S.2 (1) is a person employed by the management and there
must be a contract of service and a relationship of master and servant between them. It is a question
of fact in each case whether the relationship of master and servant exists between the management
and the workman. The critical test of the relationship of master and servant is the master's right of
superintendence and control of the method of doing the work.
17. In Hussainbhai (supra), the apex Court settled the law on true test of determining the master and
servant relationship, which reads as follows:-
"5. The true test may, with brevity, be indicated once again. Where a worker or group
of workers labours to produce goods or services and these goods or services are for
the business of another, that other is, in fact, the employer. He has economic control
over the workers' subsistence, skill, and continued employment. If he, for any reason,
chokes off, the worker is, virtually, laid off. The presence of intermediate contractors
with whom alone the workers have immediate or direct relationship ex contractu is of
no consequence when, on lifting the veil or looking at the conspectus of factors
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 11
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
governing employment, we discern the naked truth, though draped in different
perfect paper arrangement, that // 34 // the real employer is the Management, not
the immediate contractor. Myriad devices, half-hidden in fold after fold of legal form
depending on the degree of concealment needed, the type of industry, the local
conditions and the like, may be resorted to when labour legislation casts welfare
obligations on the real employer, based on Articles 38, 39, 42, 43 and 43-A of the
Constitution. The court must be astute to avoid mischief and achieve the purpose of
the law and not be misled by the maya of legal appearances.
6. If the livelihood of the workmen substantially depends on labour rendered to
produce goods and services for the benefits and satisfaction of an enterprise, the
absence of direct relationship or the presence of dubious intermediaries or the make-
believe trappings of detachment from the Management cannot snap the real-life
bond. The story may vary but the inference defies ingenuity. The liability cannot be
shaken off."
18. In Nihal Singh (supra), the apex Court directed absorption of Special Police Officers appointed
by the State, whose services were placed at the disposal of various Banks in the State and whose
wages were paid by Banks. It was held that the mere fact that wages were paid by the Bank did not
render the appellants 'employees' of those Banks since the appointment was made by the State and
disciplinary control vested with the State. It held that the creation of a cadre or sanctioning of posts
for a cadre is a matter exclusively within the authority of the State, but if the State did not choose to
create a cadre but chose // 35 // to make appointments of persons creating contractual relationship,
its action is arbitrary. It also refused to accept the defence that there were no sanctioned posts and
so there was justification for the State to utilize services of large number of people like the appellants
for decades. It held that "sanctioned posts do not fall from heaven" and that the State has to create
them by a conscious choice on the basis of some rational assessment of need.
19. In G. Srinivasa Chary (supra), the Telengana High Court, while considering the claim of
employees engaged on outsourcing basis in Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation, answered
two issues namely (i) Whether outsourced employees are entitled to regularization in their service ?
and (ii) Whether those outsourcing employees are entitled to equal wage based on the principle of
equal pay for equal work as per the law laid down by the apex Court in the case of Jagjit Singh vs.
State of Punjab, (2017) // 36 // 1 SCC 148. In the said case, i.e., G. Srinivasa Chary (supra), at
pargraph-79, it has been held as follows:-
"79. In the result,
(a) The Writ Petition is allowed;
(b) the respondents' action in engaging the petitioners on "outsourcing basis" as
Sanitary Supervisors (SFA), Sanitation Workers, Entomology Field Workers,
Entomology Superior Field Workers, Supervisors (EFA), Superior Field Assistants
through intermediaries/agencies/contractors is contrary to law, violative of Article
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 12
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India and also the law declared by the Supreme
Court in Uma Devi (1 supra) mandating periodic regular recruitment to sanctioned
posts;
(c) that the "outsourcing" system adopted by the GHMC is only a sham and a ruse to
avoid extending to the petitioners their genuine service entitlements; and that the
presence of such intermediary/contractor has to be ignored, and the petitioners are
held to have been directly engaged by the GHMC and they are also held entitled to be
considered for regularisation of their services;
(d) consequently, the respondents, while continuously engaging the services of the
petitioners directly henceforth, are directed to consider the case of the petitioners for
regularisation of their services, by ignoring the existence of the
intermediaries/agencies/contractors in the posts of Sanitary Supervisor (SFA),
Sanitation Workers, Entomology Field Workers, Entomology Superior Field Workers,
Supervisors (EFA), Superior Field Assistants within two (2) months from the date of
receipt of a copy of the order.
(e) the petitioners are entitled to minimum of time scale of pay attached to the posts
of Sanitary Supervisor (SFA), Sanitation Workers, Entomology Field Workers,
Entomology Superior Field Workers, Supervisors (EFA), Superior Field Assistants in
which they are now discharging their functions till their claim for regularisation is
considered by the GHMC in accordance with para 53 of the decision in Uma Devi (1
supra); and such payments shall be made by the GHMC directly to the petitioners
w.e.f the date of filing of this Writ petition ( after deducting the payments already
received by them during this period from the contractor/intermediary) and shall be
continued till the cases of the petitioners are considered for regularisation by the
GHMC. The arrears upto 31.7.2020 shall be paid on or before 15.9.2020."
// 37 //
20. In Sanatan Sahoo (supra), a Division Bench of this Court observed that while he was so
continuing, even though two posts of Jr. Data Entry Operators were created under H & UD
Department, the same were filled up on out sourcing basis from the service provider without due
process of selection. Their services have also been regularized. Thus non- consideration of the case
of an employee, whose services have been utilized for last 22 years, is nothing but exploitation of
such employee by his employer. The persons who were sponsored through outsourcing agency by
the Service Provider and not through due process of selection, have already been regularized,
whereas the petitioner, has been discriminated on the plea that he has not been appointed by
following the Rules meant for Data Entry Operators. Against the judgment passed in the case of
Sanatan Sahoo (supra), challenge was made before the apex Court in SLP (C) No. 11911 of 2018,
which was dismissed vide order dated 18.05.2018.
// 38 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 13
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
21. So far as the case of Sushil Kumar Nayak (supra) is concerned, the judgment passed by this
Court in the said case had been challenged before the apex Court by Orissa Power Transmission
Corporation Ltd. and on the basis of the proposal given by the counsel appearing for the appellant,
namely Orissa Power Transmission Corporation Ltd., which was partly based on the observation
made in Ashok Kumar (supra) the matter was disposed of.
22. The cumulative effect of the judgments, mentioned supra, clearly states that the master- servant
relationship is to be determined on the basis of the facts of each case. If the same is applied to the
present context, there is no iota of doubt that the petitioners have been engaged through
outsourcing agencies to discharge the duties and responsibility as Data Entry Operators admissible
to a government employee, which is purely governmental in nature. Merely because monthly
remuneration is being paid by the outsourcing agencies that ipso facto cannot be said // 39 // that
there is no existence of master-servant relationship between the petitioners and the State. Thus on
lifting the veil, it would appear that the Government is to be deemed as a master, who has superior
choice, control and direction of the servant and on whose will the servant represents not merely in
the ultimate result of the work, but in details. In other words one who exercises personal authority
over another is the master and that other is a servant. If it will be further simplified, if a person
employed by another to render personal service to the employer is a servant.
23. In Shaffi vs. Commissioner, E & P Tax, AIR 1960 SC 1269, the apex Court held that a master is
one who not only prescribes to the workman the end of the work, but directs or at any moment may
direct the means also or as it has been put, retains the power of controlling the work. A servant is a
person subject to the command of his master as to the manner in which he shall do his work.
// 40 //
24. Therefore, piercing the veil, it appears that the petitioners are discharging the duties and
responsibilities of the government, for the government and by the government. Though they have
been paid their remuneration through the outsourcing agency, that ipso facto cannot be said that
there is no master- servant relationship exists between the petitioners and the State opposite parties
for whom they are rendering the services.
25. So far as the contention raised by learned Additional Government Advocate, that the petitioners
are not engaged against the sanctioned posts, that itself is fallacious one, in view of fact that the
petitioners have been rendering service for more than 13 years continuously without any
interruption and without any order passed by this Court. That apart, the facts which are delineated
above, clearly indicate that 38 number of posts of Data Entry Operators had been created, against
which the petitioners are discharging // 41 // their duty, and that though they have been engaged
through outsourcing agencies but the nature of work they are discharging is governmental.
Therefore, observation has been made by the apex Court in Nihal Singh (supra) that sanctioned
posts do not fall from heaven and that the State has to create them by a conscious choice on the
basis of some rational assessment of need. But the judgments of the apex Court in Hussainbhai
Calicut, G. Srinivasa Chary, Nihal Singh (supra) have not been considered by the apex Court in Ilmo
Devi (supra) and also in the judgment of the Punjab & Haryana High Court referred to by the State
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 14
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
Counsel. Thereby, since the said judgments are distinguishable, in view of the law laid down by the
apex Court in Hussainbhai, Calicut, G. Srinivasa Chary and Nihal Singh (supra), it can be irresistibly
concluded that the petitioners' services are to be brought to the contractual establishment in terms
of G.A. Department resolution dated 17.09.2013 // 42 // and, if not, they are to be brought to the
contractual establishment in terms of contractual Rules, 2013.
26. If consideration is made from other angle, in the State of Odisha, initially outsourcing agencies
upon their registration under the provisions of Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005
read with Private Security Agencies Odisha Rules, 2009 were engaged to provide manpower services
of private security guards and also other employees. Subsequently, the Government issued
Resolutions in the year 2010-11 providing modalities for engagement of personnel in Govt.
offices/Organizations on outsourcing basis through a transparent and open tender process. Those
resolutions were issued in order to reduce operating cost and provide more effective delivery of
public services in numbers of auxiliary support services. Those regulations/instructions, being
issued by orders of the Governor, shall be deemed to operate as General Financial Rules and
delegation of financial powers and Rules and those are having the // 43 // authority under Article
166 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, providing services of Data Entry Operators to Local
Fund Audit Organizations under the Finance Department by private manpower service providers,
Finance Department issued tender notice providing scope of work and general instructions for
bidders with technical requirement for tendering manpower service providers. As per the tender
conditions the bidder should have EPF registration, ESI registration and Registration/ License
under Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970. The tender conditions also expressly
stipulate that the Department have tentative requirement of 30 nos. of Data Entry Operators on
urgent basis. The tender conditions further stipulate that in case the grievances of the deployed
persons are not attended by manpower service provider the deployed persons can put forth their
grievance before the committee consisting of representatives of the Department or office concerned
and authorized representative in all the manpower // 44 // service providers. The terms and
conditions further stipulate the manner in which the work is to be undertaken by the outsourced
employees.
27. Therefore, if all the above aspects borne in mind, it would apparently be made clear that the
petitioners are discharging the duty and responsibility akin to the State Government employees,
though they are being paid through the outsourcing agencies. Needless to say, similarly situated
employees like Jatin Kumar Das and Others, who were working as DEOs, had approached the
Tribunal in O.A. No. 2172 (C) of 2015 and batch, which were allowed vide judgment dated
17.05.2018. The judgment so passed by the Tribunal was challenged before this Court in W.P.(C)
No.6661 of 2018, which was dismissed by judgment dated 10.05.2018. Although the said judgment
was assailed by the State in SLP No.18642 of 2018, but the same was dismissed on 06.06.2018.
Pursuant thereto, all the DEOs working under the CT & GST Department have been regularized, the
petitioners cannot be // 45 // discriminated from Jatin Kumar Das & others, so as to deprive them
of the benefit of contractual appointment in terms of resolution dated 17.09.2013 or Rules, 2013,
otherwise it will amount to violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 15
Rashmi Rekha Dash vs State Of Odisha & Another ..... Opp. ... on 23 November, 2021
28. Applying the judgments of the apex Court in Umadevi (3), M.L. Keshari and Sheo Narain Nagar
(supra), it cannot be construed that the petitioners are illegally appointed rather it can at best be
construed as irregular appointment. Even if they are appointed irregularly, they are also entitled to
get the benefits of contractual appointment, as per the resolution dated 17.09.2013 or Rules, 2013.
29. Pursuant to direction of this Court, the opposite parties produced the file of the Finance
Department, LFA-1 Branch for the year 2006-07 relating to proposal for purchase of computers for
LFA Organization of Finance Department and extension of agreement of DEOs. On perusal of the
note sheets, it appears 30 computers with printers for 30 Data Entry // 46 // Operators were to be
procured/ employed and the same has got approval of the concerned Minister. Thereafter, the
process was started for engagement of such 30 Data Entry Operators and initially, on 07.02.2008,
as per the approval of the Government, 20 computers along with 20 Data Entry Operators were
provided to different district audit offices and headquarters in Finance Department and balance 10
computers have already been supplied to the big district audit offices as per the statement. The due
approval of the Minister, to that effect, has been made on 14.02.2008. This clearly indicates that the
petitioners have been engaged with due approval of the Government to discharge the duties and
responsibility assigned to them, which is purely governmental in nature, even though they have
been engaged through outsourcing agency by entering into an agreement. More so, as per clause-8
of the agreement, the agency has to sponsor the names for selection for their engagement. Thereby,
the petitioners, having faced the // 47 // selection process, have been engaged as Data Entry
Operators in Local Fund Audit Organization of the Government under the Finance Department.
Therefore, if the petitioners are discharging the duties and responsibility of the Government, even
though they are engaged through outsourcing agencies, that cannot deprive of them the benefits, as
per the resolution dated 17.09.2013 and Rules, 2013.
30. In view of the facts and circumstances, as discussed above, this Court is of the considered view
that as the petitioners are discharging the duties and responsibilities for the Government, of the
Government and by the Government, though they have been paid through outsourcing agencies,
they are entitled to get the benefit of contractual appointment, as per resolution dated 17.09.2013 or
they may be brought over to the contractual establishment in view of the 2013 Rules governing the
field, since they stand at par with the employees those who have been absorbed in CT&GST
Department, pursuant to the judgment of the // 48 // Tribunal in Jatin Kumar Das (supra). Such
benefits should be extended to the petitioners as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a
period of three months from the date of communication of this judgment.
31. In the result, the writ petitions are allowed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
32. The Govt. file produced pursuant to direction dated 23.09.2021 be returned to the Additional
Government Advocate with due acknowledgement.
..................................... DR. B.R. SARANGI, JUDGE Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 23rd
November, 2021, Arun/Alok
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159587127/ 16
