Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3
March, 2025
Author: Pankaj Bhatia
Bench: Pankaj Bhatia
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12711
Court No. - 7
Case :- MATTERS UNDER ARTICLE 227 No. - 969 of 2025
Petitioner :- Rashmi Jaiswal
Respondent :- District Election Officer/District Magistrate,Sitapur And 17 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Gaurav Mehrotra,Akber Ahmad,Ankit Tripathi,Harsh Vardhan Mehrotra,Rajiv Raman Srivastava
Counsel for Respondent :- Anurag Kumar Singh,C.S.C.,Murli Manohar Srivastava
Hon'ble Pankaj Bhatia,J.
1. Heard Mr. Gaurav Mehrotra, Shri Rajeev Raman Srivastava, Mr. Akber Ahmed, Mr. Ankit
Tripathi and Ms. Shhreiya Agarawal, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Murli Manohar
Srivastava, learned counsel, who appears for contesting respondent No.7, Mr. Anurag Kumar Singh,
learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 to 4.
2. The present petition has been filed challenging an order dated 20th January, 2025 passed by the
learned District Judge, Sitapur in Election Petition No.3 of 2023, wherein he has rejected the
application for recounting of the votes as filed by the petitioner merely on the ground that the said
relief can be granted only at the time of final disposal as an order of recounting would amount to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 1
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
final disposal of the election petition.
3. Challenging the said order, the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the
petitioner had contested an election held for the post of Chairperson, Nagar Palika, Sitapur. In the
said election, it is argued that respondent No.7 was declared elected. Aggrieved against the election
of respondent No.7, an election petition was filed by the petitioner as prescribed under Section 19 of
the Municipalities Act, 1916.
4. The submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that in the election petition filed, in
paragraph 11, it was specifically stated that the number of votes as polled and informed by the
Officer of the Control Room, the number of the votes polled were 67,841. However, in the record of
the Returning Officer, the the number of votes were shown as 66,998. He further argues that in
paragraph 11, it was specifically pleaded that in yet another report of the Returning Officer, the total
number of votes polled were shown as 66,990.
5. He argues that as the petitioner was apprehending unfairness in the election, the petitioner had
approached this Court earlier by filing Writ-C No.3610 of 2023, which was disposed of on
02.05.2023, observing that all steps shall be taken to ensure free and fair election. He further argues
that yet another Writ-C No.3831 of 2023 was also disposed of with similar observations vide
judgement dated 12.05.2023. He argues that along with the election petition, the petitioner had
moved an application for decision on the application filed for recounting in view of the discrepancies
as stated in the election petition. As the same was not being decided, the petitioner approached this
Court by filing an application under Article 227 No.2287 of 2024, which was disposed of on
08.05.2024, wherein the Court had granted liberty to the petitioner to move an application for early
disposal, which was directed to be considered within a period of three weeks. In terms of the said
liberty, the petitioner had approached the Tribunal to decide the application. However, instead of
deciding the application for recounting, the District Judge vide its order dated 22.10.2024, disposed
of the urgency application only and did not pass any order on the application for recounting, as
such, the petitioner once again approached this Court by filing an application under Article 227
No.5640 of 2024, which was disposed of on 29.11.2024, directing the court to decide the interim
application, if not already decided and also directed that the application for recounting shall also be
decided in accordance with law, if not already decided. In terms of the said directions given by this
Court on 29.11.2024, the order impugned came to be passed.
6. While doing so, the District Judge held that the burden of proving the averments as contained in
the election petition was on the petitioner and in case, the petitioner succeeds in discharging the
said burden by leading appropriate evidence, the court can consider to passing directions for
recounting. It also recorded that the petition was pending for framing of issues and at that stage, it
would not be proper to decide the request for recounting. It was also observed that a similar
observation was made in the earlier order dated 22.10.2024 and in that circumstances, the
petitioner cannot be given interim relief, which would amount to a final relief.
7. Shri Gaurav Mehrotra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner argues that the
District Judge erred in not deciding the application on the ground that granting of interim relief
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 2
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
would amount to grant of final relief, which according to him, is contrary to the judgement of this
Court in the case of Mohd. Mustafa Vs. Up Ziladhikari Phoolpur and others 2007 (6) AWC 5536.
The reliance has been placed on paragraph 23, which is quoted herein-below:-
"23. We have carefully examined the reasoning given by a learned Single Judge in
Abrar's s case (supra) wherein the learned Single Judge opined that the disposal of an
application for recount would amount to be a final order as it disposes of the
application for recount finally. As explained by us, hereinabove, a mere order for
recount does not finally alter the status of the contesting parties and it does not, in
any way, finally determines the status of an elected candidate. The finality comes only
after the disposal of the ejection application as the relief of setting aside an election or
dismissing an election application comes at the final stage and not by mere disposal
of an application of recount or ordering recount on deciding the issue framed for this
purpose."
8. He further relies upon the judgement of learned Single Judge in the case of Smt. Rajesh Vs. State
of U.P. and others; Writ-C No.60883 of 2014, wherein the following was observed:-
"There cannot be any dispute to the proposition that order of recounting is an
interlocutory order and unless and until the election is set aside or the election
petitioner has been declared elected, this would not result in the disposal of the
election petition or allowing the election petition. The order dated 1.11.2014,
therefore, cannot be said to be a consequential order. This Court while allowing the
writ petition had observed only that as there was certain overwriting and cutting in
the counting sheet and margin of votes between the election petitioner and the
winning candidate was only one vote, there was no reason to interfere in the order of
recounting passed by the prescribed authority. The merits of the election of
respondent no. 4 was not subject matter of adjudication before this Court. The order
dated 1.9.2014, therefore, would not result in final adjudication on the merits of the
election petition between the parties."
9. His next submission is that law with regard to the recounting was summarized by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Mahendra Pal Vs. Ram Dass Malanger and others (2000) 1 SCC 261
with the following effect:-
"30. In the present case, it is not disputed, as indeed it cannot be, that in Form 20-A,
Ex.P-2, it is recorded that the total number of votes found in the ballot boxes of 82
polling stations pertaining to this constituency were 35310 whereas a perusal of
statement of "roundwise detailed result of counting, certified copy whereof is Ex. P-3,
records that the total number of valid and rejected votes counted for the purpose of
declaring the result were 35318. A difference of 8 votes had been projected in
Annexure P-2 and Annexure P-3. The margin of difference between the votes polled
by the election petitioner and the returned candidate, in the present case, was only 3
votes. Unless a satisfactory explanation was furnished during the trial about the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 3
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
discrepancy, there would be need to inspect the ballot papers to clarify doubts
regarding the excess counting of 8 votes, allegedly in favour of the returned
candidate. This was also necessary to dispel doubts about the allegations of
irregularity in counting. Had the Returning Officer, instead of rejecting the
application for recount made a test check, soon after the declaration of result, he
could have silenced the scepticism and removed all doubts but since that was not
done, the learned designated Judge ought to have considered the matter in its correct
perspective.
31. Indeed, recount of ballot papers cannot be ordered just for the asking but it is
equally well settled that while maintenance of secrecy of ballot is sacrosanct,
maintenance of purity of election is equally important."
10. In the light of the said, it is argued that the District Judge has erred in not deciding the
application on its own merits and the observations based upon which the exercise of discretion has
been denied is arbitrary and illegal.
11. Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, strongly opposes the argument by
arguing that it is very well settled that the relief of recounting, is based upon pleadings and evidence
to be led, which can be led only after framing of issues. He argues that in the present case, even
issues have not been framed and thus, any order of recounting of votes at this stage, would be
without there being any material evidence to justify the recounting.
12. He further argues that at the time of recounting, no objections with regard to the allegations of
improper recounting of votes were raised and the allegations for the first time were raised as an
afterthought, which is also contrary to the provisions contained in the Municipalities (Conduct of
Election of P and EP) Order, 1983, wherein in Order 31, the Returning Officer is duly empowered to
order of recounting, if he is not satisfied on the basis of the material available with regard to
accuracy of the previous counting. He argues that in absence of any material, at the instance of the
petitioner at the time of recounting, its exercise cannot be claimed at this stage as is being done by
the petitioner.
13. My attention has also been drawn to the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Vadivelu Vs. Sundaram and others (2000) 8 SCC 355 with emphasis on paragraphs 18 and 20,
which are as under:-
"18. From the above pleadings, it is evident that the appellant has not set forth
material facts or particulars required for re-count of votes. To justify his contention
that there was irregularity or illegality in the counting, except making some general
and bald allegations, no other details are given. Though an allegation is made that
electoral roll contained the names of dead persons, that the 1st respondent took
advantage of the same, and that some persons had impersonated and cast votes in his
favour, no details are given as to who committed such irregularity. The appellant has
also not mentioned as to how many such votes had been cast in favour of the 1st
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 4
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
respondent. So also, the appellant has not alleged the nature of the illegality or
irregularity said to have been committed by the counting officers. How and in what
manner there was improper acceptance of invalid votes and improper rejection of
valid votes also is not explained by the appellant. In short, the Election Petition is
bereft of all details and the appellant, while examined as PW 1, could not supplement
anything by way of evidence.
20. The appellant-Election Petitioner in this case has not stated as to when did he file
the application for re-count. He has stated that he had given an application to the
Returning Officer for recounting of votes and the request for recounting was not
accepted. At the time of the evidence also, the appellant has not stated as to when did
he file the application. In cross-examination, he stated that at about 10.00 p.m. on
14.10.1996, it was announced through loud speaker that the 1st respondent was
elected and he denied the allegation that the application for re-count was made at
11.45 p.m. The 1st respondent was examined as RW 1. He deposed that the result of
the election was declared at 10.30 p.m. and in all probability, the appellant filed an
application for re-count after the result of the election was declared. Therefore, the
application for re-count was not filed in accordance with Rule 66 of the Tamil Nadu
Panchayats (Elections) Rules, 1995."
14. Reliance has also been placed on the Full Bench judgement of this Court in the case of Ram
Adhar Singh Vs. District Judge and others 1985 SCC Online All 246, wherein the Full Bench had
summarized the law with regard to the recounting in paragraph 14 to the following effect:
"14. The Principles laid down in Bhabhi's case (supra) have again been applied and
followed by that Court in the case of N. Narayanan v. S. Semmalai, (1980) 2 SCC 537:
AIR 1980 SC 206 (at P. 213) wherein it observed thus:-
"Finally, the entire case law on the subject regarding the circumstances under which
recount could be ordered was fully summarised and catalogued by this Court in case
of Bhabhi v. Sheo Govind, (1975) Suppl SCR 202: ((1976) 1 SCC 687: AIR 1975 SC
2117) to which one of us (Fazal All, J) was a party and which may be extracted thus:
"The Court would be justified in ordering a recount of the ballot papers only where;
(1) the election petition contains an adequate statement of all the material facts on
which the allegations of irregularity or illegality in counting are founded;
(2) On the basis of evidence adduced such allegations are prima facie established,
affording a good ground for believing that there has been a mistake in counting, and
(3) The Court trying the petition is prima facie satisfied that the making of such an
order is imperatively necessary to decide the dispute and to do complete and effectual
justice between the parties."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 5
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
15. He further emphasizes on the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Tanaji
Ramchandra Nimhan Vs. Swati Vinayak Nimhan and others (2006) 2 SCC 300, wherein the
Supreme Court had held as under:-
"9. This Court after referring to a number of prior decisions, has held in Mahendra
Pal vs. Ram Dass Malanger and others [(2002) 3 SCC 457] that an order for
recounting cannot be made as a matter of course. Unless the election petition had
laid the foundation and there was clinching evidence to support the case set up by the
election petitioner, a recount normally could not be ordered. In Chandrika Prasad
Yadav Vs. Sateof Bihar & Ors. [(2004) 6 SCC 331], relying on an earlier decision in M.
Chinnasamy Vs. K.C. Palanisamy & Ors. [(2004) 6 SCC 341], a bench of three Judges
(to which one of us S.B. Sinha, J. was a party) held that an election petition seeking a
recount must contain a concise statement of material facts and clear evidence in
support of the facts pleaded. It was held that a small margin of victory by itself was
not a ground for ordering recount. A roving and fishing inquiry was not permissible
while directing recount of votes. The requirement of maintaining secrecy of ballot
papers had also to be kept in mind before directing a recount. The requisites for
ordering recount are a prima facie case and pleading of material facts detailing the
irregularities in counting of votes. Going by the tests laid down by these decisions, it
is clear that the election petitioner in the case on hand has not made out a specific
case for recount. In other words, except generally asserting that the process of
counting was undertaken hurriedly and suggesting that mistakes might have
occurred because of the haste shown, she has not been able to establish specifically
any flaw either in the matter of segregation of votes polled in the ward by colour,
segregation of the votes polled by each candidate, or in the matter of bundling of the
votes into 25 or in the matter of identification of the invalid votes which were clearly
shown to all the counting agents before being deposited in the box kept separately for
invalid votes. It is true that there could be a suspicion that in view of the
announcement of an award for the returning officer who finished the counting
process first, there might have been some hurry in the process of counting. But such a
general feeling or possibility cannot be a substitute for clear pleading and evidence in
support of a prayer for recounting of the votes. After all, only 15,000 odd votes were
involved and there were 10 tables and each table dealt with only about 40 ballot
boxes. Admittedly each ballot paper was shown to the agents before it was deposited
into the receptacle kept for it and at best the evidence is that it was done with some
haste."
16. In view of the rival pleadings and the law as argued, it is essential to notice the scheme of Section
19 of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, which prescribes the manner in which, an election can be
questioned. Sections 19(1) and 19(2) of the said Act are quoted herein-below:-
"19. Power to question municipal election by petition. - (1) The election of any person
as a member of a [Municipality] may be questioned by an election petition on the
ground-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 6
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
(a) that such person committed during or in respect of the election proceedings a
corrupt practice as defined in Section 28;
(b) that such person was declared to be elected by reason of the improper rejection or
admission of one or more votes, or any other reason was not duly elected by a
majority of lawful votes;
(c) that such person was not qualified to be nominated as a candidate for election or
that the nomination paper of the petitioner was improperly rejected.
(2) The election of any person as a member of a [Municipality] shall not be
questioned, -
(a) on the ground that the name of any person qualified to vote has been omitted
from, or the name of any person not qualified to vote has been inserted in the
electoral roll or rolls;
(b) on the ground of any non-compliance with this Act or any rule, or of any mistake
in the forms required thereby, or of any error, irregularity or informality on the part
of the officer or officers charged with carrying out this Act or any rules, unless such
non-compliance, mistake, error, irregularity or informality has materially affected the
result of the election. "
17. In the light of the said, the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner was that the entire
foundation of the petition filed by the petitioner was premised on the 19(1)(b). He argues that in
terms of the pleadings as contained and filed by the petitioner, there was a specific allegation with
regard to the number of the votes being polled being different in respect of the two reports and in
fact, there is a third report, which in turn further is differing in terms of the number of polls voted.
He, thus, argues that there was a specific pleading and the evidence in the form of the Government
records itself and thus, the primary burden of pleadings and evidence was discharged by the
petitioner.
18. He draws my attention to the written statement filed by the State Authorities as well as
respondent No.7, wherein none of them have denied the existence of the reports as pleaded and
relied upon in the election petition filed by the petitioner.
19. In the light of the said, prima facie what flows is that there was a specific pleading, no denial in
the written statement and the evidence relied upon were the documents furnished by the Election
Authorities was on record. The law as emphasized by both the counsels and as explained by the
Supreme Court is that the recounting can be done only if there is sufficient material and evidence to
establish any foul play warranting a recounting.
20. In the present case, the pleading was effectively contained in three paragraphs of the election
petition. The evidence relied upon was the evidence furnished by the Government Authorities. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 7
Rashmi Jaiswal vs District Election Officer/District ... on 3 March, 2025
the absence of any denial in the written statement filed either by the State Authorities or by
respondent No.7 and there being no denial that the evidences proposed to be relied upon to carry
charge of irregular counting being either forged, fabricated or non-existent, there was no denial of
the evidence also.
21. It is very well settled that the issues are framed based upon the pleadings and its denial and the
said issues are to be decided based upon the evidence to be led by both the parties. In the present
case, as there was no denial, probably the need for framing of an issue with regard to the pleadings
and documents proposed to be relied upon may not arise. There being no denial of three different
numbers said to be the number of the votes polled, probably there may be no necessity for framing
of an issue to that effect also.
22. In view thereof, it was incumbent upon the District Judge to have decided the application for
recounting based upon the pleadings and the evidence led, to which there is no denial in the written
statement by either of the parties and there being no material to controvert the documents of the
Government Authorities proposed to be relied upon.
23. In view of the said, I have no hesitation in holding that the District Judge has erred in holding
that the issue has to be decided after the pleadings and evidence are led and issues are framed. He
has further erred in holding that granting the application at this stage would amount to a final relief,
which is also contrary to the law as laid down by this Court in the cases of Mohd. Mustafa Vs. UP
Ziladhikari and others (supra) and Smt. Rajesh Vs. State and Others (supra).
24. Thus, on all counts, the impugned order dated 20th January, 2025 cannot be sustained and is
quashed. The matter is remanded to the District Judge to decide the application for recounting
based upon the pleadings and evidence as contained in the election petition and relied upon by the
petitioner by passing a fresh order within a period of four weeks from today.
25. The petition is disposed of in terms of the above.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Ashutosh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97285999/ 8
