Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 October, 2019
Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1
October, 2019
1
Writ Petition No.12986/2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
W.P. No. No.12986/2019
(Revendra Pal Mishra Vs. The State of M.P. and others)
JABALPUR, dated : 01.10.2019
Shri Lavkush Mishra, learned counsel for the
petitioner.
Shri Devendra Gangrade, learned Panel Lawyer for
the respondents/State.
Despite granting opportunity to the respondents/State to file reply, the same has not been filed and
since the issue involved in the present case is already settled, therefore, this petition is being decided
finally.
By the instant petition, the petitioner is assailing the order dated 29.06.2019, whereby he has been
directed to be retired on attaining the age of 60 years.
As per the petitioner, he is holding the post of Supervisor and is working in the Work Charged
Contingency Establishment.
However, in view of the law laid down by this Court in case of Ramesh Prasad Agnihotri Vs. State of
M.P. and others (W.P. No.13115/2019) decided on 06.08.2019, wherein the Court has observed as
under:-
"3. However, the Division Bench of this Court in Review Petition No.587/2017 parties
being State of M.P. Vs. Ramjilal Prajapati while reversing the judgment passed in
Writ Appeal No.308/2016 held that the Time Keeper as well as Supervisor are not the
Class-IV posts but they are Class-III posts as per the schedule appended to M.P.
Irrigation Department Work Charged and Contingency Paid Employees Recruitment
and Conditions of Service Rules, 1977 and, therefore, it is held that their age of
retirement is 60 years. In the present case, the petitioner is holding the post of
Copyist and has been classified and according to view taken by the Division Bench of
this Court in case of Ramjilal Prajapati (supra) and the said case has been followed by
the co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Writ Petition No.10102/2017 and other
connected matters, dismissed the petitions holding that the employees working as
Class-III employees should be retired at the age of 60 years. So far as the Copyist post
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199389165/ 1
Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 October, 2019
is concerned, in the schedule, it also falls under the category of Class-III employee,
therefore, age of retirement of the petitioner is also 60 years. However, from the
reliance placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner in Policy sponsored by the
State of Madhya Pradesh on 07.10.2016, it is clear that the stipulation made in the
said Policy would not determine the age of retirement of the petitioner. Admittedly,
the petitioner was a daily rated employee classified in pursuance to the Policy of the
State Government which also contained that a daily wager if at all is to be regularized,
he would be regularized on Class-IV category and secondly, the said condition has
been inducted taking note of the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Dainik Vetan
Bhogi Karmchari (Sewa Ki Sharte) Niyam, 2013 in which, a procedure is prescribed
for regularization on the vacant post of Class-IV employees. It does not mean that the
petitioner should also be treated to be a Class-IV employee because ultimately he has
to be regularized on Class-IV post. The said Policy contained a clause relating to
vacant post of Class-IV in regular establishment and the procedure to fill up the
same, therefore, that cannot be treated to be a criteria to determine the status and
category of the petitioner.
4. However, the Division Bench of this Court in case of Ramjilal Prajapati (supra) has
not taken note of the notification issued on 31.03.2018 whereby, the earlier age of
superannuation of Class-III employees which was 60 years has been enhanced to 62
years. By the said notification, the State Government has amended the Madhya
Pradesh Shahskiya Sevak (Adhivarshiki-Ayu) Adhiniyam, 1967 (in short the
'Adhiniyam, 1967') and substituted the word '60 years' by '62 years' and as such, the
age of retirement of Class-I to Class-III employees has been enhanced from 60 years
to 62 years. The notification also provides the amendment with regard to extending
the age of superannuation and it be also inserted in the Fundamental Rules and in
place of 60 years, it should be 62 years. The impact of extending the age of
superannuation of the Government employees from 60 years to 62 years and
amendment made in the Fundamental Rules as such, has not been considered by the
Division Bench in the case of Ramjilal Prajapati (supra). The core question that arises
here is that if the Fundamental Rules provide enhancement of age of the Government
servants, the petitioner having status of permanent employee would be considered as
a Government servant or not and the provisions of the Fundamental Rules would be
applicable to the petitioner or not? Undisputedly, if it is found that the provisions of
the Fundamental Rules are applicable to the present petitioner then he is also
entitled to get the benefit of extended age of superannuation which is being provided
to the employees of the State Government in view of the amendment made in the
Adhiniyam, 1967 as well as in the Fundamental Rules. The notification dated
31.03.2018 is quoted hereinbelow:-
MADHYA PRADESH ORDINANCE No.4 OF 2018 THE MADHYA PRADESH
SHASKIYA SEVAK (ADHIVARSHIKI-AYU) SANSHODHAN ADHYADESH, 2018
[First published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette (Extra-ordinary)", dated the 31st
March, 2018.] Promulgated by the Governor in the sixty-ninth year of the Republic of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199389165/ 2
Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 October, 2019
India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Shaskiya Sevak
(Adhivarshiki-Ayu) Adhiniyam, 1967.
WHEREAS, the State Legislature is not in session and the Governor of Madhya
Pradesh is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take
immediate action;
Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 213 of
the Constitution of India, the Governor of Madhya Pradesh is pleased to promulgate
the following Ordinance:-
1. This Ordinance may be called the Short title.
Madhya Pradesh Shaskiya Sevak (Adhivarshiki-Ayu) Sanshodhan Adhyadesh, 2018.
2. During the period of operation of this Madhya Ordinance, the Madhya Pradesh Pradesh Act
Shaskiya Sevak (Adhivarshiki-Ayu) No.29 of 1967 to Adhiniyam, 1967 (No.29 of 1967) be
temporarily (hereinafter referred to as the principal amended. Act), shall have effect subject to the
amendments specified in section 3.
3. In section 2 of principal Act, in rule Amendment of 56 of the Fundamental Rules, in sub-
Fundamental rule (1)- Rule 56 as substituted by
(i) the brackets, figures and letters section 2 of the "(1-a), (1-b)" occurring twice, Madhya shall be
omitted; Pradesh Act
(ii) for the words "sixty years" No.29 of 1967.
occurring twice, the words "sixty two years" shall be substituted.
BHOPAL: ANANDIBEN PATEL
DATED THE 31st March, 2018 Governor,
Madhya Pradesh
The Division Bench of this Court in case of M.L. Kalia Vs. Union of India and others reported in
1979 SCC Online MP 215 : 1979 Lab IC 1166 has laid down that the provisions of Fundamental Rule
56 (A) would be applicable to all the classes of Government servants- temporarily, officiating or
permanent. The relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:-
"In K.R. Tahiliani v. Union of India, Civil Writ No. 1311 of 1975, D/- 23-5-1977 (Delhi)
the learned single Judge while holding that Fundamental Rule 56(j) would not apply
to a case of Government servant who did not belong to Class I or Class II service or
permanently hold such a post, has laid emphasis on the use of the word "IN"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199389165/ 3
Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 October, 2019
appearing in cl. (i) in sub-rule (j) of Fundamental Rule 56. In the opinion of the
learned Judge deciding that case a concept of retirement would be wholly foreign for
a temporary Government servant and, therefore, in his opinion the Fundamental
Rule 56(j) could apply only to a permanent Government servant in Class I or Class II
service. With due respect to the learned Judge, we find ourselves unable to agree with
the view taken. We have already shown above that Fundamental Rule 56(a) would
apply to all classes of Government servant -- temporary, officiating or permanent --
and we see no reason to restrict the scope of Fundamental Rule 56(j) as has been
done by the Delhi High Court. We are of opinion that the sub-rule (j) shall apply to an
officiating or temporary Government servant also holding a Class II Post."
Although, it is clear as per the view taken by the Division Bench in the case of M.L. Kalia (supra) that
the provisions of Rule 56 of the Fundamental Rules are applicable to the Government servants
having status of officiating, temporary and permanent employees. Since the petitioner has acquired
the status of permanent employee as per the notification issued by the State Government on
07.10.2016, he was also entitled to get the benefit as has been provided to the employees of the State
Government. Further, if Rule 2 of the Fundamental Rules is seen that deals with the application of
the Fundamental Rules and it provides as under:-
F.R. 2. Extent of application-(1) The Fundamental Rules apply, subject to the
provisions of rule 3, to all Government servants whose pay is debitable to civil
estimates in India, and to any other class of Government servants in India to which
the Secretary of State in Council may by general or special order declare them to be
applicable. In relation to services under its administrative control, other than
all-India services a local Government may make rules modifying or replacing any of
the Fundamental Rules; provided that-
(a) no such rule shall adversely affect any person who is in Government service at the
time when the Fundamental Rules come into force; and
(b) any such rule which grants any privilege or concession not admissible under the
terms of the Fundamental Rules, or of the Civil Service Regulations as they stand at
the time when the Fundamental Rules are introduced, shall require the sanction of
the Secretary of State in Council. (2) Where the application of any rule in the
Fundamental Rules is expressly or by implication limited by the provisions of any
rule made under section 45-A of the Act, the limitation shall prevail and the rule in
the Fundamental Rules shall be subject to the rule made under section 45-A of the
Act.
Then in Rule 3 of the Fundamental Rules, it is dealt as under:-
F.R. 3. Scope of the Fundamental Rules.- Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly
provided by or under these rules, these rules do not apply to Government servants
whose conditions of service are governed by Army or Marine Regulations.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199389165/ 4
Ravendra Pal Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 October, 2019
The aforesaid Rule 3 is an exclusion clause showing as to whom rules would not be
applicable. Undoubtedly, the category of the petitioner does not fall under the
categories which have been excluded from applicability of the provisions of the
Fundamental Rules.
5. With due respect to the law laid down by the Division Bench in the case of Ramjilal
Prajapati (supra) it is distinguishable in view of the fact and circumstances as quoted
hereinabove, as the scope and applicability of the Fundamental Rules over the
petitioner has not been considered, therefore, I am of the opinion that the petitioner
being a permanent employee though otherwise, falls under the schedule not part of
any Rules introduced by the Department of Water Resources in which, he has been
placed under the category of Class-III employee but even otherwise, he is entitled to
get the benefit of extended age of superannuation i.e. 62 years as has been available
to the Government servants in view of the amendment made in the provisions of
Adhiniyam, 1967 as well as in the Fundamental Rules, therefore, the petition filed by
the petitioner is allowed and the order retiring the petitioner at the age of 60 years is
hereby set aside and the respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to continue
in service till the age of 62 years."
the petitioner is also entitled to get the benefit of enhanced age of superannuation and has to be
retired at the age of 62 years.
Thus, in view of above enunciation of law, it is appropriate to set aside the order impugned dated
29.06.2019 (Annexure-P-1), therefore, the petition is allowed and the order impugned is set aside. It
is directed that the petitioner shall be allowed to perform the duties till the age of 62 years.
Certified copy as per rules.
(SANJAY DWIVEDI) JUDGE ac/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199389165/ 5
