Ravi vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
Ravi vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD ?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29808 Case
:- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 42946 of 2024 Applicant :- Ravi Opposite Party :-
State of U.P. Counsel for Applicant :- Gaurav Srivastav,Rajesh Kumar Srivastava Counsel for
Opposite Party :- Akhilesh Kumar Tiwari,G.A.,Mohd Intesaf Khan Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J
Supplementary affidavit has been filed by the applicant, which is taken on record.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned counsel for informant and learned AGA for the
State-Respondent and perused the record.
This bail application under Section 439 Cr.P.C. has been moved on behalf of accused-applicant,
Ravi, seeking enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 14, under Sections 326, 504, 506 of the Indian
Penal Code, Police Station Dauki, District Agra.
The first information report was lodged against the applicant and two other with allegation that on
26.1.2021 at 10:00 a.m. that the applicant and two other accused persons started abusing
informant's son and beaten badly. When the son of informant opposed them the applicant hit him
with the butt of pistol in his right eye, due to which the son of informant suffered severe injuries.
Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the accused-applicant is innocent and he has been
falsely implicated in this case crime number. It is next submitted that the role assigned to the
applicant that he was having pistol and he beaten the injured with the butt of pistol. Subsequently,
the statement of the injured recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and the version of the FIR was
changed to the effect that the applicant was beaten him with 'danda' and he suffered severe injuries
in his eye. It is next submitted that from the allegation made in the FIR as well as statement of the
injured is varied. All injuries alleged to have been sustained by the injured are simple in nature. He
further submitted that the recovery of wooden stick (danda) was made at the pointing of applicant
from an open place. There is no independent witness of the said recovery and the wooden stick
(danda) recovered from the possession of the applicant does not have blood stains. Lastly, it is
submitted that the applicant is in jail since 23.9.2024. The applicant has no criminal antecedent and
there is no likelihood of his fleeing from course of justice or tampering with evidence in case of
release on bail. Hence, the bail has been prayed for.
Learned counsel for the informant as well as learned AGA has vehemently opposed, but could not
dispute the aforesaid facts.
Considering all those facts and circumstances, the nature of accusations, severity of the punishment
in the case of conviction and nature of supporting evidence, reasonable apprehension of tampering
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61509471/ 1
Ravi vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
with the witness and prima-facie case, but without commenting on merit of case, a case for bail is
made out.
Accordingly, the bail application is allowed.
Let the accused-applicant, Ravi, involved in above mentioned case crime number be released on
bail, on his executing a personal bond and two reliable sureties each, in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned, subject to the following conditions:
1. The applicant will not tamper with the evidence.
2. The applicant will not indulge in any criminal activity.
3. The applicant will not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses and
co-operate in the trial.
4. The applicant will appear regularly on each and every date fixed by the trial court,
unless his personal appearance is exempted through counsel by the court concerned.
In the event of breach of any of the aforesaid conditions, the court below will be at liberty to proceed
to cancel his bail.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Md Faisal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61509471/ 2
