Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21
February, 2017
Author: Subodh Abhyankar
Bench: Subodh Abhyankar
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE MADHYA PRADESH,
JABALPUR, M.P.
DIVISION BENCH: Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.K.Gangele
&
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Subodh Abhyankar
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2094 OF 2010
Gajanand @ Gajju.
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2184 OF 2010
Ravinder Singh.
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2218 OF 2010
Santosh Gupta & Anand Tiwari.
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2283 OF 2010
Santosh Meena.
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri K.S.Rajput, Advocate in Cr.A.No.2094/2010, Shri
Prakash Upadhyay, Advocate in Cr.A.No.2184/2010, Shri
K.S.Rajput and Shri Prakash Upadhyay, Advocates in
Cr.A.No.2218/2010 and Shri M.K.Tripathi, Advocate in
Cr.A.No.2283/2010.
Shri Prakash Gupta, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent/State.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUDGEMENT
(Delivered on this the 21st day of February, 2017) The following judgment of the Court was rendered
by:
Subodh Abhyankar,J:
This judgment shall also govern the disposal of above mentioned criminal appeals, as
all these appeals have arisen out of common judgment of conviction dated
20.09.2010 passed by the Fourth Additional Sessions Judge, District Khandwa, in
S.T.No. 230/2007, whereby the appellants/accused persons have been convicted and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 1
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
sentences as under:
Cr.A.No.2094/2010:
Name of Conviction Fine Default
Sentence
accused u/s (Rs.) clause
RI for
Gajanand @ 302/120-B of
RI for life 1,000/- one
Gajju IPC
year
364/120-B of RI for 10 RI for 6
500/-
IPC years months
300/-
365/120-B of RI for 3 RI for 4
IPC years months
346/120-B of RI for 6
Nil Nil
IPC months
Cr.A.No.2184/2010:
Name of Conviction Fine Default
Sentence
accused u/s (Rs.) clause
RI for
Ravinder 302/120-B of
RI for life 1,000/- one
Singh IPC
year
364/120-B of RI for 10 RI for 6
500/-
IPC years months
300/-
365/120-B of RI for 3 RI for 4
IPC years months
346/120-B of RI for 6
Nil Nil
IPC months
Cr.A.No.2218/2010:
Name of Conviction Fine Default
Sentence
accused u/s (Rs.) clause
Santosh
RI for
Gupta & 1,000/-
302 of IPC RI for life one
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 2
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
Anand each
year
Tiwari
364/120-B of RI for 10 500/- RI for 6
IPC years each months
365/120-B of RI for 3 300/- RI for 4
IPC years each months
346/120-B of RI for 6
Nil Nil
IPC months
RI for one 500/- RI for 3
201/34 of IPC
year each months
Cr.A.No.2283/2010:
Name of Conviction Fine Default
Sentence
accused u/s (Rs.) clause
RI for
Santosh
302 of IPC RI for life 1,000/- one
Meena
year
364/120-B of RI for 10 RI for 6
500/-
IPC years months
365/120-B of RI for 3 RI for 4
300/-
IPC years months
346/120-B of RI for 6
Nil Nil
IPC months
All sentences were directed to run concurrently.
2. In brief, the case of the prosecution is that on 16.08.2007 at around 12'O clock, deceased Gullu @
Ramswaroop was called by his neighbours Ravinder Singh and Amolak Singh to go to Village
Chhanera and when the deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu did not return till the afternoon, his wife
PW/2 Smt. Rekha Prajapati tried to call him on mobile phone but as the same was switched off, she
also called accused Ravinder Singh Saluja on his mobile phone. Accused Ravinder Singh initially
said that he is coming with Gullu but later on said he is not coming with him and since the deceased
did not return by the evening, hence Smt. Rekha Prajapati lodged a complaint Ex.P-2 at 10:00 P.M.
On 16.08.2007.
3. It is further the story of the prosecution that one day prior to 16.08.2007, i.e. on 15.08.2007,
accused Santosh Meena called PW/5 Rajendra Singh who used to drive Trax Gama bearing
registration No.MP-12 T-0347 owned by him and said that his vehicle is required on 16.08.2007. On
16.08.2007 Rajendra Singh met accused Ravinder Singh, Amolak Singh, Balwant Thakur and
deceased Ramswaroop. All of them boarded PW-5-Rajendra Singh's vehicle and reached at Jaiswal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 3
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
Ka Dhaba from there they started for Village Chhanera and reached a country liquor shop near
Sector No.5 at Naya Harsood where accused Sajid also sat in the vehicle and from there they started
for Naya Harsood where they stopped at a Chawl and after around 10 minutes, accused Amolak
Singh, Guddu Chauhan and Ravinder Singh came out from the Chawl, sat in a white Indica car
which was already parked there and left from there whereas accused Balwant Singh and Sajid came
out and sat in the vehicle of PW-5-Rajendra Singh. After ten minutes accused Santosh Meena came
out from the Chawl and told PW-5 Rajendra Singh to reverse the vehicle and park it in front of the
gate and when he did so, accused Santosh Meena opened the back door and pushed deceased
Ramswaroop @ Gullu on the back seat. This witness-PW-5 saw that Ramswaroop @ Gullu's both
hands were tied behind his back/alongside his waist with a rope and accused Santosh brought
something wrapped in a paper and kept it in the vehicle. Accused Anand Tiwari and Santosh Gupta
also sat in the vehicle and when PW-5- Rajendra Singh, asked them as to what they are doing, he
was told to drive the vehicle and mind his own business. Afterwards accused Gajanand @ Gajju who
came on a motorcycle also joined them. In the vehicle, PW-5 Rajendra Singh overheard that accused
persons were asking the deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu as to why their names had been mentioned
in a shoot out case but the deceased kept silent.
4. It is further the case of the prosecution that while driving the vehicle when they reached a dense
forest, near a Pulia (Culvert), PW-5Rajendra Singh was asked to stop the vehicle and accused
Santosh Meena asked him to get out of the vehicle and move a little away as they had to get some
papers signed by deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu. At that time, accused Gajanand @ Gajju came
there on a motorcycle and accused Anand Tiwari told PW-5 Rajendra Singh to fetch some Gutkha,
cigarette etc. and then PW-5 Rajendra Singh and Gajanand @ Gajju left from that place on Gajju's
motorcycle to Sheikhpura. After some time, Santosh Meena called and told him to come towards
Khandwa road when this witness PW-5 reached near his vehicle, he did not find deceased
Ramswaroop @ Gullu and when he asked about his whereabouts, accused Santosh Meena informed
him that they got him signed some documents and left him behind and that he would get home by
evening. Thereafter, all the three accused persons got down from PW-5 Rajendra Singh's vehicle and
when Rajendra Singh left for his home, Gajanand @ Gajju also accompanied him and when PW/5
asked about Ramswaroop @ Gullu, Gajanand @ Gajju informed that Anand Tiwari had told him
that, â(cid:129)(cid:130)Gullu @ Ramswaroop ko upper wali dharani me pahuncha diya hai.â(cid:129)(cid:131) Meaning there by
that he has been done away with.
5. When deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu did not reach his home, a complaint was lodged by Smt.
Rekha Prajapati on 16.08.2007. In the night of 16.08.2007 itself accused Ravinder Singh also lodged
a written complaint, which was registered at Sr. No. 724 in the Daily Register (Roznamcha Sanha),
which is Ex.P-29. On 17.08.2007. An FIR Ex.P/32 was also lodged by accused Gajanand @ Gajju on
17.08.2007 regarding the kidnapping of Ramswaroop @ Gullu against Santosh Meena and Santosh
Gupta under Sections 365 and 342 of the IPC.
6. During the investigation, statement of PW/5-Rajendra Singh was recorded under s.161 as Ex.D/3
and u/s. 164 of Cr.P.C. on 21.08.2007 vide Ex.D/4. During the investigation, prosecution witness
Rekha also submitted letters written by Gullu, which are exhibited as Ex.P-3, 4, 5 and 7 that his life
is in danger and is under threat. During the course of investigation, Station House Officer N.S.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 4
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
Rawat (P.W.9) on 19.08.2007 recovered a dead body from beneath a culvert (Pulia), which was
subsequently identified as of deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu vide Ex.P-11. Initially the charge sheet
was filed against the accused Santosh Meena, Anand Tiwari, Santosh Gupta @ Michael and
Gajanand @ Gajju and accused Ravinder Singh who was subsequently arrested, hence a separate
trial was initiated, which was merged in ST No.230/2007.
7. During the course of investigation accused Nos. 1 Santosh Gupta, 2 Anand Tiwari and 4 Gajanand
@ Gajju were arrested and accused No.3 Santosh Meena was absconding and hence in his absence
charge-sheet was filed under Section 173(8) of the Cr.P.C. and the case was committed in respect of
accused Nos. 1 ,2 and 4. Subsequently, accused Santosh Meena was also arrested, hence a
supplementary charge-sheet was also filed against him before the Second Additional Sessions Judge,
Khandwa, where the case was already pending against accused Nos. 1, 2 and 4 and, thereafter, these
cases were transferred to to Fourth Additional Sessions Judge.
8. Against Ravinder Singh S/o Arjun Singh investigation was kept open under Section 173(8) of
Cr.P.C. and subsequently, the charge-sheet was also submitted against him and after committal the
Session Judge, sent the case to the same judge, where the trial of other accused persons was already
pending and this case was also merged into the case of the other accused persons in ST
No.230/2007 but evidence was recorded de novo.
9. The other accused persons namely Balwant Thakur, Raj Kumar Chouhan, Amolak Singh, Sajid
and Umesh could not be arrested and are still absconding and the impugned judgment has been
passed only against five accused persons.
10. The prosecution has examined as many as eight witnesses in ST No. 230/07 and ten witnesses in
the case of Ravinder Singh. In defence, two witnesses have been examined and some documents
have also been produced. All the accused persons have denied the allegations under Section 313 of
the Cr.P.C.
11. Learned counsel for all the appellants have submitted that there is no direct evidence on record
against the present appellants to connect them with the alleged offence, therefore the learned trial
Court has committed a grave error in convicting them. Under such circumstances, the appellants are
entitled to be acquittal.
12. On the other hand, Shri Prakash Gupta, learned Panel Lawyer appearing on behalf of the
respondent/State supported the impugned judgment mainly contending that the prosecution has
established the guilt of the accused persons/appellants beyond reasonable doubt, hence the
impugned judgment does not call for any interference.
13. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
14. So far as the homicidal death of deceased Ramswaroop is concerned, the same has been proved
by Dr. N.K.Sethiya (PW-6), who had conducted the post-mortem on 19.8.2007. According to this
witness, the body of the deceased was tied with rope. The hands were tied behind his back and legs
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 5
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
of the deceased were also tied and around his neck, rope was tied rolled over for five times. The
cause of death is shown to be asphyxia by strangulation, which was homicidal in nature. The
duration was between 24 to 84 hours. The post-mortem report is Ex.P-18. In the cross examination
this witness has admitted that there was no blister on the body of the deceased. He also admitted
that blister occurred after around 48 hours of the death. It is also admitted by this witness that the
skin of the body was peeled off on account of blisters. An attempt has been made in his cross
examination to suggest that the figure of 84 hours mentioned in the post-mortem report has been
tampered with and it was actually 48 hours instead of 84 hours to which the doctor has categorically
refused.
15. The alleged incident can be said to have taken place in two phases, first phase is confined to the
acts of Ravinder Singh and second phase starts when Ravinder Singh left deceased in the company
of other accused persons viz. the present appellants Santosh Gupta @ Michael, Santosh Meena and
Anand Tiwari, and Gajanand @ Gajju joined them afterwards. We will first discuss the second phase
and then the first phase as it relates to Ravinder Singh who was arrested subsequently and was tried
separately in the same trial by the same court.
16. On consideration of the evidence of other witnesses, as stated by Rekha Prajapati (PW-2), the
wife of deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu, he started from his house in the morning of 16.8.2007, he
was called by accused Ravindra Singh (appellant in Cr.A.No.2184/2010), who had come to his house
with Amolak Singh and took him away. She has stated that at around 2 Oâ(cid:129)(cid:132)clock Ravinder Singh
called her and informed that he would come with Gullu @ Ramswaroop and there is nothing to
worry about and thereafter he informed her that he was speaking from Chhanera and the deceased
has been abducted by Raj Kumar Chouhan and his gang. Although this witness-PW-2 has stated in
her statement u/s.161 of Cr.P.C. exhibited as Ex.D1 and D/8 that Ravinder Singh has given false
assurances that he would come back with Gullu @ Ramswaroop, but there is no specific allegation
made by her in her original complaint Ex.P/2 lodged on 16.8.2006. Rekha Prajapati (PW-2) in her
statement (Ex.D-1& D/8) recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C., has stated that Ravinder Singh had
misled her regarding whereabouts of the deceased, and that Ravinder Singh informed her that the
deceased had been taken by Raj Kumar Chouhan and other accused persons. The deposition of this
witness would be dealt with in detail at a later stage while discussing the case of Ravinder Singh.
This witness has also got recovered the letter (Ex.P-3) issued by the deceased Gullu @ Ramswaroop
to the police wherein he had expressed his apprehension that Raj Kumar Chouhan and other
persons of his gang may attack on him and has also stated in the said letter that Raj Kumar Chouhan
accompanied with Guddu @ Umesh Chouhan, Santosh, Balwant Singh and Santosh @ Michael, who
had also fired upon him on 11.6.2007 for which Crime No.17/2007 was registered under Sections
294, 307, 120-B of IPC and Sections 25/27 of the Arms Act and they may again try to kill him.
Another document got recovered by Rekha Prajapati (PW-2) is a letter along with phone number of
various members of Raj Kumar Chouhanâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s gang. Similarly, other letters (Ex.P-4, P-5 and P-6)
have also been got recovered by PW-2. So far as other accused persons are concerned, she is a
hearsay witness and has named them only because it was so informed by accused Ravinder Singh
and on the basis of the letters of her husband and also on account of the previous animosity between
the deceased Gullu, Raj Kumar Chouhan and other accuse persons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 6
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
17. Manish Kumar (PW-3) happens to be the nephew of the deceased. He also made similar
allegation against appellant Ravinder Singh. This witness has also identified the body of the
deceased Gullu vide Ex.P/9. According to this witness, Ravinder Singh had informed him that Raj
Kumar and other accused persons namely Balwant, Santosh, Michael and Anand Tiwari had taken
away the deceased, but this witness is not an eye-witness and has implicated the other co-accused
persons only on the basis of his earlier knowledge of enmity between Gullu and Raj Kumar as both
their families are living in the same house.
18. Rajendra Singh (PW-5) is the star witness, who was there all along with the accused persons and
the deceased. According to this witness, Santosh Meena called him on 15.8.2007 and then on
16.8.2007 to bring a vehicle near the railway station and thereafter four persons viz. Ravinder Singh
Sardar, Amolak Singh Sardar, Balwant Thakur and Ramswaroop @ Gullu sat inside the vehicle and
thereafter they went to Naya Harsood, Sector No.5, and another person to whom Ravinder Singh
has referred to as Pahalwan also got into the vehicle. Thereafter they went to a Chawl situated at
Sector No.5 and after going into the said Chawl, Amolak Singh, Ravinder Singh and other person
Guddu came out, sat in an Indica Car and drove away by saying that they have to come back. After
these persons left the Chawl, Santosh Meena asked PW-5 to reverse his vehicle and park the same in
front of the room where all of them were sitting. After he parked the vehicle, the back door of his
vehicle was opened and Ramswaroop @ Gullu was pushed by the accused persons inside the vehicle,
Gulluâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s hands were tied with a rope, and other accused persons who also sat in the vehicle were
one Pahalwan, Santosh Meena, Anand Tiwari and Santosh Gupta @ Michael. When this witness
refused to drive the vehicle on the ground that the hands of Ramswaroop @ Gullu were tied, he was
threatened by accused Anand Tiwari who told him to mind his own business and also abused him.
Thereafter they also filled the diesel of Rs.500/- in the vehicle only to proceed to village Dharni.
When this witness protested to go to Dharni, then accused Anand Tiwari, again abused him and told
him that he should be concerned with fair only.
19. Thereafter they went to Malgaon road as directed by accused Santosh Meena and when they
reached near Ashapur Mandir, accused Santosh Meena asked to drive the vehicle slowly because
Gajanand @ Gajju is coming behind on his motorcycle and he was asked to stop the vehicle in the
jungle near the culvert (Puliya) and all of them got down from the vehicle. He also heard accused
persons saying to Gullu why their names have been mentioned in the shoot out (Goli Kand).
Thereafter Gajanand @ Gajju came there on a motorcycle, and Anand Tiwari took him aside, had
some conversation with him and then Gajanand @ Gajju asked this witness PW/5 to come with him
on his motorcycle to Sheikhpura to buy Gutkha etc.. At this juncture, a question was also asked by
the trial Court that whether he had apprehended that anything may happen to Gullu, whose hands
were tied and in reply to the aforesaid question, this witness has clearly answered that Santosh
Meena informed him that nothing would happen to Gullu and they have brought him only to teach a
lesson. When this witness came back to the spot along with Gajanand @ Gajju from motorcycle after
purchasing Gutka, his vehicle was not there and they proceed further. After one-two kms. he
received a call from Santosh Meena and was asked to come towards Khandwa road. After reaching
Khandwa road, he did not find Gullu @ Ramswaroop in the vehicle and when he enquired about
him, then Santosh Meena informed him that they have already left him behind and he would get to
his house at Khirkiya, and when this witness asked for fair of the vehicle, Santosh Meena told him to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 7
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
come to Indore Naka where the same would be paid and thereafter Santosh Meena, Santosh Gupta
@ Michael and Anand Tiwari, the three accused persons got down from his vehicle, but they left
Gajju behind and told him to bring this witness along with him. When this witness-PW-5 reached
Indore Naka, Santosh Meena gave him Rs.500/- and told him that remaining sum of Rs.1500/-
would be paid at his house only and also asked him to drop Gajanand @ Gajju at Chhanera. When
this witness enquired about the whereabouts of Gullu @ Ramswaroop, Gajanand @ Gajju told him
that â(cid:129)(cid:130)vkuan us crk;k gS fd xqYyw mQZ jkeLo:i dks mij okyh /kkj.kh esa igqapk fn;k gSAâ(cid:129)(cid:131) and
thereafter Gajju got down near Sarvoday Colony and he came back to Khirkiya. After coming back to
his house, he narrated the entire story to his father and his father told him that he would lodge a
report tomorrow morning. This witness in para 9 of his deposition, has identified the accused
Santosh Meena, Anand Tiwari and Gajanand @ Gajju by name , although he could not name
Santosh Gupta, but has identified him from amongst other accused persons who mentioned his
name as Santosh S/o Kishanlal Gupta. This witness's vehicle (GAMA) bearing registration No.MP12
T-0347 and its documents were also seized vide Ex.P-16. In the lengthy cross examination of this
witness, he has admitted that on 16th night, 17th and 18th August, 2007 he did not go to the house
of Gullu @ Ramswaroop and he was so afraid that he did not tell this incident to anybody else.
20. PW/5 Rajendra Singhâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. has also been recorded on
21.8.2007. This witness has also admitted that no test identification parade took place of the
accused persons and after the incident he identified the accused persons for the first time in the
court only. A suggestion was also put to him that no such incident had taken place and that nobody
called for his vehicle on 16.8.2007, he has been confronted with his statements given to the police
Ex.D-3 and D/4 u/s.164 of Cr.P.C. The cross- examination of this witness started from 22.7.2008
and completed only on 3.6.2009 i.e. around one year and all the omissions and contradictions as
pointed out in his cross- examination are minor in nature. That apart, he has supported the case of
the prosecution. This witness has also mentioned the name of four accused persons namely Santosh
Meena, Santosh Gupta @ Michael, Gajanand @ Gajju and Anand Tiwari regarding their presence
with Gullu whose hands were tied. His testimony has remained unrebutted that he saw the accused
persons with the deceased whose hands were tied behind back. Merely because PW-5 Rajendra's
statements were also recorded u/s 164 of Cr.P.C. does not mean that his testimony is unreliable.
21. So far as the dock identification by PW-5 of the appellants witnesses for the first time in the
Court is concerned, no infirmity can be said to have occurred if no test identification parade has
been conducted by the police. Witness Rajendra Singh (PW-5) was in the company of the accused
persons for a long time i.e. from the noon till the evening and had ample opportunities to identify
them and to know about them by their names. Rajendra Singh (PW-5) in his examination-in- chief,
has identified Santosh Meena, Anand Tiwari and Gajanand @ Gajju, but he could not identify one of
the accused persons by his name but after he pointed out to one of the accused, he identified himself
as Santosh Gupta. Thus the testimony of this witness is found trustworthy and credible.
22. The honâ(cid:129)(cid:132)ble Apex court in the case of Ashok Debbarma v. State of Tripura, (2014) 4 SCC 747,
while dealing with the dock identification has held thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 8
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
â(cid:129)(cid:130)20. We have gone through the oral evidence of PW 10 and PW 13 and, in our
view, the trial court and the High Court have rightly appreciated their evidence and
the involvement of the appellant in the above incident, including the fact that he had
fired at various people, which led to the killing of relatives of PW 10 and PW 13. We
are of the view that since the accused persons were known to the witnesses and they
were identified by face, the fact that no test identification parade was conducted at
the time of investigation, is of no consequence. The primary object of the test
identification parade is to enable the witnesses to identify the persons involved in the
commission of offence(s) if the offenders are not personally known to the witnesses.
The whole object behind the test identification parade is really to find whether or not
the suspect is the real offender. In Kanta Prashad v. Delhi Admn., this Court stated
that the failure to hold the test identification parade does not make the evidence of
identification at the trial inadmissible. However, the weight to be attached to such
identification would be for the court to decide and it is prudent to hold the test
identification parade with respect to witnesses, who did not know the accused before
the occurrence. Reference may also be made to the judgment of this Court in
Harbajan Singh v. State of J&K, Jadunath Singh v. State of U.P. and George v. State
of Kerala.
21. The abovementioned decisions would indicate that while the evidence of
identification of an accused at a trial is admissible as substantive piece of evidence, it
would depend on the facts of a given case as to whether or not such a piece of
evidence can be relied upon as the sole basis of conviction of an accused. In
Malkhansingh v.
State of M.P., this Court clarified that the test identification parade is not a substantive piece of
evidence and to hold the test identification parade is not even the rule of law but a rule of prudence
so that the identification of the accused inside the courtroom at the trial can be safely relied upon.
We are of the view that if the witnesses are trustworthy and reliable, the mere fact that no test
identification parade was conducted, itself, would not be a reason for discarding the evidence of
those witnesses. This Court in Dana Yadav has examined the points on the law at great length and
held that: (SCC p. 316, para 38)
21. â(cid:129)(cid:130)(c) The evidence of identification of an accused in court by a witness is substantive evidence
whereas that of identification in test identification parade is, though a primary evidence but not
substantive one, and the same can be used only to corroborate the identification of the accused by a
witness in court.â(cid:129)(cid:131) So far as the present case is concerned, PW 10 and PW 13 have identified the
accused in open court which is the substantive piece of evidence and such identification by the
eyewitnesses has not been shaken or contradicted. The trial court examined in detail the oral
evidence tendered by those witnesses, which was accepted by the High Court and we find no error in
the appreciation of the evidence tendered by those witnesses.â(cid:129)(cid:131) (Emphasis supplied) It is rather
surprising that this witness-PW-5, despite being independent has stood by his words which is a rare
phenomenon in the present days. His testimony is, what can be described as of sterling nature and
cannot be doubted for once.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 9
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
23. Ramesh Jadhav (PW-7) is the photographer, who had taken the photographs (Ex.P-19 to P-22)
of the deceased on the spot. From these photographs, it can clearly be discerned that the
deceasedâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s hands were tied behind his back and as narrated by Rajendra Singh (PW-5) with a
long rope, which is also found by Dr.N.K. Sethiya (PW-6) that deceasedâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s hands were tied with
rope was also tied around his neck.
24. A.S.I. K.S. Tomar (PW-8) has proved the complaint Ex.P/2 lodged by Rekha Prajapati and also
made by appellant Ravinder Singh, which is Ex.P-28. N.S.Rawat (PW-9) is the Station House
Officer, Khaknar who had recovered the body of the deceased from beneth a Pulia (Culvert).
25. A.S.I. Suresh Yadav (PW-10) is the investigation officer, who has proved that on 17.8.2007
accused Gajanand S/o Dayaram Mali also reported to the police regarding abduction of deceased
Ramswaroop @ Gullu by Santosh Meena and Michael @ Santosh Gupta. On the basis of which an
FIRâ(cid:129)(cid:133)Ex.P/32 vide Crime No.220/2007 was registered under Sections 365, 342 of IPC. This
witness has also been confronted with the infirmities of the statements given by Rajendra (PW-5)
but nothing substantive could be extracted from his lengthy cross examination which may be helpful
to any of the appellants.
26. In their defence, accused persons have examined Shri D.R.Kanungo, retired DSP who has
proved Ex.D/5A, D/6A and D/7A. These documents are an attempt to suggest that there was no
grievance of deceased Gullu against the present appellants. For example Ex.D/5A is an application
submitted by deceased Gullu to the SHO, P.S. Chipabad wherein Gullu has stated that Raj Kumar
has nothing to do with an assault on him he has not lodged any report against Umesh, Balwant,
Santosh and Michael and the FIR lodged in this behalf is false. Other documents are also of the
same nature. But, the aforesaid documents are of no help to the appellants because there is an
eyewitness account of their deeds in the present case. In this respect, it is also pertinent to mention
here that appellant Gajanand @ Gajju, despite having lodged the FIR has not taken any specific plea
regarding his defence.
27. From the aforesaid discussion, the eyewitness account of PW/5 Rajendra Singh is more than
sufficient to bring home the offence against the accused Santosh Meena, Santosh Gupta @ Michael,
Anand Tiwari and Gajju @ Gajanand Mali. In the considered opinion of this court, the chain of
circumstances leading to the death of deceased Gullu @ Ramswarup is complete by the following
events:-
(a) Deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu, with his hands tied behind his back by a rope
and was sitting inside the vehicle of PW-5 Rajendra Singh along with accused
Santosh Meena, Santosh Gupta @ Michael, Anand Tiwari.
(b) Accused Gajanand @ Gajju also accompanied these three accused persons for
some time as their aide and was present at the time when deceased Gullu @
Ramswaroop was very much alive, with his hands tied behind his back by a rope was
sitting inside the aforesaid vehicle, he also took PW/5 Rajendra Singh on his
motorcycle away from the other accused persons leaving the deceased Gullu alone in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 10
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
the company of other accused persons in order to facilitate the crime.
Otherwise there was no reason for Gajanand @ Gajju to take Rajendra Singh away from the spot.
His lodging of FIR Ex.P/32 on 17.08.2007 against Santosh Meena and Santosh Gupta @ Michael
also indicates his efforts to create a false evidence to show his innocence, which only leads credence
to the story of conspiracy in which he was involved with other accused persons.
(c) Soon after his disappearance on 16.08.2007 in the presence of accused Santosh Meena, Santosh
Gupta @ Michael, Anand Tiwari, deceased Gullu @ Ramswarup was not heard of for two days and
his body was recovered on 19.08.2007 with his hands tied behind his back. These circumstances as
aforesaid, lead to the hypothesis consistent only with the guilt of the accused persons and nothing
else. The Honâ(cid:129)(cid:132)ble Apex Court in the case of Madhu v. State of Karnataka, (2014) 12 SCC 419,
observed as under:
â(cid:129)(cid:130)13. This Court has dealt with the case of circumstantial evidence time and again.
It has consistently been held that a conviction can be based solely on circumstantial
evidence. The prosecution case must stand or fall on its own legs and cannot derive
any strength from the weakness of the defence put up by the accused. However, a
false defence may be called into aid only to lend assurance to the court where various
links in the chain of circumstantial evidence are complete in themselves. The
circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
established. The facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of
the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable or point to any
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty. The circumstances should be of a
conclusive nature and tendency. The evidence produced by the prosecution should be
of such a nature that it makes the conviction of the accused sustainable. (Vide Sharad
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, State of U.P. v. Satish and Paramjeet
Singh v. State of Uttarakhand.)â(cid:129)(cid:131) (emphasis supplied)
28. Now coming to the first phase of the case, which relates to the involvement of accused Ravinder
Singh till he was last seen by the PW/5 Rajendra Singh outside the Chawl at Sector-5 of New
Harsood. After Ravinder Singhâ(cid:129)(cid:132)s case was merged into the present case, almost all the witnesses
have been re-examined. In the statements given by the witnesses in the case of Ravinder Singh, who
was subsequently arrested, the statement of Rekha Prajapati, examined as PW/3 in these
proceedings is important wherein she has been declared hostile and has not supported her earlier
version that Ravinder was trying to mislead her when she spoke to him on 16.8.2007 on phone. She
has also stated that appellant Ravinder Singh did not mislead her, and on the contrary she has
stated that he is the person who informed her about the incident of abduction of her husband Gullu.
She, in her subsequent statement so far as accused Ravinder Singh is concerned, has stated that
Ravinder Singh is her well-wisher and helper. She has also stated that Ravinder informed her that
Rajkumar had sent him to get the Stamps and when he again reached the place, nobody was there.
Thus by her statement, it is clearly established that this witness has been won over by accused
Ravinder Singh and cannot be relied upon.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 11
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
29. Similarly, Manish Kumar (PW/4) in these proceedings, in his supplementary statement has been
declared hostile and has not supported the case of the prosecution so far as it relates to accused
Ravinder Singh by saying that Ravinder Singh is the family member and he always available for any
help.
30. So far as PW-6 Rajendra Singh is concerned, who is examined as PW-5 in the connected trial,
his testimony has remained intact that initially Ravinder Singh Sardar, Amolak Singh Sardar,
Balwant Thakur, Gullu @ Ramswaroop sat in his vehicle and when they reached at Chhanera at
Sector No.5, they went into a room and when Ravinder Singh, Amolak Singh and other person came
out from the room, they sat in the Indica Car and left the spot by saying that they have to come back.
In his cross examination he has admitted that this statement that Ravinder Singh also said that they
have to come back is missing from his 161 statement although he had informed the police regarding
the same. This witness is not declared hostile and his testimony is binding on the prosecution.
Although, on behalf of Ravinder Singh no suggestion has been put to any of the witnesses that he
had gone to take the Stamp and when he came back, nobody was there at the Chawl but still, it is
established that after Ravinder Singh left from the spot, Gullu was tied with rope and was taken in
Trax. In such circumstances, the conduct of Ravinder Singh revolves around the realm of
suspension only and it cannot be said with any certainty that Ravinder Singh knew all along that
Gullu @ Ramswaroop is about to be murdered and he genuinely may have taken deceased Gullu @
Ramswaroop to the Chawl in order to discuss the matter with Raj Kumar Chouhan and other
accused persons. It is a settled position of law that mere suspicion however strong, cannot be the
substitute for proof and in such circumstances, it would be unsafe to convict a person.
31. So far as the Cr.A. No.2184/2010 of appellant Ravinder Singh is concerned, even assuming the
testimony of these eye-witness PW/6 Rajendra to be true, as discussed earlier, at the most it can be
said that the deceased had gone along with this accused Ravinder Singh to discuss the matter with
Raj Kumar Chouhan and thereafter this accused appellant/Ravinder Singh along with Amolak Singh
left the spot soon from Sector No.5 at Khairkheda and after they left the deceased who was not tied
by then in the company of other accused persons, he got missing for two days and was found dead. It
is pertinent to mention here that till this accused was present on the spot along with other accused
persons, the hands of the deceased were not tied and soon after he left the spot as narrated by
witness Rajendra Singh (PW-5) in great details, that when deceased Ramswaroop @ Gullu came out
from the room, his hands were tied and other accused persons also accompanied him. Under such
circumstances, when accused Ravinder Singh who had also lodged a complaint in the same night
narrating the same incident, which is Ex.P-28 proved by ASI Tomar (PW-8), he is entitled to the
benefit of doubt. Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that his involvement in the offence is
proved beyond reasonable doubt and that he was also involved in the conspiracy to commit the
murder of the deceased Gullu @ Ramswaroop. In fact, the complaint Ex.P/28 lodged by appellant
Ravinder Singh also tallies with the statement given by Rajendra Singh (PW-5), and it cannot be
said with certainty that appellant Ravinder Singh had conspired with other accused persons or there
was any meeting of minds with them to commit the murder of the deceased Gullu @ Ramswaroop.
32. Thus, the finding of the learned judge of the trial court so far as it relates to the appellant
Ravinder Singh suffers from proper appreciation of evidence on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 12
Ravindra Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 February, 2017
33. In their accused statements under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. all the accused persons have denied all
the allegations and have stated that they have been falsely implicated. Thus, no specific defence has
been set up by any of the accused persons.
34. On the above mentioned depositions and the documents available on record, this court comes to
the conclusions that:
(a) The presence of the accused persons Santosh Meena, Santosh Gupta @ Michael,
Anand Tiwari and Gajanand @ Gajju have been established beyond reasonable
doubt. Under these circumstances, these appellants have failed to make out any case
to warrant any interference by this Court in the findings recorded by the learned
court below, hence their conviction and sentence as awarded by the learned Judge of
the trial court is maintained and so far as the conviction of appellant Ravinder Singh
is concerned, the same deserves to be set aside after giving him the benefit of doubt.
35. In the result, Cr.A. No.2094/2010 filed by appellant Gajanand @ Gajju, Cr.A.No.2218/2010 filed
by appellant Santosh Gupta, Anand Tiwari and Cr.A.No.2283/2010 filed by appellant Santosh
Meena being devoid of merits are liable to be dismissed and accordingly the same are hereby
dismissed, whereas Criminal Appeal No.2184/2010 filed by appellant Ravinder Singh is allowed, the
impugned judgment, so far as it relates to the appellant Ravinder Singh is set aside and the
appellant is acquitted.
36. At present appellant Ravinder Singh of Cr.A. No.2184/2010 is in jail, therefore he be released
forthwith if not required in any other case by issuing a release warrant without any delay.
(S.K. Gangele) (Subodh Abhyankar) Judge Judge 21/2/2017 21/2/2017
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/23395726/ 13
