Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.A.No.119 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 10.12.2021
CORAM
THE HON'BLE Ms. JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.A.No.119 of 2015
Ravi ... Petitioner/Accused No.1
Vs.
State represented by
The Inspector of Police,
Kelemangalam Police Station,
Kelemangalam,
Krishnagiri District.
(Crime No.176 of 2011) ... Respondent/Complainant
Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374 (2) of Cr.P.C. against the
judgement passed by the Sessions Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Krishnagiri,
dated 30.01.2015 in SC.No.92 of 2012 for conviction for the offences under
Sections 498(A) and 304(B) I.P.C and under Sections 4 of Dowry Prohibition
Act.
For Petitioner : Mr.C.R.Malarvannan
For Respondent : Mr.A.Gopinath
Government Advocate (Crl.Side)
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/18
(cid:12) Crl.A.No.119 of 2015
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 1
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
JUDGMENT
This Criminal Appeal has been preferred challenging the judgement of the Sessions Judge, Fast
Track Mahila Court, Krishnagiri, dated 30.01.2015 passed in SC.No.92 of 2012.
2. The first accused/petitioner is the husband of the deceased Nagamani. The second and third
accused are the parents of the first accused.
3. The case of the prosecution is that the deceased was subjected to a continuous mental and
physical harassment due to demand of dowry; on 26.07.2011 at about 6.30 am, the deceased called
her parents and told that it is not possible for her to live with the first accused at his house; after a
short while, the deceased hanged her son Santhosh and after he died, she also committed suicide by
hanging.
4. On the complaint given by P.W.1 – Ganesh, brother of the deceased on 26.07.2011 at 11.45 pm,
P.W.8 – Special Sub-Inspector, registered a case in Crime No.176 of 2011 of Kelemangalam Police
Station under Section 174 Cr.P.C., for doubtful death and prepared the F.I.R. (Ex.P5); thereafter,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis P.W.11 – Deputy Superintendent of Police, took up the case for
investigation, went to the place of occurrence, prepared observation Mahazar and rough sketch in
the presence of the witnesses and further, examined the witnesses and recorded their statements;
since his enquiry revealed that the deceased had committed suicide after seven years of marriage, he
prepared an alteration report by altering the charges under Sections 174 Cr.P.C into 304(B), 306,
498(A) IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act and sent the alteration report (Ex.P8) to Court;
he arrested the accused on the same day i.e. on 27.07.2011 and sent him to judicial custody; on
getting the intimation from Police, P.W.9 – RDO went to Government hospital (where the body of
the deceased was kept) and conducted the inquest and prepared the inquest report (Ex.P6); in his
inquest report, he had stated that the deceased had died due to dowry harassment.
5. P.W.6 - Doctor Anbarasu conducted post-mortem on the body of the deceased and given his
post-mortem report (Exs.P2 & P3); in his post-mortem report, he has stated that both the deceased
have died due to haltering. He noticed the following external injuries on the body of the deceased
and given his final opinion as under:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis A male child body lies on its back with all four
limbs extended. External Injuries.
Ligature mark 22 cms x ½ cms starting from 3 cms below the middle of mandibular
region encircling the nape of neck upto (Lt) angle of Mandible, another ligature mark
5 cms x ½ cm seen below the symphysis menmenti, c/s. - white patchment like in
appearance.
Death would have occurred about 14 to 18 hours prior to Autopsy.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 2
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
A female body lies on its back with all four limbs extended. External Injuries:
Ligature mark 26 cms x 2 cms storing from right mastoid process encircling the neck
above the thyroid cartilage ending on nape of neck. Knot mark seen over the nape of
neck c/s whitish pachment like appearance Death would have occurred about 14 to 18
hours prior to Autopsy.
6. The viscera of the deceased were also sent for chemical examination and in the chemical
examination, no poison was detected; after getting the report, P.W.12 – Investigation Officer
Suhashini continued the investigation and after examining the doctor who conducted the
post-mortem and the RDO https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis who conducted the inquest and got all
the relevant certificates; after completing the investigation, she filed a charge sheet under Sections
498(A), 304(B) IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act.
7. After the case was taken on file and after complying all legal mandates, the learned trial Judge
framed the charges against the accused under Sections 498(A) & 304(B )IPC and Section 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act and questioned them. Since the accused pleaded innocence and claimed to be tried,
the trial was conducted.
8. During the course of the trial, on the side of the prosecution, 12 witnesses were examined as P.W.1
to P.W.12 and 8 documents were marked as Exs.P1 to P8. M.O.1 and M.O.2 series were marked. On
the side of the defence, no witness was examined and Ex.D1 alone was marked.
9. After concluding the trial and on considering all the materials available on record, the learned
trial Judge found the accused guilty for the offences under Sections 498A, 304(B) IPC and Section 4
of Dowry Prohibition Act and convicted and sentenced them to undergo the following punishment:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.No. Accused Provisions under which Sentence
convicted
1. A1 498(A) IPC 3 years Rigorous Imprisonment and a fine of Rs.10,000/-
304(B) IPC 7 years Rigorous Imprisonment
and a fine of Rs.10,000/-
4 of Dowry Prohibition Act 1 year simple imprisonment
In default of payment of fine 6
months Simple Imprisonment.
2. A3 is acquitted under Section 235(i) Cr.P.C.
All the sentence has to run concurrently.
10. The second accused died during the pendency of the case and the third accused
was acquitted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 3
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
11. Aggrieved over the above judgement, the first accused has preferred this Criminal
Appeal.
12. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant/first accused and the learned
Government Advocate (Crl. Side) appearing for the respondent State.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
13. The learned counsel for the appellant/first accused submitted that the materials available on
record does not disclose any demand for dowry and the learned trial Judge had omitted to note this
material aspect. It is further submitted that one of the witnesses has stated that the above said
quarrel between the deceased Nagamani and the first accused was with regard to allowing their 1 ½
years old child carelessly to road; P.W.1, the brother of the deceased Nagamani also deposed
evidence by stating that the deceased Nagamani and the first accused were living peacefully for one
year from the date of marriage; the first accused was amenable to the desires of the deceased and he
even set up a separate family by taking a separate house; these aspects were not properly dealt by
the learned trial Judge and hence, the judgement has to be set aside.
14. The learned Government Advocate submitted that the occurrence had taken place within 7 years
of marriage and there was a demand of dowry by way of demanding a land to be settled in his
favour.
15. Point for consideration:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Whether the conviction and sentence of the
accused for the offence under Sections 498 A, 304 B of IPC and 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act by the learned Sessions Judge based on the materials available on
record is fair and proper?
16. Whenever a person is charged for the offence under Section 304(B), a presumption has to be
taken against the accused as per Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act. In order to draw such a
presumption in favour of the prosecution, it is obligatory on the part of the prosecution to prove
certain facts as seen in Section 113B. For better appreciation, Section 113B of the Indian Evidence
Act is extracted as under:-
“113B. Presumption as to dowry death. ––-When the question is whether a person
has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her
death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for,
or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such
person had caused the dowry death.”
17. During the course of the arguments, the learned counsel for the appellant relied on the decision
reported in Manu/SC/0243/2013 [Bakshish Ram and Ors. Vs. State of Punjab] and submitted that
before drawing the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis presumption, it should be proved that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 4
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment before her death. In the said judgement it is held as
under:-
12 . We have already noted Section 304B Indian Penal Code and its essential
ingredients. Section 113B of the Evidence Act is also relevant for the case in hand.
Both Sections 304B and 113B of the Evidence Act were inserted by Dowry Prohibition
(Amendment) Act 43 of 1986 with a view to compact the increasing menace of dowry
deaths. Section 113B of the Evidence Act reads as under:
113B. Presumption as to dowry death.- When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person
had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) As per the
definition of "dowry death" in Section 304B Indian Penal Code and the wording in
the presumptive Section 113B of the Evidence Act, one of the essential ingredients
amongst others, in both the provisions is that the woman concerned must have been
'soon before her death' subjected to cruelty or harassment "for or in connection with
the demand for dowry". While considering these provisions, this Court in M.
Srinivasulu v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/7892/2007 : (2007) 12 SCC 443 has observed
thus:
... The presumption shall be raised only on proof of the following essentials:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (1) The question before the court must be whether
the accused has committed the dowry death of a woman. (This means that the
presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence under
Section 304-B Indian Penal Code.) (2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or
harassment by her husband or his relatives.
(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with any demand for dowry.
(4) Such cruelty or harassment was soon before her death.
18. In the case in hand, there is no disagreement on the point that the marriage between the
deceased and the first accused had taken place within seven years from the date of occurrence.
However, it has be proved before the Court that the deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment
by the first accused or in connection with the demand of dowry and such cruelty or harassment
should have been caused soon before the death of the deceased.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 5
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
19. The defacto complainant, who was examined as P.W.1, has stated in his evidence that the
deceased and the first accused were living peacefully for one year after marriage and thereafter, they
lived as a separate family. That would show that immediately after marriage, they lived as a joint
family and as https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis per the wishes of the deceased, the first accused had
set up a nuclear family. The couples were blessed with a child also. There are allegations against the
accused that he was in a habit of demanding dowry in the form of land and jewels. It is seen from
the evidence of P.W.1 that before 15 days of the occurrence, the couple had been to the mother's
place of the deceased for celebrating a temple festival; on the day of occurrence i.e., on 26.07.2011 at
about 6 pm, P.W.1 is said to have received a call from his sister that he should come immediately
and take her back; however, P.W.1 seem to have replied that he had some field work and he could
only come at about 4 pm in the evening. At about 6 pm, he received a call from the neighbours of the
deceased that she died due to hanging.
20. In the evidence of P.W.1, he has stated that due to continual dowry demand made by the first
accused, they convened Panchayat and convinced him each time. P.W.4 – Gopal Reddy, who was
examined as a Panchayatadar has stated that on coming to know about the harassment given to the
deceased, he held a Panchayat along with the other villagers and convinced the accused but his
evidence does not reveal the exact/approximate date and time when the said Panchayat was held;
his evidence does not disclose the names of other https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Panchayatadars,
who were present during the Panchayats. However, the cross- examination of P.W.1 would reveal
that one Seenan also participated in the Panchayat but the said Seenan has not been examined.
21. It is curious to note from the evidence of P.W.1 that only according to the wishes of the deceased,
the first accused agreed to set a separate family by settling her in a separate house. Since she wished
to shift to a bigger house, he got back the advance amount of his old house and found a bigger one.
When it was suggested to P.W.1 that the deceased was in a habit of coming to his house by
quarrelling with her husband, P.W.1 denied. However, he has stated that his sister (deceased) used
to come along with her husband and during that time, the husband would tell P.W.1 that his sister
should be properly advised not to fetch frequent problems in the family.
22. The above evidence of P.W.1 would reveal that the life between the deceased and the accused
was near normal and even the quarrels between them were also like quarrels that would usually
come between the couples. And that is the reason why the first accused had requested P.W.1 to
advise his sister. One further thing to be noted in the evidence of P.W.1 is that on the day of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis occurrence when the deceased called him, he did not rush to her
house immediately to bring her back; he convinced her that he would come at 4'o clock as he had
some other work. Had there been some serious consequences of the demand for dowry that was
alleged to have been made on the day of occurrence, P.W.1 would have felt it badly and immediately
rushed to take her back to his house. But P.W.1 had convinced his sister in a normal manner.
23. But one strange thing which is not understandable is even if it is accepted for the sake of
argument that there was dowry demand, I find no convincing reason as to why the deceased went to
the edge of taking the cruellest decision of killing her own 1 ½ years old child. Normally, when the
woman is subjected to harassment due to dowry demand, she would not take such extreme steps of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 6
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
killing the child before killing herself. This strange episode has got some relevance to the statement
of P.W.7 before the RDO. In the statement before the RDO, it appears that P.W.7 has stated that on
the previous day of the occurrence, there was a quarrel between the couples in connection with
letting their baby to road. The statement of P.W.7 to RDO, would also reveal that there was a quarrel
between the couples before six months because of some family reasons.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
24. P.W.2, father of the deceased – Nagamani has also stated that before 15 days of the occurrence,
the deceased had been to the native place with her husband for a temple festival; on the day of
occurrence, at about 6 am, he called her son and told him that she was subjected to harassment by
all the three accused by demanding dowry. However, none of the witnesses who are residing nearby
to the house of the deceased had been examined to state that the parents of the first accused was
also present at the place of occurrence during the relevant time. P.W.2, the father of the deceased
has also stated in his evidence that the deceased and the first accused were living in a separate
family as she refused to live in the village with her in-laws. He has further stated that his daughter
Nagamani was having a tendency to get angry even for trivial issues.
25. With the above evidence of the prosecution witnesses, it is difficult to conclude that the deceased
was subjected to the dowry harassment soon before her death. P.W.3 has given her submission
during her cross-examination that when she was inquired by the RDO, she has not stated that the
deceased was physically harassed due to the demands of jewels, money or land. P.W.3 being
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the mother of the deceased, had there been a demand for dowry,
she would have been the first person who knew about the same. But she did not tell before the RDO
that there was a demand for dowry and the deceased Nagamani was subjected to such harassments
right from her marriage.
26. It is relevant to note that the deceased and the first accused were living a happy life without any
problems between themselves. None of the witnesses has spoken about any of the events that had
immediately proceeded the occurrence. Excepting the statement of P.W.1 that there was a quarrel
between the couple in connection with the child. The extreme decision taken by the deceased
Nagamani to hang her 1 ½ years old son would also show that she was in an extreme anger, apart
from frustration. So the evidence of P.W.2, who has stated that the deceased was very emotional and
she would tend to get angry even for trivial issues assumes relevance. P.W.9 RDO who conducted
the inquest has also stated in his evidence that the accused himself has given the statement before
him by stating that only because he scolded Nagamani for not caring the child properly, they had a
quarrel between themselves. But strangely RDO did not enquire into this aspect, despite he believed
that https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis whatever the accused stated is true and his evidence on this
aspect are extracted as under:-
1k; njjp vd;dplk; thf;FK:yk; bfhLj;jnghJ jd;Dila FHe;ij nuhl;oy; bry;tJ bjhlh;ghf mjid
rhpahf ghh;ff ; tpy;iy vd;gjw;fhf jpl;oajhf thf;FK:yk;
bfhLj;Js;shh; vd;why; rhp/ mth; Twpa tpgu';fs; gw;wp
tprhuiz bra;atpy;iy/ mth; TwpaJ cz;ik vd;Wjhd;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 7
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
ehd;; ek;gpndd;.
27. The very object of inquesting the Review Officer like RDO is to cull out the truth
behind the death of the deceased, wherever the death of a woman had occurred
within 7 years of marriage due to suicide. So it is obligatory on the part of the RDO to
explore the facts and circumstances of her death by enquiring the witnesses and give
a detailed report as to whether the dowry demand was a cause for her death. But
P.W.9 did not conduct the enquiry in all seriousness despite he stated that there is
some truth in the statement of the first accused before him. Even during the chief
examination also the first accused had stated that they happened to quarrel only
because of the child was led to the road. But the learned trial Judge failed to notice all
these essential aspects.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
28. Since the materials on record did not prove that the deceased was subjected to cruelty or
harassment soon before her death in connection with any demand for dowry, the prosecution is not
entitled to get the initial presumption under Section 113B. In the absence of initial presumption, it is
for the prosecution to prove beyond reasonable doubts that the death of the deceased had occurred
as stated by the prosecution.
29. It is seen from the evidence of the father and the brother of the deceased herself that they did
not take it all seriousness when she called them in the morning and asked them to take her back.
Had the deceased subjected to cruelty, they would have taken it very seriously and gone to her house
immediately. Since the deceased killed herself and her 1 ½ years old son, it can be reliably presumed
that she was a very emotional woman who might loose her temper even for small irritation. In the
said backdrop of facts, I feel there are reliable materials available on record to give benefit of doubt
to the accused. Since the learned trial Judge omitted to appreciate the evidence in a right
perspective, I feel that the judgement is liable to be set aside. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
R.N.MANJULA.,J.
Sni In the result, this Criminal Appeal is allowed and the judgement of the learned Sessions Judge,
Fast Track Mahila Court, Krishnagiri, dated 30.01.2015 in SC.No.92 of 2012 is set aside.
10.12.2021 Speaking/Non-speaking Index : Yes/No Sni To
1.The Sessions Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Krishnagiri District.
2.District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Denkanikottai.
3.Central Prison, Vellore.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 8
Ravi vs State Represented By on 10 December, 2021
4.The Inspector of Police, Kelemangalam Police Station, Kelemangalam, Krishnagiri District.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78914011/ 9
