Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September,
2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Case:-B.A. No. 359/2021
CrlM Nos. 188/2022, 2289/2021 &
1110/2023
c/w
CRM(M) No. 706/2021
CrlM No. 2062/2021
CRM(M) No. 564/2022
CrlM Nos. 1143/2022 & 1489/2022
Reserved on: 25.09.2023
Pronounced on: 29.09.2023
B.A. No. 359/2021,
CrlM Nos. 188/2022, 2289/2021 &
1110/2023
1. Razak Hussain, Age 25 years, .....Petitioner(s)
S/O Bilal Hussain.
2. Bilal Hussain, Age 44 years,
S/O Noor Hussain.
3. Surayya Bibi, Age 41 years,
W/O Bilal Hussain.
4. Waseem Akram, Age 22 years,
S/O Bilal Hussain.
5. Sahil Chaudhary, Age 18 years,
S/O Mohd. Yaqub
All residents of Meen Sarkar, Kartholi,
Bari Brahmana, I/Complex, Jammu.
Through :- Mr. G.S. Thakur, Advocate &
Mr. Satyajeet, Advocate.
v/s
1. UT of J&K Through SHO, .....Respondent(s)
Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu.
2. Asifa Bano, Age 23 years,
D/O Sh. Abdul Hanief,
W/O Razak Hussain, R/O Village
Raika, Narwal Bala, Jammu.
Through :- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG for R-1.
Ms. Deepika Pushkar Nath, Advocate &
Mr. Mohd. Arshad Chowdhary, Adv for
R-2.
2 B.A. No. 359/2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 1
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
CRM(M) No. 706/2021
CrlM No. 2062/2021
1. Razak Hussain, Age 25 years, .....Petitioner(s)
S/O Bilal Hussain.
2. Bilal Hussain, Age 44 years,
S/O Noor Hussain.
3. Surayya Bibi, Age 41 years,
W/O Bilal Hussain.
4. Waseem Akram, Age 22 years,
S/O Bilal Hussain.
5. Sahil Chaudhary, Age 18 years,
S/O Mohd. Yaqub.
All residents of Meen Sarkar, Kartholi,
Bari Brahmana, I/Complex, Jammu.
Through:- Mr. G.S. Thakur, Advocate &
Mr. Satyajeet, Advocate.
1. UT of J&K Through Commissioner Secretary .....Respondent(s)
Home, Civil Secretariat, Srinagar/Jammu.
2. Senior Superintendent of Police, Jammu.
3. SHO, Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu.
4. Asifa Bano, Age, 23 years,
D/O Sh. Abdul Hanief,
W/O Razak Hussain, R/O Village
Raika, Narwal Bala, Jammu.
Through:- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG for
R-1 to 3.
Ms. Deepika Pushkar Nath, Adv.&
Mr. Mohd. Arshad Chowdhary,Adv.
for R-4.
CRM(M) No. 564/2021
CrlM Nos. 1143/2022 & 1489/2022
Asifa Bano, Age, 23 years,
D/O Sh. Abdul Hanief,
W/O Razak Hussain, R/O Village
Raika, Narwal Bala, Jammu.
Through:- Ms. Deepika Pushkar Nath, Adv. &
Mr. Mohd. Arshad Chowdhary, Adv.
3 B.A. No. 359/2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 2
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
1. UT of J&K Through its Principal Secretary .....Respondent(s)
(Home), Civil Secretariat, Jammu/Srinagar.
2. Director General of Police, J&K,
Police Headquarters, Gulshan Ground,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu.
3. Inspector General of Police, Jammu Zone,
Jammu.
4. Senior Superintendent of Police, Jammu.
5. SHO, Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu.
Through:- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioners through the medium of this bail application filed under Section 438 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure seeks bail in anticipation of their arrest in case FIR No. 351/2021 registered at
Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu at the instance of the respondent No. 2 (wife of the petitioner No.
1) for commission of offences punishable under Sections 354, 342, 498, 498-A, 504 & 506 IPC,
asserting therein that the marriage of petitioner No. 1 was solemnized on 23.10.2020 and after
performance of the rituals, the respondent No. 2-wife of the petitioner No. 1 joined his company at
her matrimonial house; that the marriage between them was dowryless except some gift items like
fridge, A.C, washing machine, furniture and utensils; that the father of the respondent No. 2, who is
a superstitious person, forced the petitioners to take her to a tantrik at Sunjwan, Jammu and when
she was taken there, she and her sister began to create a drama and the father of his wife abused and
insulted the petitioners publically; that in April, 2021, the wife(cid:128)s father told the petitioners to take
her to Kishtwar for offering prayers at Dargah, so the petitioners alongwith her nephew and brother
went there; that in July, 2021, she again got ill and her father called the petitioner No. 1 and told
him to take her again to the same tantrik, to which the petitioner No. 1 refused, however, his
father-in-law again began to torture and compel the petitioners to take her to tantrik, after which in
order to calm the situation, the petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 took her to a Dargah in Badori, where she
offered prayers and she was given holy water to drink by the Molvi; that the wife of the petitioner
No. 1 started misbehaving and abusing petitioner Nos. 2 to 4 without any reasonable cause and
forced the petitioner No. 1 to permanently get separately from his family members and caused
mental cruelty to petitioner No. 1 and his family members. Though petitioner No. 1 tried his tooth
and nail to reconcile the situation, yet as his wife was abetted and instigated by her parents,
conditions got worsened and the relationship between them got deteriorated.
2. It was alleged that on 08.09.2021, wife of the petitioner No. 1 created a scene while being
restrained from clicking photographs at Shrine of Kaller Shariet and without any reasonable cause,
did not return to her matrimonial house despite intervention from the members of the community.
It was further alleged that the impugned FIR is based on concocted story, which the wife of the
petitioner No. 1 has lodged after a lapse of about two months after leaving the house of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 3
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
petitioner No. 1; that the petitioners are being unnecessarily harassed due to her ulterior motives;
that the allegations leveled in the impugned FIR are completely baseless, false and frivolous besides
being with ulterior motives. It was finally prayed that the petitioners be admitted to bail in
anticipation of their arrest in the case.
3. This Court vide interim order dated 12.11.2021 admitted the petitioners to interim bail. The
complainant was impleaded as respondent No. 2 in the petition in terms or order dated 22.03.2022.
4. The official respondents filed the objections, asserting therein that the petitioners cannot claim
bail as a matter of right, because they are involved in heinous offences punishable under Sections
354, 342, 498, 498-A, 504 & 506 IPC registered at Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu; that the
liberty of the accused is subservient to the interests of public at large and in order to restore the
confidence of the public in the justice delivery system, it is imperative that the accused involved in
serious crimes should be denied the bail. It has been further pleaded that on a written complaint on
28.10.2021, a case was registered at Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu vide FIR No. 351/2021 for
commission of offences punishable under Sections 354, 352, 498, 498-A, 504 & 506 IPC, however,
during investigation of the case, the statement of the prosecutrix was recorded and offence
punishable under Section 376 IPC was added against three accused, namely, Wasim Akram, Sahil
Choudhary besides an unknown tantrik and it was prayed that the bail application moved by the
petitioners be dismissed.
5. During the pendency of this petition, an application came to be filed on behalf of Officer Incharge,
Police Station, Bahu Fort, Jammu, seeking cancellation of bail granted to the accused, asserting
therein that the initial FIR was registered for commission of offences punishable under Sections
354, 352, 498, 498-A, 504 & 506 IPC, however, offence under Section 376 IPC was added after the
statement of the victim under Section 164-A CrPC was recorded; that the allegations in the case are
quite serious in nature and there being involvement of more persons in the crime including tantrik,
whose identity is yet to be ascertained and in order to conduct thorough investigation, the custodial
interrogation of the accused is necessary and their liberty severely affects the chances of fair
investigation to be conducted against them. It was finally prayed that the bail granted to the accused
in the aforementioned FIR be cancelled, in the interest of justice.
6. Objections to this application have been filed on behalf of the petitioners, asserting therein that
the bail granted to the petitioners cannot be sought to be cancelled on a plea that serious offence
punishable under Section 376 IPC has been added, based on the statement of the victim recorded
during investigation, as this is an afterthought by the complainant, who in her detailed application
moved to the police officer of the rank of, not less than Inspector General of Police, had not made
any such accusation of rape, therefore, the interim bail granted in favour of the petitioners be made
absolute.
7. Mr. G.S. Thakur, learned counsel for the petitioners has, vehemently, argued that it was simply a
matter of marital discord between the petitioner No. 1 and respondent No. 2, who had got married
in the year 2020 and that due to this marital discord between them, the respondent No. 2 has not
only implicated her husband-petitioner No. 1, but his entire family in a false and frivolous case. He
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 4
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
has further argued that the respondent No. 2/complainant in the application moved to the Inspector
General of Police, Jammu had alleged that she has been subjected to cruelty, with no allegation of
rape having been committed against her person by any of the accused/petitioners. Therefore, her
allegation later, with regard to rape or gang rape in her statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC
is an afterthought, just making pressure and project the offence as rape, so that the petitioners are
denied grant of bail in anticipation of their arrest. He has also argued that there are different
principles governing grant of bail and for cancellation of bail. He has further argued that the Apex
Court in case titled, "Dolatram Vs. State of Haryana, reported in 1995 (1) SCC 349" had held that
„rejection of bail in a non-bailable case at the initial stage and the cancellation of bail so granted,
have to be considered and dealt with on different basis. Very cogent and overwhelming
circumstances are necessary for an order directing cancellation of bail already granted. Generally
speaking, the grounds for cancellation of bail, broadly (illustrative and not exhaustive) are:
interference of attempt to interfere with the due course of administration of justice or
evasion of attempt to evade the due course of justice of abuse of the concession
granted to the accused in any manner.(cid:128) He has further argued that the application
for grant of bail moved by the petitioners be allowed and the interim order admitting
them to interim bail be made absolute in the interest of justice and the application
moved for cancellation of bail, be rejected.
8. The case diary has been produced by the Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, learned Dy. AG for perusal. The
statement of the victim/prosecutrix is perused for her exact allegations about her sexual abuse,
which reveals that the petitioners, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil Choudhary had raped her on
different occasions and the unknown tantrik of Badori, Bari Brahamana had also sexually abused
her and videographed this activity.
9. Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, learned Dy. AG appearing for the official respondents argued that the
petitioner Nos. 4 & 5, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil Choudhary, besides an unknown tantrik
had been accused of the commission of offence punishable under Section 376-D IPC (gang rape), in
view of the statement of the prosecutrix during the investigation. He has also argued that the
registration of the case is not the end of a story, as during investigation of the case based on the
statement of the victim or the witnesses, the relevant provisions of the offences can be added to
ensure the fair investigation. He has further argued that supervening developments/facts with
regard to accusation made by the prosecutrix, during investigation against three of the accused
including the petitioner Nos. 4 & 5 for grave offence of gang rape have compelled the investigating
agency to move an application for cancellation of bail, besides the allegations that the petitioners
after obtaining the interim bail have not cooperated with the investigating agency in any manner, so
much so that the identity of the tantrik, who had been accused of the sexual offences is yet to be
ascertained.
10. Ms. Deepika Pushkar Nath, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 argued that the assertion of
the learned counsel for the petitioners that there was no allegation in the application moved by the
respondent No. 2 based on which the impugned FIR was registered, is not correct, as the
complainant/respondent No. 2 had made allegations in her detailed complaint that „the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 5
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
parents-in-law of the complainant are in the habit of visiting Tantriks and Godmen and they tried all
in their power to destroy the life of the complainant. In the month of July, August, the accused
persons crossed all limits of humanity and morality when they took the complainant to a Tantrik in
village Badori. There the complainant was put to not only torture but great humiliation and sexual
assault. The Tantrik, on making of the accused, first made the complainant smell some Babhuti and
then after the complainant became drowsy, the Tantrik took off her clothes with the help of accused
No. 2 and 3 and touched her on all the private parts of her body. Despite being drowsy, the
complainant tried to protest and run away from that place, but the accused No. 2 and accused No. 3
caught hold off her while the Tantrik was forcibly applying oil to her private parts and sexually
assaulted her(cid:128). She has also argued that the complainant had clearly stated that she had been
tortured and sexually assaulted, therefore, to say that her allegation of rape having been committed
by her person was afterthought later during investigation, is not correct. She has further argued that
the offence of rape/gang rape should have been invoked by the police at the very outset. She further
submits that, even if some fact has not been recorded in the compliant, the offence based on such
fact can be added later, in view of the law clearly laid down by the Apex Court in case titled,
"Superintendent of Police, CBI & Ors. vs. Tapan Kumar Singh, reported in 2003 (6) SCC 175" that
„the First Information Report is not an encyclopedia to disclose all facts and details relating to the
offence reported.(cid:128) She has finally prayed that the application moved by the petitioners for grant of
bail in anticipation of their arrest be rejected and the application moved by the SHO, Police Station,
Bahu Fort, Jammu, be allowed and the interim bail granted in favour of the petitioners be revoked.
11. Heard, perused and considered.
12. Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that this Court vide order interim dated
14.12.2022 has already considered the aspect of addition of offence punishable under Section 376
IPC against two of the accused, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil Choudhary and has extended the
interim bail granted in favour of all the petitioners with a direction to them to necessarily join the
investigation within two days of passing of the order and on failure to do so by the petitioners, the
Investigating Officer had been directed to report to the Court, as such, this aspect cannot be
reviewed now. Alongside this bail application, the petitioners had already moved a petition under
Section 482 CrPC, invoking inherent jurisdiction of this Court to quash the impugned FIR. The
respondent No. 2/complainant had also moved a similar petition with a prayer that investigation of
the case be monitored or transferred to some other agency for fair investigation.
13. On a keen perusal of the complaint initially lodged by the complainant/prosecutrix, i.e.,
respondent No. 2, it is evident that she had alleged to have been subjected to sexual assault by a
tantrik and in her statement recorded under Section 164 CrPC, she again deposed that she was
subjected to sexual abuse by a tantrik and two of the accused, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil
Choudhary.
14. Since it is trite in law that FIR is not an encyclopedia in itself, even if some specific allegations
are found missing in the impugned FIR, that does not mean that the offences, as disclosed by the
victim in her statement are not required to be invoked or even if invoked, does not carry any value.
The Apex Court in Tapan Kumar(cid:128)s case (Supra) held in para-20 as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 6
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
"20. It is well settled that a First Information Report is not an encyclopedia, which
must disclose all facts and details relating to the offence reported. An informant may
lodge a report about the commission of an offence though he may not know the name
of the victim or his assailant. He may not even know how the occurrence took place.
A first informant need not necessarily be an eye witness so as to be able to disclose in
great details all aspects of the offence committed. What is of significance is that the
information given must disclose the commission of a cognizable offence and the
information so lodged must provide a basis for the police officer to suspect the
commission of a cognizable offence. At this stage it is enough if the police officer on
the basis of the information given suspects the commission of a cognizable offence,
and not that he must be convinced or satisfied that a cognizable offence has been
committed. .........................................................................................................."
15. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the bail once granted cannot be
cancelled later, as the principles governing grant of bail and cancellation of bail are different, pales
into insignificance, having regard to accusations made by the complainant in her initial complaint
with regard to sexual abuse and later reiterated in her statement under Section 164 CrPC during
investigation is supervening effect, as emerged on the record of investigation that two of the
petitioners, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil Choudhary alongwith an unknown tantrik had been
involved in the commission of gang rape with her. The offence of gang rape is a grave offence, which
attracts rigorous imprisonment of not less than twenty (20) years and which may extend to life
imprisonment, that too, for whole of the remaining life of the convict. Since it is not a case of bail
having been granted, as only an interim bail had been granted in favour of the petitioners, therefore,
the principles governing cancellation of bail, as submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner
are not applicable in the case. The interim bail is an interim arrangement till bail application is
decided, on its merits.
16. Having regard to the totality of the facts, as projected and after hearing rival submissions, this
Court is of the considered opinion that the petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 are entitled to be admitted to bail in
anticipation of their arrest, however, the petitioner No. 4, namely, Waseem Akram and petitioner
No. 5, namely, Sahil Choudhary, in view of the grave offence of gang rape against them are not
entitled to be admitted to bail in anticipation of their arrest.
17. For the foregoing reasons and observations made hereinabove, the plea for grant of bail by
petitioner Nos. 4 and 5, namely, Waseem Akram and Sahil Choudhary is rejected and interim bail in
their favour is revoked.
18. Bail application alongwith pending application(s) is, thus, disposed of, in the above terms.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that in view of the progress of investigation into the
case, he has instructions to withdraw this petition. His statement is taken on record.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn alongwith connected applications.
However, the petitioners shall be at liberty to move such a petition, in case need arises again.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 7
Razak Hussain vs Ut Of J&K Through Sho on 29 September, 2023
Interim direction, if any, shall stand vacated.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of the progress of investigation into the case,
she has instructions to withdraw this petition, in view of apparent fair investigation of the case by
the police. Her statement is taken on record.
Writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn alongwith connected applications.
Interim direction, if any, shall stand vacated.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 29.09.2023 Ram Krishan Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191367181/ 8
