Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O.
Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
Author: H.P.Sandesh
Bench: H.P.Sandesh
-1-
MFA No. 102868 of 2014
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, DHARWAD
R
BENCH
DATED THIS THE 4TH DAY OF AUGUST, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE H.P.SANDESH
MISCELLANEOUS FIRST APPEAL NO. 102868 OF
2014 (MV-D)
BETWEEN:
1. RELIANCE GENERAL INSURANCE
COMPANY LIMITED,
CTS #472-474, V.A. KALBURGI SQUARE,
DESAI CROSS, DESHPANDE NAGAR, HUBLI,
REPRESENTED BY THE AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY,
THE RELIANCE GENERAL INSURANCE
COMPANY LIMITED, BRANCH OFFICE,
CTS # 172/171, V.A. KALBURGI SQUARE,
DESAI CROSS, DESHPANDE NAGAR, HUBLI.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI. S K KAYAKAMATH, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. GANGAPPA S/O. CHINNAPPA SAUNSHI
AGE: 63 YEARS, OCC: RETIRED, R/O. BYAHATTI,
TALUK: HUBLI.
2. KAVTIA W/O. RAJALAKHAMANAGOUDA PATIL
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 1
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
AGE: 32 YEARS, OCC: SERVICE,
R/O. B. RALIKATTI, TALUK: HUBLI.
3. SANGEETA D/O. GANGAPPA SAUNSHI
AGE: 27 YEARS, OCC: STUDENT,
-2-
MFA No. 102868 of 2014
R/O. BYAHATTI, TALUK: HUBLI.
4. SANTOSH S/O. GANGAPPA SAUNSHI
AGE: 23 YEARS, OCC: STUDENT,
R/O. BYAHATTI, TALUK: HUBLI
5. SHRIDEVI D/O. GANGAPPA SAUNSHI
AGE: 20 YEARS, OCC: STUDENT,
R/O. BYAHATTI, TALUK: HUBLI
6. SAVITA W/O. JAGADISH BILEBAL
AGE: 30 YEARS, OCC: HOUSEHOLD WORK
R/O. CHIKKANARTI, TALUK: KUNDAGL.
7. ASHFAQ S/O. DAWALSAB BEPARI
AGE: MAJOR, OCC: OWNER OF LORRY,
R/O. MYADAR ONI,
AT POST: KALAGHATAGI,
DIST: DHARWAD.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. S S BAWAKHAN, ADVOCATE FOR R1-R5,
NOTICES TO R6 & R7 SERVED)
THIS APPEAL IS FILED U/S 173(1) OF MV ACT 1988 AGAINST
THE JUDGMENT AND AWARD DATED 09.05.2014 PASSED IN MVC
NO.339/2012 ON THE FILE OF THE I ADDITIONAL SENIOR CIVIL
JUDGE AND MEMBER ADDITIONAL MOTOR ACCIDENT CLAIM
TRIBUNAL HUBLI, AWARDING THE COMPENSATION OF
RS.5,91,600/- WITH INTEREST AT THE RATE OF 6% P.A. FROM THE
DATE OF PETITION TILL THE DATE OF REALIZATION.
THIS APPEAL HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR
JUDGMENT, COMING ON FOR 'PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT',
THIS DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
-3-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 2
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
MFA No. 102868 of 2014
JUDGMENT
Though this appeal is listed for admission, with the consent of both the parties, it is taken up for
final disposal.
2. The present appeal is filed by the insurance company questioning the quantum of compensation
awarded in judgement and award passed in MVC No.339/2012 on the file of I Additional Senior
Civil Judge and Additional MACT, Hubballi as well as not considering the contributory negligence
aspect.
3. Factual matrix of the case of the claimants before the Tribunal is that on 12.04.2012 the Smt.
Renuka W/o Gangappa Saunshi was travelling in tempo towards Hubballi to attend a marriage
function and when the said vehicle reached near Yamanur, at that time a lorry bearing
Reg.No.KA-25/C-19 came and dashed to the tempo from opposite direction. As a result, the Renuka
sustained grievous injuries and immediately she was taken to PHC, Navalgund, thereafter to KIMS
Hospital, Hubballi and she succumbed during the course of treatment on account of accidental
injuries. Hence, the claimants being the dependants, laid a claim before the Tribunal.
4. In pursuance of the claim petition, notice was ordered and respondent No.1 remained absent and
respondent No.2 was represented through counsel and filed detailed statement of objections. The
claimants in order to substantiate their claim, have examined the husband of deceased as PW.1 and
also examined one witness as PW.2 and got marked documents as Exs.P.1 to P.6. On the other hand,
the respondents have not led any evidence.
5. The Tribunal after considering both the oral and documentary evidence on record, allowed the
claim petition in part granting compensation of Rs.5,91,600/- with interest at the rate of 6% p.a.
against respondent Nos.1 and 2.
6. Being aggrieved by the impugned judgment and award, the present appeal is filed by the
insurance company contending that there is contributory negligence on the part of the driver of the
tempo in which the deceased was travelling. Learned counsel appearing for the insurance company
also contended that the tempo has been used for transporting the marriage party, as such the charge
sheet has been filed only against the driver of the lorry. The Tribunal has swayed away by the charge
sheet and gave a finding to the effect that the accident has occurred due to the negligence on the part
of the driver of the lorry alone, which is erroneous and hence it requires interference since there is
contributory negligence on the part of the driver of the tempo also.
7. The other contention of the insurance company is that the claim petition has been filed by the
husband of the deceased and major and married daughters of the deceased. The claimant No.1 is a
retired school teacher and pensioner and major children cannot be called as dependants upon their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 3
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
deceased parents. The Tribunal instead of awarding compensation only under the head of loss of
estate, has awarded compensation under the head of loss of dependency, which is erroneous.
8. The other contention of the insurance company is that claimant No.1 is the husband of deceased
who has been examined as PW.1 and during his cross-examination it is elicited that at the time of
marriage he was aged about 24-25 years and the age of his wife was 19 years. That means the age
gap between claimant No.1-husband and deceased-wife was of six years and the accident has
occurred in the year 2012 and the witness has been deposed in the year 2013. Witness has deposed
in his evidence that he was aged 64 years. If the said fact is taken into consideration, the deceased
was 57 years old as on the date of accident. Hence, the multiplier would be 9 and not 13 as is
adopted by the Tribunal.
9. Learned counsel for the appellant-insurance company also in his argument relied upon the
judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Smt.Manjuri Bera vs. The Oriental Insurance
Company Limited and Another passed in Civil Appeal No.1702/2007 dated 30.03.2007 and
referring to this judgement, he would submit that the married daughters are not dependents.
Counsel also relied upon the judgement of this Court passed in MFA No.347/99 in the case of
A.Manavalagan vs. A.Krishnamurthy and Others, wherein also this Court held about what would be
the position if the claimant legal heir is not a dependent and held that question of awarding any
amount under the head loss of dependency would not arise as there was no financial dependency.
10. Learned counsel referring to these two judgements, would vehemently contend that the Tribunal
failed to take note of the fact that the married daughters and major children are not dependants and
hence they are not entitled for compensation and hence, it requires interference of this Court.
11. Further, learned counsel also contends that the deduction made by the Tribunal at 1/5th is
erroneous and it ought to have been 1/4th considering the number of dependants and hence it
requires interference of this Court.
12. Per contra, learned counsel for appearing for the claimants would vehemently contend that the
married daughters are also entitled for compensation. In support of his contention, he relied upon
the judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in MANU/SC/0028/2020 in the case of National
Insurance Company Limited vs. Birender and Others and brought to the notice of this Court that
Hon'ble Apex Court in similar circumstances held that even major legal representatives of deceased
have a right to apply for compensation and even major married and earning sons of deceased being
legal representatives have a right to apply for compensation and it would be the bounden duty of the
Tribunal to consider the application irrespective of the fact whether the concerned legal
representative was fully dependent on the deceased and not to limit the claim towards conventional
heads only. Hence, the very contention of the insurance company cannot be accepted.
13. Counsel also relied upon the judgement of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in (1987) 3 SCC 234
in the case of Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahmedabad vs. Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai
and Another, wherein the Apex Court held that brother of a person who dies in any motor vehicle
accident is entitled to maintain a claim petition under Section 110-A of the Motor Vehicles Act if he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 4
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
is the legal representative of the deceased. It is further held that in an Indian family brothers, sisters
and brothers' children and sometimes foster children live together and they are dependent upon the
bread-winner of the family.
14. Counsel also relied on the judgement of Kerala High Court reported in ICL 2021 (8) Ker. 893 in
the case of United India Insurance vs. Shalumol dated
- 10 -
25.08.2021, wherein it is discussed that in a petition under Section 166 of Motor Vehicles Act
whether dependency is a relevant criterion in a claim petition or whether the parents and married
daughters entitled to claim compensation as dependants of the deceased and held that it would be
preposterous to accept the contention of the appellant that a 25 year old daughter would be no
longer dependent on 49 year old mother because she was given in marriage. The bond between the
mother and a daughter is eternal, no matter how she old may be, some times a girl just needs her
mom. Even the dependency is a relevant criterion to claim compensation for loss of dependency, it
does not mean financial dependency is the 'ark of covenant'. Dependency includes gratuitous service
dependency, physical dependency, emotional dependency, psychological dependency, and so on and
so forth, which can never be equated in terms of the money.
15. Further, learned counsel would also contend that the insurance company did not choose to
examine
- 11 -
any witness and now cannot contend that there was contributory negligence and hence, the appeal is
liable to be dismissed.
16. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the material on record, the
following points would arise for consideration:
i. Whether the Tribunal has committed error in not considering contributory
negligence as contended by the insurance company?
ii. Whether the Tribunal has committed error in considering the major and married
daughters of the deceased as dependants?
iii. Whether the Tribunal has committed any error in awarding higher compensation
as contended in the appeal?
iv. What order?
17. Regarding Point No.1: The main contention of the insurance company is that the
tempo in which the deceased was travelling is a goods vehicle and she had been to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 5
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
attend the marriage and while returning to her
- 12 -
native the accident has occurred in the curve and hence, contends that there is contributory
negligence on the part of the driver of the tempo in which the deceased was travelling and hence the
Tribunal ought to have taken contributory negligence aspect into consideration. In order to
substantiate this contention first of all insurance company has not examined the driver of the
offending vehicle, who is the right person to speak with regard to negligence and insurance company
also not even examined the official witness of the insurance company to substantiate the said
contention.
18. In the cross-examination of PW.1 except making the suggestion that the accident was occurred
on account of negligence of the driver of the vehicle in which the deceased was travelling, nothing is
elicited regarding negligence is concerned. When the insurance company has failed to elicit any
negligence on the part of the driver of the tempo in the evidence of PW.1 and also in the cross-
examination of PW.2, question of Tribunal coming to the
- 13 -
conclusion of contributory negligence does not arise. Apart from that, either the investigating officer
or the driver of the offending vehicle has been examined and I have already pointed out that the
right person to speak with regard to the negligence on the part of the driver of the vehicle in which
the deceased was proceeding, nothing is on record. Therefore, unless there is cogent evidence before
the Court with regard to negligence, question of considering contributory negligence does not arise.
19. Apart from that, the claimants have relied upon the FIR which is marked as Ex.P.1, wherein
specific allegation is made against the driver of the offending vehicle and charge sheet is also filed
against him which is marked as Ex.P.3 and both oral and documentary evidence is against the diver
of the offending vehicle. When such being the case and in the absence of any contra evidence against
the driver of the vehicle in which the deceased was travelling, I do not find any force in the
contention of the learned counsel for insurance company and the contention
- 14 -
that the deceased was travelling in a goods tempo cannot be a ground to fasten the liability on the
other vehicle owner and insurance company since there is no material to invoke contributory
negligence. The Court has to see whether the driver has contributed to an accident and the same is
not found in the case on hand. Hence, I answer point No.1 in negative.
20. Regarding point Nos.2 & 3: Now coming to the other two grounds which have been urged by the
insurance company are that the married daughters of the deceased are not the dependants while
claiming loss of dependency and other contention is that in the cross- examination of PW.1 it is
elicited that the age difference between claimant No.1-husband and deceased-wife is only six years
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 6
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
and he categorically admits that he was 64 years when he was examined in the year 2013.
21. In support of contention of the appellant, counsel has relied upon the judgement in the case of
Manavalagan supra. The said judgement is delivered on
- 15 -
17.04.2004. No doubt, this Court held that loss of dependency to be taken while quantifying the
compensation on the head of loss of dependency. Per contra, counsel for the claimants relied upon
the judgement in the case of Birender supra and the Apex Court decided the said matter on
13.01.2020, wherein categorically held that it is settled by now that legal representatives of the
deceased have a right to apply for compensation. It is further observed that even the major married
and earning sons of the deceased being legal representatives have a right to apply for compensation
and it would it would be the bounden duty of the Tribunal to consider the application irrespective of
the fact whether the concerned legal representative was fully dependent on the deceased and not to
limit the claim towards conventional heads only. In view of the principles laid donw in Birender's
case, judgement in Manavalagan's case of this Court is not applicable to the case on hand as
contended by learned counsel for insurance company.
- 16 -
22. No doubt learned counsel for insurance company also relied upon judgement in Manjuri Bera
decided on 30.03.2007, wherein the Apex Court discussed earlier the contention taken by married
daughter and the same was rejected as she is not dependent. But in view of recent judgement in
Birender, the Apex Court discussed in detail regarding the word 'legal representatives of the
deceased' and considering an application under Section 166(1) of Motor Vehicles Act and the
judgement in Manjuri Bera is also taken note of by the Apex Court and held that even the major
married and earning sons of the deceased being legal representatives have a right to apply for
compensation irrespective of the fact whether legal representative was fully dependant on the
deceased and not to limit the claim towards conventional heads only. Hence, the said contention of
insurance company cannot be accepted in view of Birender's case.
23. The Apex Court in the said judgement further held even married sons are also entitled for
compensation.
- 17 -
This Court also cannot make any discrimination whether they are married sons or married
daughters and hence, very contention that married daughters of deceased are not entitled for
compensation cannot be accepted and the Court has to take note of the rationale behind in coming
to the conclusion of even married sons and major sons are eligible to claim compensation and hence
the married daughters also entitle for compensation on all the heads and not to limit only for
conventional heads.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 7
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
24. Counsel for respondents/claimants also relied upon a judgement of Kerala High Court in the
case of Shalumol supra. In paragraph Nos.50 and 51 of the said judgement, Kerala High Court also
held that bond between the mother and daughter is eternal and further observed that even if the
dependency is relevant criterion to claim compensation for loss of dependency, it does not mean
financial dependency is the 'ark of the covenant'. Dependency includes gratuitous service
dependency, physical dependency, emotional dependency,
- 18 -
psychological dependency so on and so forth, which can never be equated in terms of the money.
25. Having considered the principles laid down in the judgements referred to supra, this Court has
taken note of recent judgement of the Apex Court in Birender, wherein it is held that even married
sons are entitled for compensation not only on conventional heads but also on loss of dependency.
Hence, the very contention of the appellant-insurance company cannot be accepted.
26. This Court also would like to rely upon the judgement of the Division Bench of this Court in
MFA No.118/2018 dated 26.03.2021, wherein also this Court by relying upon the judgement in
Birender, held that even married sons are also entitled for compensation not only on conventional
head but also on loss of dependency.
27. The other contention of the insurance company is that 13 multiplier adopted by the Tribunal is
erroneous and in order to substantiate the said contention except
- 19 -
eliciting answers from cross-examination of PW.1 that deceased might have six years younger to
him, nothing is on record and the Court has to take note of the age of the deceased based on
documentary evidence. On perusal of material on record, the claimants have relied on Ex.P.4-
postmortem report, wherein age of the deceased is mentioned as 48 years and in order to controvert
the said age, respondents have not placed any material before the Tribunal and also not even
examined any witnesses.
28. No doubt I have already pointed out that an answer is elicited from the mouth of PW.1 regarding
age difference and when the documentary evidence is available before the Court, the documentary
evidence prevails against oral evidence and doctor who conducted postmortem has categorically
mentioned the age of deceased as 48 years and hence, very contention of insurance company that
Tribunal ought to have taken 9 multiplier and not 13 cannot be accepted.
- 20 -
29. The Tribunal based on the Ex.P.4-postmortem report and while giving reasons also in the order
it is mentioned that in order to prove the age of the deceased, the claimants have produced Ex.P.4
which shows the age as 48 years and also taken note of charge sheet which is marked as Ex.P.3,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 8
Reliance General Insurance Company ... vs Gangappa S/O. Chinnappa Saunshi on 4 August, 2022
wherein also age of the deceased is mentioned as 48 years as on the date of accident. Hence, the
Tribunal has taken the age of deceased as 48 years as on the date of accident and to rebut the said
material, no other evidence has been placed before the Tribunal by the respondents. Hence, the said
contention also cannot be accepted.
30. It is also important to note that while assessing loss of dependency, the Tribunal has taken note
of Ex.P.6 which is warranty card regarding purchase of durby sewing machine. The Tribunal has
taken the income of the deceased as Rs.4,500/- and deducted 1/5th of the income towards personal
expenses considering husband, daughters and also sons as dependants and the very
- 21 -
contention that the Tribunal ought to have deducted 1/4th of the income cannot be accepted. Apart
from that future prospects also has not been considered by the Tribunal while calculating loss of
dependency and no appeal is filed by the claimants as against the quantum of compensation and
having taken note of this aspect into consideration, I do not find any force in the contention of
learned counsel for insurance company that exorbitant compensation has been awarded by the
Tribunal. Hence, I answer point Nos.2 and 3 in the negative.
31. Regarding point No.4: In view of the discussions made above, I pass the following:
ORDER Appeal is dismissed. No cost.
Sd/-
JUDGE SH
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146140952/ 9
