Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July,
2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
S. No. 91
Suppl. Cause List
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRM(M) No. 226/2022
CrlM No. 703/2022
Reyaz Ahmad Khan and Ors. ...Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Shuja-ul-Haq & Mr. Mian Muzaffar, Advocates
Vs.
UT of J&K and Ors. ...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. T. M. Shamsi, DSGI with
Mr. Faizan Ahmad, CGC & Ms. Yasmeen Jan, Advocate for
R-1 to R-4
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
15.07.2025
1. Quashing of FIR no.43/2022 for the offences under Section 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC,
registered in Police Station, Kargil, is sought for in the instant petition.
2. I have heard the learned counsel for parties and perused the record on the file and considered the
matter.
3. A complaint had been filed by respondent No.5 against the petitioners and proforma respondents
before the respondent No.2, Senior Superintendent of Police, Kargil, who forwarded it to respondent
No.3- Additional Superintendent of Police, Kargil. The respondent No.3 on the basis of enquiry
directed the respondent No.4-Station House Officer, Police Station, Kargil, to register FIR and
accordingly, he registered an FIR No. 43/2022 for the offences under Section 419, 420, 467, 468,
471 IPC and started investigation in the matter.
4. The background facts of the cases are that the petitioners and proforma respondents had entered
into a sale deeds with respect to different plots of land with respondent No.5 and those sale deeds
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 1
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
had also been got registered and after proper identification of the land, the possession thereof
handed over to them by respondent No.5. The respondent No.5, who is a broker and had sold the
land to petitioners and proforma respondents, is alleged to be a greedy person and does not hold a
good track record with regard to sale and purchase of the land and concocted a story that the sale
deeds executed by the petitioners and proforma respondents with him are fraudulent documents
and have filed a complaint before the local police alleging therein that some persons had sold land
which was earmarked for District Court Complex, Kargil, which after verification found that the land
belongs to petitioners and proforma respondents and is located 400 meters away from the boundary
of the land earmarked for District Court Complex, Kargil. Thereafter, the respondent No.5 filed a
suit for declaration and permanent injunction in the Court of Principal District Judge, Kargil, and
the said Court vide order dated 25.05.2022 directed the parties to maintain status quo in respect of
the suit land. The respondent No.5, has filed another complaint with respondent No.2 for registering
an FIR against the petitioners and proforma respondents. The said application was forwarded by
respondent No.2 to respondent No.3, who on the basis of some enquiry directed the respondent
No.4 to register FIR in the matter. Accordingly, respondent No.4 has registered FIR No. 43/2022
under Sections 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC and started investigation.
5. On 18.03.2025, learned counsel for the petitioners made a statement that the parties have entered
into compromise and award has also been passed by National Lok Adalat at District Court, Kargil.
This Court vide order dated 22.05.2025 directed the parties to appear before the Registrar Judicial
for recording their statements on 27.05.2025. However, on 27.05.2025, learned counsel for the
petitioners made a statement that due to ailment of petitioner No.1, the petitioners could not appear
before the Registrar Judicial and this Court again directed them to appear before the Registrar
Judicial for recording their statements in the first week of July. This Court vide its order dated
14.07.2025 observed that statements of parties had been recorded, but they were not present and
they were directed to appear through virtual mode on the next date of hearing.
6. Today, when the matter has come up for consideration, parties are present through virtual mode.
7. Counsel for petitioners would contend that dispute between the parties, that resulted in
lodgement of FIR as well, has been resolved by them by amicable settlement as is evident from their
statements recorded by Registrar Judicial of this Court and, as such, impugned FIR may be quashed
because if FIR is not quashed it will cause great oppression and prejudice to petitioners. Counsel for
the petitioners in support of their contentions have placed reliance on the judgements passed in
Sardar Ali Khan v. State of Uttar Pradesh through Principal Secretary Home Department and Anr.,
AIR 2020 SC 626; judgement dated 16th January 2019 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at
Nainital in Writ Petition (Criminal) No.112/2019 titled as Akil Ahmad vs. State of Uttarakhand and
others; judgement dated 9th February 2022 passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at
Jodhpur in S.B.CriminalMisc (Pet.) No.610/2022 titled as Devraj v. State of Rajasthan and another.
8. In the above backdrop, it would be appropriate to say that provisions of Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
provide for exercise of inherent powers by the High Court, which is noticed as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 2
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
"482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court. -- Nothing in this Code shall be
deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders
as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Code, or to prevent abuse of
the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice."
9. Exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., thus, envisages three circumstances in which
inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code; (ii) to
prevent abuse of the process of court; and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice.
10. It is well settled that inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is designed to achieve a
salutary purpose and that criminal proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a
weapon of harassment. When the Court is satisfied that criminal proceedings amount to an abuse of
process of law or that it amounts to bringing pressure upon accused, in exercise of the inherent
powers such proceedings can be quashed.
11. In State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, the Supreme
Court considered the scope of inherent powers of the Court and after referring to earlier decisions,
the Supreme Court enumerated the following categories of cases by way of illustration where the
extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the inherent powers
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be exercised by the High Court to prevent
abuse of process of Court or otherwise to secure ends of justice:-
"(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code. (3) Where the
uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is
an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 3
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
12. A three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in State of Karnataka v. M. Devenderappa and
another, 2002 (3) SCC 89, had an occasion to consider the ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. By
analyzing the scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C., the Apex Court has laid down that the authority of the
Court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to
produce injustice, the Court has power to prevent abuse. It has further held that the Court would be
justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that the initiation/ continuance thereof amounts to the
abuse of the process of the Court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of
justice. Following was laid down in paragraph 06:
"6......All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in the absence of any express
provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the
right and to undo a wrong in course of administration of justice on the principle
quando lex aliquidalicuiconcedit, concederevidetur et id sine quo res ipsaeesse non
potest (when the law gives a person anything it gives him that without which it
cannot exist). While exercising powers under the section, the court does not function
as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent jurisdiction under the section though wide
has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when such exercise
is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the section itself. It is to be exercised
ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which
alone courts exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any
attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has
power to prevent abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any
action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of
the powers court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that
initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of
these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is
disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a
complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to
assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if
the allegations are accepted in toto."
13. It would also be worthwhile to reproduce paragraph 8 infra:
"8.....Judicial process should not be an instrument of oppression, or, needless
harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and
should take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing
process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 4
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the same time the section is not
an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit a prosecution and bring
about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code
and the categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its power under it
relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process of any court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by this Court in State of
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (AIR 1992 SC 604)."
14. The Supreme Court in another case titled as Priya Vrat Singh and others v. Shyam Ji Sahai
reported in 2008 (8) SCC 232, relied on Category 07 as laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra).
In the said case the Allahabad High Court dismissed petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to
quash proceedings under Section 494, 120-B, and 109 IPC and Section 3 and 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act. After noticing background facts and parameters for exercise of powers under
Section 482 Cr. P.C., the Supreme Court has held that Section 482 Cr. P.C. does not confer any new
power on the High Court as it only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which inherent jurisdiction may be
exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down
any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative
enactment dealing with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. The High
Courts, therefore, have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary
for proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the doctrine, which
finds expression in the section, which merely recognizes and preserves inherent powers of the High
Courts. All courts, whether the civil or criminal, possess, in the absence of any express provision, as
inherent in their constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong
in the course of the administration of justice on the principlequando lex aliquidalicuiconcedit,
concederevidetur id sine quo res ipsaesse non potest (when the law gives a person anything it gives
him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers under section 482 Cr.P.C., the
Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent jurisdiction under Section 482
Cr.P.C. though wide has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only when such
exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the section itself. It is to be exercised ex
debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone the courts
exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of the justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent abuse. It would be an
abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent
promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers, the court would be justified to quash any proceeding
if it finds that the initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing
of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice.
15. It is not in dispute that in the case on hand subsequent to the filing of complaint, FIR has been
lodged against petitioners and proforma respondents, however, parties after arriving at amicable
settlement before Lok Adalat at Kargil on 13.08.2022. In such circumstances pendency of criminal
proceedings before Trial court or for that matter any other proceeding/case(s) of like nature before
any other Court/forum, amounts to abuse of process of law and in order to serve interests of justice,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 5
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
exercise of inherent powers under and in terms of Section 482 Cr.P.C. is imperative.
16. After considering the law laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra) and explaining the
decisions rendered in Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra, (1977) 4 SCC 551, Surendra Nath
Mohanty and another v. State of Orissa, (1999) 5 SCC 238; and Pepsi Foods Limited and another v.
Special Judicial Magistrate and others, (1998) 5 SCC 749, the Supreme Court held:
"8. We are, therefore, of the view that if for the purpose of securing the ends of
justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 would not be a bar to the
exercise of power of quashing. It is, however, a different matter depending upon the
facts and circumstances of each case whether to exercise or not such a power."
17. It is trite to state that the power under Section 482 Cr. P. C. should be exercised sparingly and
with circumspection only when the court is convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of the process of the court or that ends of
justice require that proceedings ought to be quashed. Exercise of such power would depend upon
the facts and circumstances of each case and it has to be exercised inappropriate cases in order to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone the courts exist. The High Court in
exercise of its inherent powers can quash criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in appropriate
cases in order to meet the ends of justice and Section 320 Cr.P.C. does not limit or affect the powers
of the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
18. In the facts and circumstance of this case and taking note of their stand taken by them in their
pleadings, it would serve no purpose to keep case-FIR/criminal proceedings pending against
petitioner and this Court in exercise of its inherent powers vested under Section 482 Cr.P.C.,
quashes the same so that parties get rid of uncertainties that prevail between them in view of the
impugned challan/proceedings. Reliance in this regard is placed on the judgment of the Supreme
Court rendered in the case of Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 and Narinder Singh
v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC 466. The observations of the Supreme Court made in the paragraph
29 in the case of Narinder Singh (supra) are very relevant and same are reproduced as under:
"29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of the
Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 6
Reyaz Ahmad Khan And Ors vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 15 July, 2025
29.2 When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
secure:
(i) end of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court. While exercising the power the High
Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
29.3 Such a power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private
in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
public servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender:
29.4 On the other hand, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
predominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of commercial
transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes should be
quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among themselves."
19. The aforementioned judgements of the Supreme Court have been relied by
various High Courts and in appropriate cases, the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
have been exercised to prevent the abuse of process of law and secure ends of justice.
20. In light of aforesaid legal position, besides that the parties have already settled
their dispute before Lok Adalat, this Court thinks it appropriate to allow instant
petition as continuance of proceedings before Trial Court would be sheer abuse of
process of law.
21. Based on the all-inclusive consideration of the facts and circumstances summed
up in foregoing paragraphs, exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
seemingly is warranted. Hence, the instant petition is allowed. FIR no.43/2022 for
the offences under Section 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC, registered in Police Station,
Kargil, is quashed.
22. Disposed of in terms of above.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 15.07.2025 Manzoor 30.07.2025 14:21 CrlM No.
703/2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139177134/ 7
