Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 2264
-1-
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 24TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE B.A.PATIL
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.5009/2020
BETWEEN :
Rijesh Ravindran
S/o Kollaikal Ravindran
Aged about 37 years
R/at Nikoo Homes, Tower No.5,
Chockkanahalli Village, Jakkur,
Bengaluru North Taluk
N/o: Pavithram, Pattiarambu
Thiruvilwamala Thrissur-680 588.
... Petitioner
(By Sri Hashmath Pasha, Senior Counsel for
Sri Nasir Ali, Advocate)
AND :
Union of India
by Narcotic Control Bureau
Bengaluru Zonal Unit,
Bengaluru,
... Respondent
(By Sri Madhukar Despande, Central Government
Standing Counsel)
This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 439 of
Cr.P.C praying to enlarge the petitioner on bail in
NCB.F.NO.48/1/14/2020/BZU registered by NCB,
Bengaluru, for the offences punishable under Sections
22, 27A, 28 and 29 of NDPS Act.
-2-
This Criminal Petition having been heard and
reserved on 06.11.2020 coming on for pronouncement of
orders this day, the Court made the following:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 1
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
ORDER
This petition is filed by accused No.3 under Section 439 of Cr.P.C. praying to release him on bail in
Crime No.NCB.48/1/14/2020/BZU on the file of NCB, Bengaluru for the offences punishable under
Section 8 r/w. Sections 22, 27A, 28 and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
1985 ('NDPS Act' for short).
2. I have heard Sri Hashmath Pasha, learned Senior Counsel for Sri Nasir Ali, learned counsel for
the petitioner-accused No.3 and Sri Madhukar Despande, learned CGSC for the respondent-NCB.
3. The gist of the case of the prosecution is that on 21.8.2020 at about 5.50 p.m., the Intelligence
Officer of NCB received a credible information that one Mohammed Anoop is staying in Room
No.205-206 of Royal Suites Hotel Apartment at Kalyannagar and has purchased 100 grams of
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine ('MDMA' for short) pills and immediately the said information
has been forwarded to higher authority and along with panch witnesses they went to the said place
and a search has been conducted in Room No.205-206 in the said Hotel, where they found 60 grams
of MDMA tablets and the same has been seized by drawing a mahazar and the said Mohammed
Anoop has been apprehended. During the course of enquiry, he disclosed that he has given 40 grams
of tablets to the petitioner-accused No.3. On the same day, i.e., on 21.8.2020 at about 11.10 p.m.,
another information report has been prepared on the basis of the statement given by Mohammed
Anoop and after taking an authorization, a search has been conducted at Flat No.52401 at
Chookanahalli, Jakkur, Yelahanka, Bengaluru and the petitioner-accused No.3 was found with 40
grams of MDMA tablets and 180 blots of Lysergic acid Diethylamide ('LSD' for short) and they were
seized under panchanama and the petitioner- accused No.3 has been taken to custody.
4. It is the submission of the leaned Senior Counsel for the petitioner-accused No.3 that the
information which has been received on 21.8.2020 at about 5.50 p.m. has not been recorded in the
Register of Information and the copy of the same has not been immediately forwarded to the
superior officer as required under Sections 42(1) and 42(2) of NDPS Act though the said provision is
mandatory. In support of his contention, he has relied upon a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in
the case of Sarija Banu @ Janarthani @ Janani and Another Vs. State through Inspector of Police,
reported in 2004(12) SCC 266. It is his further submission that Annexure-D, information report has
been got prepared only to implicate the petitioner-accused No.3 after the search of room of accused
No.2 Mohammed Anoop on 21.8.2020 at about 10.10 p.m. It is his further submission that when an
information has been disclosed about the cognizable offence, no case has been registered till the
production of accused Nos.2 and 3 on 24.8.2020 with remand application before the jurisdictional
Court. Hence, the detention of the petitioner-accused No.3 for three days is considered to be an
illegal detention, only with an intention to falsely implicate the petitioner-accused No.3. It is his
further submission that the petitioner-accused No.3 was not present when the seizure has taken
place and the name of the petitioner-accused No.3 was not found in the FIR. It is his further
submission that without registering the case, authorizations have been got used which are in printed
formats that itself shows that there was no application of mind by the Investigating Agency and no
search warrant has been obtained and no authorization was also there earlier in this behalf. It is his
further submission that for both panchanamas same panchas have been used and no sample has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 2
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
been drawn for the purpose of sending the same for chemical examination and no kit test certificate
or procedure has been followed during the course of investigation. It is his further submission that
when a person has been searched, nothing was found, but without following the procedure under
the provisions of NDPS Act the entire search and seizure has been done in violation of law. It is his
further submission that Flat No. 52401 is not in exclusive possession of the petitioner-accused No.3
and as such it will not incriminate the petitioner-accused No.3 in the said case. It is his further
submission that no test memo is prepared at the spot. As per Section 42 of the NDPS Act, no search
can be made after the sunset and before the sunrise. In support of his contention, he has relied upon
a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Roy V.D. Vs. State of Kerala, reported in (2000)8
SCC 590. The Investigating Officer is not a rank of Gazetted Officer so as to exercise the power
under Section 42 of NDPS Act. It is his further submission that no grounds have also been stated for
the search. As per Section 41 of the NDPS Act an authorized Gazetted Officer can authorize the
subordinate to execute the warrant. But in the case on hand the Investigating Officer is not a
Gazetted Officer as contemplated under Section 41 of NDPS Act and Investigating Officer has not
made any subjective satisfaction and without authority he has conducted the search. It is his further
submission that as per Standing Instruction No.1/88 and under Regulation No.1.18, the qualitative
and quantitative tests have to be produced within 30 days otherwise the Court can refuse to remand
the accused to the custody. In support of his contention, he has relied upon a decision in the case of
Noor Aga Vs. State of Punjab & another reported in 2008(16) SCC 417. It is his further submission
that Hon'ble Courts in catena of decisions have held that non-production of report of qualitative and
quantitative tests within 15 days and 30 days is considered to be a ground for bail and in that light
the petitioner-accused No.3 is entitled to be released on bail. Though the seizure of the articles is on
22.8.2020 already more than 60 days have been lapsed, no test report is produced. In that light, the
detention of the petitioner-accused No.3 appears to be illegal detention. It is his further submission
that now the NCB Officers have been given the power of incharge of Police Station and in that light
whatever the voluntary statement given by the accused during the custodial period is inadmissible
and it is also hit by Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act. In that light, he relied upon the
decision in the case of Tofan Singh Vs. State of Tamil Nadu in Criminal Appeal No.152/2013 &
connected matters disposed of 29.10.2020.
5. It is his further submission that the seized article has been sent for chemical examination and the
report has also been received. The percentage of MDMA has given positive result but it is containing
only 15.1%, 15.2%, 16.0%, 15.8%, 16.2% and 16.9% in respect of pink tablets, blue tablets, purple
tablets and orange tablets respectively. It is his further submission that there is ample material to
show that the petitioner- accused No.3 is not guilty of the offence and he has not been involved in
any case and there is no likelihood of he committing any offence in future and in that light, the
provisions of Section 37 of the NDPS Act are not applicable and that is the main criteria under the
said Section to release the petitioner-accused No.3, on bail. It is his further submission that the
petitioner-accused No.3 is not a drug peddler and he is only addicted to consume and for his
personal consumption he has kept some drugs. If at all he is liable, he is liable only under Section 27
of the NDPS Act which is not punishable with any gravity. It is his further submission that the
petitioner-accused No.3 is ready to abide by the conditions to be imposed by this Court and ready to
offer sureties. On these grounds, he prayed to allow the petition and to release the
petitioner-accused No.3 on bail.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 3
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
6. Per contra, the learned CGSC for the respondent has vehemently argued and submitted that in the
first instance, on information they went to Room No.205-206
- 10 -
of Royal Suites Hotel Apartment where accused No.2- Mohammed Anoop was staying and they have
seized 60 grams of MDMA tablets and it is accused No.2 who disclosed that he has given 40 grams
of MDMA to the petitioner-accused No.3. In continuation of the said investigation, further
authorization has been obtained from the Superintendent of NCB and a search has been conducted
as per Section 41(2) of NDPS Act. There is no illegality or irregularity in so far as search is
concerned. It is his further submission that though the provision of law indicates that after sunset
and before sunrise, no search can be conducted, the proviso indicates that if the search has been
conducted with authorization and the continuity of the investigation, then under such circumstances
the contention of the learned Senior Counsel will not be having any force. It is his further
submission that the investigation is still under progress and 40 grams of MDMA tablets and 180
blots of LSD has been seized from the possession of the petitioner- accused No.3 and the said
quantity is a commercial
- 11 -
quantity of Narcotic Drugs. It is his further submission that a mahazar has been drawn in the
presence of the witnesses and the quantity of contraband is more than the commercial quantity. It is
his further submission that when once the article seized is a commercial quantity then the
provisions of Section 37 of the NDPS Act attract and the accused has to prove that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and he is not likely to commit
any offence while on bail. When the said article has been ascertained as MDMA of commercial
quantity and it was in possession of petitioner-accused No.3 prima facie it substantiates that he was
in possession of the said contraband tablets and in that light he has to explain about his
non-involvement in the said case. It is his further submission that the Court should take into
account the factual presumption in law that the official acts by the officers have regularly been
performed, such presumption can be rebutted only during evidence and not merely saying that no
document has been produced before the Court. In this behalf, he
- 12 -
has relied upon a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Superintendent, Narcotics
Controls Bureau, Chennai Vs. R.Paulsamy, reported in (2000)9 SCC 549.
7. It is his further submission that the quantity of neutral substance has to be considered for the
purpose of quantity of the contraband and for the purpose of weighing offending drug the entire
substance has to be taken into consideration. In this behalf, he has relied upon the decision of this
Court in the case of The Registrar General, High Court of Karnataka Vs. A.Shahid and others,
reported in ILR 2015 KAR 5411 and of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Hira Singh and another
Vs. Union of India and Another, reported in SC 2020 SCC Online SC 382. It is his further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 4
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
submission that illegal detention of the petitioner- accused No.3 has not been challenged including
the remand made by the jurisdictional Court. Under such circumstances, he cannot contend that till
24.8.2020 his
- 13 -
detention is illegal. It is his further submission that the primary duty of the police is to prevent from
happening of the crime. Immediately after receiving the information they have to proceed to the
spot and avert the crime. It is his further submission that non obtaining of FSL report is not a
ground when there is material to show the involvement of the petitioner-accused No.3 in the alleged
crime. In that light, he has relied upon a decision of co- ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of
Ragini Dwivedi @ Gini @ Rags and others Vs. The State of Karnataka in Criminal Petition
No.5389/2020 & connected matters, disposed of on 3.11.2020. It is his further submission that the
seized article is exceeding commercial quantity. When the investigation is still pending, then under
such circumstances, detailed discussion while dealing with the bail application and formalities
cannot be considered. In that light, he has relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of Shri
Aayush Ajit Vs. Inspector of Customs in Criminal Petition No.4017/2020 disposed of on 8.10.2020.
It is
- 14 -
his further submission that Section 41 of the NDPS Act, empowers the person to issue authorization
and on the basis of the said authorization the search has been conducted and there is no illegality. It
is his further submission that the petitioner-accused No.3 has conspired with other accused persons
and admittedly it is his say that the seized article was kept for his personal consumption and in that
light, it is his submission that the petitioner-accused No.3 has not made out any grounds so as
release him on bail. On these grounds, he prayed to dismiss the petition.
8. I have carefully and cautiously gone through the submissions made on both sides and perused the
records.
9. The first contention which has been taken up by the learned Senior Counsel is that the MDMA
which has been seized from the possession of the petitioner- accused No.3 after excluding neutral
substance is not a commercial quantity. Seized article, i.e., MDMA has been
- 15 -
sent for chemical examination and as per the report dated 13.10.2020 the sample under reference
answers positive for MDMA and LSD. In so far as MDMA actual content is concerned, the
percentage found is 15.1%, 15.2%, 16.0%, 15.8%, 16.2% and 16.9% in respect of Item Nos.1, 3, 6, 8 10
and 12 respectively and in so far as LSD is concerned, the percentage found is 1.3%. But in case of
MDMA, the gross weight of the sample received is 5.1, 5.2, 5.2, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.0 grams respectively
and in so far as LSD is concerned, sample received is 2.9 grams, as such benefit has to be given to
the petitioner- accused No.3. Under such circumstances, it is his further submission that it is not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 5
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
coming within purview of commercial quantity. He further submitted that preservance of original
wrapper comes within the purview of the directions issued in terms of Section 3.1 of Standing
Instruction No.1/1989 and contravention of such guidelines cannot be said to be an error which in a
case of this nature can conveniently be overlooked by the Courts. It is his further submission that
the guidelines
- 16 -
issued should not only be substantially complied with, but also in a case involving penal
proceedings, vis-à-vis a departmental proceeding, rigours of such guidelines may be insisted upon.
In that light, he has relied upon the decision in the case of Noor Aga Vs. State of Punjab & another
(cited supra), wherein at paragraphs-87 and 89 it has been observed as under:-
"87. Preservance of original wrappers, thus, comes within the purview of the
direction issued in terms of Section 3.1 of Standing Order 1 of 1989, Contravention of
such guidelines could not be said to be an error which in a case of this nature can
conveniently be overlooked by the court. We are not oblivious of a decision of this
Court in South Central Railway v. G.Ratnam relating to disciplinary proceedings,
wherein such guidelines were held not necessary to be complied with, but therein
also this Court stated: (SCC p 222, para 23) "23. In the cases on hand, no proceedings
for commission of penal offences were
- 17 -
proposed to be lodged against the respondents by the investigating officers."
"89. Guidelines issued should not only be substantially complied with, but also in a
case involving penal proceedings, vis-à-vis a departmental proceeding, rigours of
such guidelines may be insisted upon. Another important factor which must be borne
in mind is as to whether such directions have been issued in terms of the provisions
of the statute or not. When direction are issued by an authority having the legal
sanction granted therefor, it becomes obligatory on the part of the subordinate
authorities to comply therewith."
10. It is the specific contention of the learned CGSC that the Court while considering the quantity of
the drug seized, neutral substance must also have to be taken into consideration and in that light it
is his submission that the articles seized are the offending drugs and are of commercial quantity. In
that light, he has also relied upon the decision in the case of Registrar General,
- 18 -
High Court of Karnataka Vs. A.Shahid and others (cited supra), wherein at paragraph-10 it has been
observed as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 6
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
"10. At the cost of the repetition, we conclude that the law prior to issuance of
notification dated 18.11.2009 had been settled by the Apex Court in the case of
E.MICHEAL RAJ cited supra holding that when any narcotic drug or psyhotropic
substance is found mixed with one or more neutral substance, for the purpose of
imposition of punishment, it is the only content of narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance which has to be taken into consideration. This proposition is altered by
virtue of the notification dated 18.11.2009 inasmuch as the entire mixture and not
just its pure drug content has to be considered by virtue of the said notification.
It is also beneficial to note that the Apex Court in the case of HAARJIT SINGH vs.
STATE OF PUNJAB, has ruled that the notification dated 18.11.2009 providing that
whole quantity of material recovered in the form of mixture is to be considered for
the purpose of imposing
- 19 -
punishment has got prospective effect, which means the notification dated
18.11.2009 operates from the date of said notification "
11. Even similar issue has also come up before the Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Hira Singh and
another Vs. Union of India and Another (cited supra) wherein at paragraphs-8.1, 8.2 and 10, it has
been observed as under:-
"8.1. In the case of Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak Mahajan reported in (1994)
3 SCC 440, it is observed by this Court that every law is designed to further ends of
justice but not to frustrate on the mere technicalities. It is further observed that
though the intention of the Court is only to expound the law and not to legislate,
nonetheless the legislature cannot be asked to sit to resolve the difficulties in the
implementation of its intention and the spirit of the law. It is the duty of the Court to
mould or creatively interpret the legislation by liberally interpreting the statute. In
the said decision this Court has also quoted following
- 20 -
passage in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 10th Edition page 229:
"Where the language of a statute, in its ordinary meaning and grammatical
construction, leads to a manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the
enactment, or to some inconvenience or absurdity, hardship or injustice, presumable
not intended, a construction may be put upon it which modifies the meaning of the
words, and even the structure of the sentence. ... Where the main object and
intention of a statute are clear, it must not be reduced to a nullity by the draftsman's
unskilfulness or ignorance of the law, except in a case of necessity, or the absolute
intractability of the language used."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 7
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
Thereafter, it is further observed that to winch up the legislative intent, it is permissible for courts to
take into account the ostensible purpose and object and the real legislative intent. Otherwise, a bare
mechanical interpretation of the words and application of the legislative intent devoid of concept of
purpose and object will render the legislature inane. It is further observed that in
- 21 -
given circumstances, it is permissible for courts to have functional approaches and look into the
legislative intention and sometimes it may be even necessary to go behind the words and enactment
and take other factors into consideration to give effect to the legislative intention and to the purpose
and spirit of the enactment so that no absurdity or practical inconvenience may result and the
legislative exercise and its scope and object may not become futile."
"8.2. Therefore, considering the statement of objects and reasons and the preamble
of the NDPS Act and the relevant provisions of the NDPS Act, it seems that it was
never the intention of the legislature to exclude the quantity of neutral substance and
to consider only the actual content by weight of offending drug which is relevant for
the purpose of determining whether it would constitute small quantity or commercial
quantity. Right from sub-clause (viia) and (xxiiia) of Section 2 of NDPS Act emphasis
is on Narcotic and Drug or Psychotropic Substance (Sections 21, 22, 23, 24, 27 and
43). Even in the table attached to the
- 22 -
Notification dated 19.10.2001, column no.2 is with respect to name of Narcotic Drug and
Psychotropic Substance and column nos.5 and 6 are with respect to "small quantity and commercial
quantity". Note 2 of the Notification dated 19.10.2001 specifically provides that quantity shown
against the respective drugs listed in the table also apply to the preparations of the drug and the
preparations of substances of note 1. As per Note 1, the small quantity and commercial quantity
given against the respective drugs listed in the table apply to the isomers ..., whenever existence of
such substance is possible. Therefore, for the determination of "small quantity or the commercial
quantity"
with respect to Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic Substance mentioned in column no.2
the quantity mentioned in the clauses 5 and 6 are required to be taken into
consideration. However, in the case of mixture of the narcotic drugs/psychotropic
drugs mentioned in column no.2 and any mixture or preparation that of with or
without the neutral material of any of the drugs mentioned in table, lesser of the
small quantity between the
- 23 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 8
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
quantities given against the respective Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic Substances
forming part of mixture and lesser of commercial quantity between the quantities
given against the respective narcotic drugs or psychotropic substance forming part of
the mixture is to be taken into consideration. As per example, mixture of 100 gm is
seized and the mixture is consisting of two different Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substance with neutral material, one drug is heroin and another is methadone, lesser
of commercial quantity between the quantities given against the aforesaid two
respective Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance is required to be considered.
For the purpose of determination of the "small quantity or commercial quantity", in
case of entry 239 the entire weight of the mixture/drug by whatever named called
weight of neutral material is also required to be considered subject to what is stated
hereinabove. If the view taken by this Court in the case of E. Micheal Raj (supra) is
accepted, in that case, it would be adding something to the relevant provisions of the
- 24 -
statute which is not there and/or it was never intended by the legislature."
"10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, Reference is answered as
under:
(I) The decision of this Court in the case of E. Micheal Raj (supra) taking the view
that in the mixture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substance with one or more
neutral substance(s), the quantity of the neutral substance(s) is not to be taken into
consideration while determining the small quantity or commercial quantity of a
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance and only the actual content by weight of the
offending narcotic drug which is relevant for the purpose of determining whether it
would constitute small quantity or commercial quantity, is not a good law;
(II) In case of seizure of mixture of Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic Substances with
one or more neutral substance(s) the quantity of neutral substance(s) is not to be
excluded and to be taken into consideration along with
- 25 -
actual content by weight of the offending drug, while determining the "small or commercial
quantity" of the Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic Substances;
(III) Section 21 of the NDPS Act is not stand-alone provision and must be construed along with
other provisions in the statute including provisions in the NDPS Act including Notification
No.S.O.2942(E) dated 18.11.2009 and Notification S.OI 1055(E) dated 19.10.2001;
(IV) Challenge to Notification dated 18.11.2009 adding "Note 4" to the Notification dated
19.10.2001, fails and it is observed and held that the same is not ultra vires to the scheme and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 9
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
relevant provisions of the NDPS Act. Consequently, writ petitions and Civil Appeal No.5218/2017
challenging the aforesaid notification stand dismissed."
12. On close reading of the aforesaid two citations, it has been made clear that in case of seizure of
mixture of drugs with one or neutral substance, the quantity of neutral substance is not to be
excluded and to be taken
- 26 -
into consideration along with the actual content by weight of the offending drug while determining
the small or commercial quantity of the drug. In that light, on perusal of the report of RFSL, it
indicates that MDMA has given a gross weight of 5.1, 5.2, 5.2, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.0 grams in respect of
pink tablets, blue tablets, purple tablets and orange tablets. In so far as LSD is concerned, the gross
weight of the sample received is 2.9 grams. In that light, the quantity of the drug seized is more than
two grams and 2 to 50 grams is medium quantity and above that, is considered to be commercial
quantity. In that light, the quantity of the drug seized from the possession of the petitioner-accused
No.3 amounts to commercial quantity and therefore, the contention of the learned Senior Counsel is
not acceptable.
13. Be that as it may, I am not having any difference of opinion with regard to the ratio laid down in
the said decision. But subsequently, the Hon'ble Apex
- 27 -
Court in the case of Hira Singh and another Vs. Union of India and Another (cited supra), has
observed that the main object and intention of the statute are clear and it must not be reduced to a
nullity by the draftsman's unskillfulness or ignorance of the law, except in a case of necessity or the
absolute interactability of the language used, it cannot be diluted. It is further observed that the act
was never intended to exclude the quantity of neutral substance and to consider the actual contents
by weight of the offending drug which is relevant for the purpose of determining whether it
constitutes a small or commercial quantity. In that light, I am of the considered opinion that the
decision quoted by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner-accused No.3 in the case of Noor
Aga Vs. State of Punjab & another (cited supra), is not applicable and it is well settled proposition of
law that the recent decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court will prevail over the earlier decisions.
- 28 -
14. It is the submission of the learned Senior Counsel that as per the Standing Instruction No.1/88
and Guideline No.1.18 they speak with regard to the quantitative and qualitative tests to be
conducted at the time of seizure and the qualitative test has to be conducted within 15 days and
quantitative test has to be conducted within 30 days so as to ascertain whether the seized article is
small or intermediate or commercial quantity. But on perusal of the mahazar dated 21.8.2020,
accused No.2-Mohammed Anoop produced MDMA tablets weighing 60 grams and it was in a
transparent polythene pouch with heat sealed and as per the seizure mahazar dated 21/22.8.2020,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 10
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
from the possession of accused No.3, 40 grams of MDMA tablets and 180 blots of LSD tablets have
been recovered and the same have been seized. In the mahazars drawn they have specifically
mentioned that at the first instance 60 grams of MDMA has been seized from the possession of
accused No.2 and 40 grams of MDMA and 180 blots of LSD have been seized from the possession of
accused
- 29 -
No.3 and it is going to satisfy the first standing order with regard to quantitative test is concerned.
Even as could be seen from the statement of the accused persons, they have clearly admitted that the
said prohibited drugs are MDMA and LSD. It is well settled proposition of law that the Court has to
take into account the factual presumption in law that official acts have been regularly performed and
such presumption can be rebutted only during evidence and not merely saying that no document
has been produced before the Court during the bail stage and compliance of formalities mentioned
in Sections 52 and 57 of the NDPS Act. This proposition of law has been laid down by the Hon'ble
Apex Court in the case of Superintendent, Narcotics Controls Bureau, Chennai Vs. R.Paulsamy
(cited supra), wherein at paragraph-6 it has been observed as under:-
"6. In the light of Section 37 of the Act no accused can be released on bail when the
application is opposed by the Public Prosecutor unless the court is satisfied that there
are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
- 30 -
guilty of such offences and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail. It
is unfortunate that matters which could be established only in offence regarding
compliance with Sections 52 and 57 have been pre-judged by the learned Single
Judge at the stage of consideration for bail. The minimum which learned Single
Judge should have taken into account was the factual presumption in law position
that official acts have been regularly performed. Such presumption can be rebutted
only during evidence and not merely saying that no document has been produced
before the learned Single Judge during bail stage regarding the compliance with the
formalities mentioned in those two sections."
15. It is the submission of the learned Senior Counsel that the statement is recorded during the
course of investigation by an officer of the NCB who is a police officer and as such the statement
recorded is hit under Sections 25 and 26 of Indian Evidence Act. In that light, he has relied upon the
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Tofan Singh Vs. State of Tamil Nadu in
- 31 -
Criminal Appeal No.152/2013 & connected matters disposed of 29.10.2020, wherein at
paragraph-152 it has been observed as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 11
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
"152. Thus, to arrive at the conclusion that a confessional statement made before an
officer designated under section 42 or section 53 can be the basis to convict a person
under the NDPS Act, without any non obstante clause doing away with section 25 of
the Evidence Act, and without any safeguards, would be a direct infringement of the
constitutional guarantees contained in Articles 14, 20(3) and 21 of the Constitution of
India."
16. Keeping in view of the ratio laid in the aforesaid decision, on perusal of the records, even
excluding the statement of the accused, on perusal of the report of the chemical examiners, dated
13.10.2020, it has given positive result for both MDMA and LSD and even the quantity of prohibited
drug which has been seized is more than the commercial quantity. In that light, the contention of
the Senior Counsel is not acceptable.
- 32 -
17. It is the contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner-accused No.3 that the
detention of the accused for the earlier period is an illegal detention and without warrant or
authorization the Investigating Officer cannot retain the petitioner-accused No.3 and he is not
empowered to make a search in between sunset and sunrise. In that light, he has relied upon the
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Roy V.D. Vs. State of Kerala (cited supra), wherein
at paragraphs-15 and 16 it has been observed as under:-
"15. It is thus seen that for exercising powers enumerated under sub-section (1) of
Section 42 at any time whether by day or by night a warrant of arrest or search issued
by a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class or any Magistrate of
the Second Class who has been specially empowered by the State Government in that
behalf or an authorization under sub-section (2) of Section 41 by an empowered
officer is necessary. Without such a warrant or an authorization, an empowered
officer can exercise those
- 33 -
powers only between sunrise and sunset. However, the proviso permits such an
empowered or authorized officer to exercise the said powers at any time between
sunset and sunrise if he has reason to believe that such a search warrant or
authorization cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment
of evidence of facility for the escape of an offender and he records the grounds of his
belief.
16. Now, it is plain that no officer other than an empowered officer can resort to
Section 41(2) or exercise powers under Section 42(1) of the NDPS Act or make a
complaint under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 36-A of the NDPS Act. It
follows that any collection of materials, detention or arrest of a person or search of a
building or conveyance or seizure effected by an officer not being an empowered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 12
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
officer or an authorized officer under Section 41(2) of the NDPS Act, lacks sanction of
law and is inherently illegal and as such the same cannot form the basis of a
proceeding in respect of offences under Chapter IV of the NDPS Act
- 34 -
and use of such a material by the prosecution vitiates the trial."
18. Section 42 of the NDPS Act empowers any officer for entry, search, seizure and arrest without
warrant or authorization. For the purpose of brevity, I quote Sections 41 and 42 of the NDPS Act,
which read thus:-
"41. Power to issue warrant and authorization.- (1) A Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Magistrate of the first class or any Magistrate of the second class specially
empowered by the State Government in this behalf, may issue a warrant for the arrest
of any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed any offence
punishable under this Act, or for the search, whether by day or by night, of any
building, conveyance or place in which he has reason to believe any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance or controlled substance in respect of which an offence
punishable under this Act has been committed or any document or other article
which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally
acquired property or any
- 35 -
document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally
acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter
VA of this Act is kept or concealed.
(2) Any such officer of gazetted rank of the departments of central excise, narcotics,
customs, revenue intelligence or any other department of the Central Government
including the para-military forces or the armed forces as is empowered in this behalf
by general or special order by the Central Government, or any such officer of the
revenue, drugs control, excise, police or any other department of a State Government
as is empowered in this behalf by general or special order of the State Government if
he has reason to believe from personal knowledge or information given by any person
and taken in writing that any person has committed an offence punishable under this
Act or that any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance in
respect of which any offence under this Act has been committed or any document or
other article which may
- 36 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 13
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally acquired property or any
document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property
which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act is kept or concealed
in any building, conveyance or place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him but superior in
rank to a peon, sepoy or a constable to arrest such a person or search a building, conveyance or place
whether by day or by night or himself arrest such a person or search a building, conveyance or place.
(3) The officer to whom a warrant under sub- section (1) is addressed and the officer who authorised
the arrest or search or the officer who is so authorised under sub-section (2) shall have all the
powers of an officer acting under section 42.]
42. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant or authorisation.- (1) Any such officer
(being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or constable) of the departments of central excise,
narcotics, customs, revenue intellegence or any other
- 37 -
department of the Central Government including para-military forces or armed forces as is
empowered in this behalf by general or special order by the Central Government, or any such officer
(being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or constable) of the revenue, drugs control, excise,
police or any other department of a State Government as is empowered in this behalf by general or
special order of the State Government, if he has reason to believe from persons knowledge or
information given by any person and taken down in writing that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic
substance, or controlled substance in respect of which an offence punishable under this Act has been
committed or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of the commission of such
offence or any illegally acquired property or any document or other article which may furnish
evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture
under Chapter VA of this Act is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or enclosed place,
may between sunrise and sunset,--
- 38 -
(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or place;
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any obstacle to such entry;
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the manufacture thereof and any other
article and any animal or conveyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to confiscation
under this Act and any document or other article which he has reason to believe may furnish
evidence of the commission of any offence punishable under this Act or furnish evidence of holding
any illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA
of this Act; and
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has reason to believe to
have committed any offence punishable under this Act:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 14
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
Provided that in respect of holder of a licence for manufacture of manufactured drugs
or psychotropic substances or controlled substances, granted under this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder, such power shall be
- 39 -
exercised by an officer not below the rank of sub-inspector:
Provided further that if such officer has reason to believe that a search warrant or
authorisation cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment
of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search such
building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time between sunset and sunrise after
recording the grounds of his belief.
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under sub-section (1) or
records grounds for his belief under the proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two
hours send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior."
19. As per Section 41(1) of the NDPS Act, if the officer making the search is below the rank of
Gazetted in the Department, then under such circumstances, in order to exercise the power for
search, he has to obtain warrant. But as could be seen from Section 41(2) of the
- 40 -
NDPS Act, if he is an officer of gazetted rank, then under such circumstances, he himself can make a
search of a building conveyance or place, either in a day or at night. But it also authorized him to
give an authorization as per Section 41(3) of the NDPS Act and if such authorization has been issued
under Section 41(2) of the NDPS Act, he shall have all the powers of the officers acting under Section
42(3) of the NDPS Act. Keeping in view the aforesaid provision of law, looking from the records, the
Superintendent of NCB has given an authorization to search under Section 41(2) of the NDPS Act
and on the basis of the same, the Investigating Officer has made a search. In that light, the search of
the Flat of the petitioner-accused No.3 conducted during night hours does not considered to be in
violation of the provisions of Section 41 of the NDPS Act.
20. Be that as it may, even as per the case of the prosecution, on 21.8.2020, on receipt of the credible
information at about 5.50 p.m., they went to Royal
- 41 -
Suites Hotel Apartment, where accused No.2 was there and there they have seized 60 grams of
MDMA tablets by drawing a mahazar. Accused No.2 disclosed that he has given 40 grams of MDMA
tablets to accused No.3 and in that light, after taking an authorization on 21.8.2020 a search has
been conducted. In that light also there is no illegality and it is continuation of the investigation on
the basis of the voluntary statement said to have been given by accused No.2-Mohammed Anoop. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 15
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
that light also, the contention of the learned Senior Counsel is not having any force and the same is
liable to be rejected.
21. On perusal of the records, the contraband article which has been seized in the form of MDMA
and LSD as discussed above, is a commercial quantity. When once the quantity of contraband article
is considered to be a commercial quantity, then under such circumstances, the provisions of Section
37 of the NDPS Act will be made applicable. For the purpose of brevity, I
- 42 -
quote Section 37 of the NDPS Act, which reads as under:-
"37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable - (1) notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974):-
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence
punishable for [offences u/s.19 or
Section 24 or Section 27A and also for offences involving commercial quantity] shall
be released on bail or on his own bond unless -
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given
an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release, and
(ii) Where the Public Prosecutor opposes
the application, the court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
while on bail.
- 43 -
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the
limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time
being in force, on granting of bail."
22. On close reading of the aforesaid Section, it says that twin conditions have to be adhered to by
the Court while dealing with the parameters of Section 439 of Cr.P.C. If the object of the NDPS Act is
looked into, it is enacted to make stringent provisions for control, regulation and authorization
relating to NDPS Act. The said enactment is a special enactment and in Section 37 of the NDPS Act,
it states that a non-obstante clause has been inserted and it is negative scope limiting the scope and
applicability of the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure for considering the bail application. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 16
Rijesh Ravindran vs Union Of India on 24 November, 2020
that light, the Court has to keep in mind the object of enactment and proceed with the aspect. Even
as could be seen from Section, 37(b)(i) and (ii) of the NDPS Act
- 44 -
are the specific limitations prescribed on the Court and it says that while dealing with the bail
application, the Public Prosecutor has to be given an opportunity to oppose the application and the
Court must satisfy itself that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty
of such offence and is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
23. Keeping in view the said proposition of law, on perusal of the records and the submission made
by the learned Senior Counsel, it is not in dispute that 40 grams of MDMA and 180 blots of LSD has
been seized from the possession of the petitioner-accused No.3 and the seized article is a
commercial quantity.
24. Even though it is the submission of the learned Senior Counsel that the said contraband article
was kept for the personal use of the petitioner-accused No.3, when the quantity of the contraband is
of commercial quantity, then under such circumstances, the petitioner-accused No.3 has to come
with a proper explanation and there
- 45 -
are no grounds made out to show that the petitioner- accused No.3 is not guilty of such offence
under the Act.
Looking from any angle, the petitioner-accused No.3 has not made out any case so as release him on
bail. Hence, the petition being devoid of merits, is liable to be dismissed and accordingly the same
stands dismissed.
However, liberty is reserved to the petitioner- accused No.3 to file a fresh petition after filing of the
charge sheet.
Sd/-
JUDGE *ck/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44875504/ 17
