Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10
April, 2025
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLMC No.2783 of 2021, CRLMC Nos.1685 and 2063 of 2022, CRLMC
Nos.1323 and 4994 of 2023 & CRLMC Nos.3967 and 4103 of 2024
(In the matters of applications under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973)
CRLMC No.2783 of 2021
Rikhiram Chandrakar .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Mr. B. S. Dasparida, Advocate
Mr. K. Mohanty, Advocate
Mr. M. K. Agrawalla, Advocate
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CRLMC No.1685 of 2022
Pramod Kumar Biswal .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Mr. B. S. Dasparida, Advocate
Mr. S. Mohapatra, Advocate
Mr.K. Mohanty, Advocate
Mr. M. K. Agrawalla, Advocate
Page 1 of 30
Mr. A. Ray, Advocate
Mr. A. Pradhan, Advocate
Ms. S. S. Lenka, Advocate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 1
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
For Opposite Part : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CRLMC No.2063 of 2022
Gopal Chandra Bisoi .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Ms. R. Dhal, Advocate
Mr. B. S. Dasparida, Advocate
Mr. S. Mohapatra, Advocate
Mr. K. Mohapatra, Advocate
Mr. M. K. Agrawalla, Advocate
Mr. A. Ray, Advocate
Mr. A. Pradhan, Advocate
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CRLMC No.1323 of 2023
Manoj Kumar Sahoo .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Page 2 of 30
Mr. B. S. Dasparida, Advocate
Mr. S. Mohapatra, Advocate
Mr. K. Mohanty, Advocate
Mr. M. K. Agrawalla, Advocate
Mr. A. Ray, Advocate
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 2
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
CRLMC No.4994 of 2023
Surath Chandra Mallick .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Sameer Kumar Das, Advocate
Mr. P. K. Behera, Advocate
Mr. N. Jena, Advocate
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CRLMC No.3967 of 2024
Sumanta Paikaray .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Mr. B. S. Dasparida, Advocate
Mr. S. Mohapatra, Advocate
Mr.K. Mohanty, Advocate
Mr. M. K. Agrawalla, Advocate
Mr. A. Ray, Advocate
Page 3 of 30
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CRLMC No.4103 of 2024
Dr. Debabrata Mohanty .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite Party
For Petitioner : Mr. Debi Prasad Dhal,
Senior Advocate
Mr. N. Rath, Advocate
Mr. A. Nayak, Advocate
Mr. S. J. Prakash, Advocate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 3
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
For Opposite Party : Mr. Niranjan Moharana,
Additional Standing Counsel
(Vigilance Department)
CORAM:
HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE SIBO SANKAR MISHRA
Date of Hearing: 13.12.2024 :: Date of Judgment:10.04.2025
S.S. Mishra, J. In the present batch of matters, the petitioners have
sought for quashing of the entire criminal prosecution initiated
against them solely on the ground that they have been exonerated in
the departmental proceeding initiated against them on the selfsame
allegations, hence, the prosecution cannot proceed with the criminal
Page 4 of 30
cases against them. The common question of law regarding the
applicability of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
fact scenario of the present cases is the point of determination in the
present batch of cases. Therefore, all the matters are heard
analogously and by a common judgment, they are disposed of.
Bereft of unnecessary details the facts of all the cases in
brevity are enumerated as preface to the Judgement.
In CRLMC No.2783 of 2021
1. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceedings initiated in Koraput Vigilance P.S.
Case No.27 of 2017 corresponding to G.R. Case No.15 of 2017
(Vigilance), pending in the Court of the learned Special Judge,
Vigilance, Jeypore.
2. The prosecution case, in short, is that the petitioner, namely,
Rikhiram Chandrakar while working as the Welfare Extension Officer
as well as the Nodal Officer of Badakumari Gram Panchayat under the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 4
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
Umerkote Block, he along with other ineligible beneficiaries have
illegally availed houses by producing fake photographs and false
verification report and misappropriated the Government funds under
the Indira Awas Yojana (I.A.Y.) as per the recommendations of Kedar
Page 5 of 30
Nath Nayak and Jeturam Majhi. After investigation, charge-sheet has
been filed on 27.12.2021 after obtaining sanction on 17.11.2021 from
the competent authority. Thereafter, the learned Court below has taken
cognizance of the offences under Sections 13(2)r/w13(1)(c)(d) of the
P.C. Act read with Sections 468/471/406/420/120-B of the I.P.C.
against the petitioner and other co-accused persons. It is alleged that
after submission of charge-sheet and taking cognizance, the petitioner
was exonerated in the departmental proceeding wherein the evidences
collected by the prosecution have not been considered and the vital
prosecution witnesses have not been examined. Thereafter, the
concerned administrative department, i.e., the Director, SC & ST
Development and Welfare Department vide order dated 03.04.2024
has directed for de novo enquiry of the departmental proceeding
initiated against the petitioner. Hence, this case.
In CRLMC No.1685 of 2022
3. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceedings initiated in the F.I.R. dated 27.08.2009
in Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.32 of 2009 corresponding to T.R.
No.48 of 2017, pending in the Court of the learned Special Judge
(Vigilance), Dhenkanal.
Page 6 of 30
4. The petitioner, namely, Pramod Kumar Biswal while working as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 5
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
J.E. of Sadar Block, Dhenkanal during the year 2004-05 along with
two others have misappropriated Rs.1,75,000/- by preparing false bills
and forged documents showing execution of a cement concrete road
from Mangalpur Satyabadi High School to Mangalpur U.P. School
under the scheme of Sampurna Gramina Rojgar Yojana (S.G.R.Y.
Scheme). After obtaining sanction, charge-sheet was submitted on
31.10.2012 and cognizance was taken by the learned trial Court for the
offence under Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(c)(d) of the P.C. Act, 1988 and
Sections 468/420/409/ 120-B of the IPC on 25.02.2013 against the
petitioner. It is apposite to mention that the petitioner has been
exonerated in departmental proceeding in 2020. On the basis of such
exoneration order the petitioner is seeking quashment of the criminal
case.
In CRLMC No.2063 of 2022
5. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceedings in Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.02
of 2009 corresponding to T.R. Case No.01 of 2020, pending in the
Court of the learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Angul.
Page 7 of 30
6. The petitioner, namely, Gopal Chandra Bisoi being the public
servant as Assistant Director of Factories and Boilers, Angul Zone
during the year 1986-2009 had possessed disproportionate assets to
the tune of Rs.80,11,074.96/- in his name and in the name of his wife,
who has allegedly abated him in acquisition of the assets in her name
claiming false sources of income. After completion of investigation,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 6
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
charge-sheet has been filed against the petitioner and his wife on
29.06.2019 under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(e) of the P.C.
Act,1988 and Section 109 of the I.P.C. Since the petitioner had
already retired from the service by the time charge-sheet was
submitted and there was no need of sanction to prosecute against him.
Therefore, without sanction cognizance of offences has been taken.
However, the departmental proceeding initiated against the petitioner
was concluded with a punishment of warning, i.e., the petitioner is
hereby warned to conduct himself in a disciplined manner and be
careful in future. Thus, he was not exonerated on merit. The finding
recorded in the departmental proceeding has been made the cause for
quashment of the criminal case.
Page 8 of 30
In CRLMC No.1323 of 2023
7. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceedings in Balasore Vigilance P.S. Case No.02
of 2015 corresponding to T.R. Case No.17 of 2022 pending in the
Court of the learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Balasore.
8. The petitioner, namely, Manoj Kumar Sahoo while working as
Junior Technician in Tihidi Electrical Sub-Division under NESCO,
Bhadrak, allegedly misappropriated the amount to the tune of
Rs.5,66,000/- within the period from 05.10.2013 to 22.11.2014. After
completion of investigation and obtaining sanction from the
competent authority, charge-sheet has been filed U/s.13(2) r/w
13(1)(c)(d) of the P.C. Act, 1988 and Sections 409/477-A/120-B of
IPC against the petitioner and other co-accused persons on 31.05.2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 7
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
and trial is going on. Departmental proceeding has also been initiated
against the petitioner. The petitioner assailed the instant criminal
proceeding on the basis of the inquiry report in the departmental
proceeding by which he has been exonerated.
In CRLMC No.4994 of 2023
9. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceeding in Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.55
Page 9 of 30
of 2011 corresponding to V.G.R. Case No.55 of 2011 pending in the
Court of the learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Cuttack.
10. The petitioner, namely, Surath Chandra Mallick being a public
servant was found possession of disproportionate assets to the tune of
Rs.15,79,895/- during the check period and his wife alleged to have
abated the petitioner in possessing the assets in her name having no
sources of income by filing false income tax return etc. After
conclusion of investigation and obtaining the order of sanction for
prosecution from the competent authority, charge-sheet U/s.13(2) r/w
13(1)(e) of the P.C. Act, 1988 and Section 109 of IPC has been filed
on 07.11.2023 against the petitioner and his wife. The departmental
proceeding has also initiated against the petitioner. Exoneration in
departmental proceeding has been made cause to file this petition.
In CRLMC No.3967 of 2024
11. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceeding in Sambalpur Vigilance P.S. Case
No.54 of 2019 corresponding to V.G.R. Case No.21 of 2019 pending
in the Court of the learned Special Judge (Vigilance), Sambalpur.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 8
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
12. The prosecution case, in brief, is that, the petitioner, namely,
Sumanta Paikaray while working as Section Supervisor of OFDC
Page 10 of 30
Limited, Jharsuguda (C-KL) Sub-Division, Badmal, demanded and
accepted bribe of Rs.16,000/- from the complainant for preparing
challan and T.T. permit and allowing load of firewood from OFDC
Limited, Badmal Depot, Jharsuguda. It is alleged that the petitioner
was trapped on the spot and the tainted bribe money was recovered
from his possession. After completion of investigation and obtaining
sanction for prosecution, charge-sheet has been filed on 13.10.2020.
Subsequent thereto, the learned Court below has taken cognizance of
the offences punishable U/s.7 of the P.C. Act, 1988 against the
petitioner on 02.07.2021. However, the petitioner has been exonerated
in the departmental proceedings; therefore, he seeks quashing of the
criminal case relying upon the findings of departmental proceedings.
In CRLMC No.4103 of 2024
13. This petition has been filed by the petitioner with a prayer to
quash the criminal proceeding in V.G.R. Case No.43 of 2009
corresponding to T.C. No.162 of 2013 arising out of Balasore
Vigilance P.S. Case No.43 of 2009, pending in the Court of the
learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Baripada.
14. The petitioner, namely, Dr. Debabrata Mohanty being the Senior
Surveyor of Mines, Baripada, in connivance with other Mining
Page 11 of 30
Officers abused his official position and shown undue official favour
to the lease holders as well as the Power of Attorney Holders and
allowed them to illegally excavate the iron ore of 1,88,484.440 MT
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 9
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
beyond the leasehold area and thereby cheated the government fund
by fabricating records to the tune of Rs.21,60,56,217/-. After
obtaining sanction, the charge-sheet was submitted on 17.03.2011 and
cognizance was taken by the learned trial Court on 10.01.2012.
It is also alleged that earlier the petitioner had approached this
Court by filing CRLMC No.1661 of 2012 against the cognizance
order seeking quashing of the entire proceeding. However, the same
was dismissed. Again the petitioner by filing CRLREV No.518 of
2017, challenged the order of rejection of discharge petition on
20.07.2017. The same was also not entertained by this Court as by that
time charge had already been framed. Again the petitioner had
approached this Court by filing CRLREV No.365 of 2018 which was
disposed of on 15.02.2019 giving liberty to the petitioner to raise all
such contentions at the time of trial before the court below. In the case
as well petitioner is relying upon the Departmental inquiry findings to
press his prayer for quashing the FIR.
Page 12 of 30
Submissions
15. Mr. Dhal, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners submitted
that the central issue for determination in the present cases is whether
the exoneration of an accused in departmental proceedings, having
been concluded, criminal proceedings based on the same set of facts
should be allowed to continue or not. The learned counsel further
argued as to whether such proceedings should be deemed an abuse of
the process of the Court and a wastage of judicial time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 10
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
In advancing this argument, the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioners have relied on three judgments passed by a Three-Judge
Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court: Radheshyam Kejriwal V. State of
West Bengal1, State (NCT of Delhi) V. Ajay Kumar Tyagi2 and
Ashoo Surendranath Tewari V. Deputy Superintendent of Police,
EOW, CBI & Anr.3.
16. In the context of the judgment in Radheshyam Kejriwal
(supra), the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners pointed out that
the Hon'ble Supreme Court while discerning adjudication proceedings
vis-à-vis criminal prosecution has outlined the following distinctive
yardstick: -
1
(2011) 3 SCC 581
2
(2012) 9 SCC 685
3
(2020) 9 SCC 636
Page 13 of 30
"38. The ratio which can be culled out from these
decisions can broadly be stated as follows:
(i) Adjudication proceedings and criminal prosecution
can be launched simultaneously;
(ii) Decision in adjudication proceedings is not necessary
before initiating criminal prosecution;
(iii) Adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings
are independent in nature to each other;
(iv) The finding against the person facing prosecution in
the adjudication proceedings is not binding on the
proceeding for criminal prosecution;
(v) Adjudication proceedings by the Enforcement
Directorate is not prosecution by a competent court of law
to attract the provisions of Article 20(2) of the
Constitution or Section 300 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure;
(vi) The finding in the adjudication proceedings in favour
of the person facing trial for identical violation will
depend upon the nature of finding. If the exoneration in
adjudication proceedings is on technical ground and not
on merit, prosecution may continue; and
(vii) In case of exoneration, however, on merits where the
allegation is found to be not sustainable at all and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 11
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
person held innocent, criminal prosecution on the same
set of facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to
continue, the underlying principle being the higher
standard of proof in criminal cases.
39. In our opinion, therefore, the yardstick would be to
judge as to whether the allegation in the adjudication
proceedings as well as the proceeding for prosecution is
identical and the exoneration of the person concerned in
the adjudication proceedings is on merits. In case it is
found on merit that there is no contravention of the
provisions of the Act in the adjudication proceedings, the
trial of the person concerned shall be an abuse of the
process of the court."
17. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
yardstick to judge whether the allegation in the adjudication proceedings
and the prosecution proceedings are identical, and whether the
exoneration in the adjudication proceedings is on merits, is crucial. The
Page 14 of 30
learned Senior Counsel contended that if it is found on merit that there is
no contravention of the provisions of the relevant Act in the adjudication
proceedings, continuing the criminal trial would amount to an abuse of the
process of the Court.
18. Further, the learned Senior Counsel has relied upon paragraph-47 of
the judgment in the case of Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra), where the
Court held that: -
"47. Bearing in mind the principles aforesaid we proceed
to consider the case of the appellant. In the adjudication
proceedings on merit the adjudicating authority has
categorically held that "the charges against Shri
Radheshyam Kejriwal for contravening the provisions of
Section 9(1)(f)(i) and Section 8(2) read with Section 64(2)
of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 cannot be
sustained". In the face of the aforesaid finding by the
Enforcement Directorate in the adjudication proceedings
that there is no contravention of any of the provisions of
the Act, it would be unjust and an abuse of the process of
the court to permit the Enforcement Directorate to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 12
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
continue with the criminal prosecution."
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners further submitted that
similar issue was again in consideration before a three Judge Bench in the
case of Ajay Kumar Tyagi (supra) of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
which the Court held as under:
"25. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the exoneration
in the departmental proceeding ipso facto would not result
in the quashing of the criminal prosecution. We hasten to
add, however, that if the prosecution against an accused is
solely based on a finding in a proceeding and that finding
is set aside by the superior authority in the hierarchy, the
very foundation goes and the prosecution may be quashed.
Page 15 of 30
But that principle will not apply in the case of the
departmental proceeding as the criminal trial and the
departmental proceeding are held by two different entities.
Further, they are not in the same hierarchy."
However, the petitioners' counsel contended that in the
aforementioned judgment, the Hon'ble Court has not noticed the prior
ruling in Radheyshyam Kejriwal (supra) by a coordinate Bench of three
Judges, which decided the same issue differently. Although, the Senior
Counsel is not being questioning the judgment of Ajay Kumar Tyagi
(supra) in terms of its authority, it is argued that the former should be
considered per incuriam.
19. Mr. Dhal, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner further draw the
attention of this Court towards the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Ashoo Surendranath Tewary (supra), in which the
Hon'ble Court while discussing the earlier judgment of Radheshyam
Kejriwal (supra) unanimously held that:
"13. It finally concluded: (Radheshyam Kejriwal
case [Radheshyam Kejriwal v. State of W.B., (2011) 3
SCC 581 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 721] , SCC p. 598, para 39)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 13
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
"39. In our opinion, therefore, the yardstick would
be to judge as to whether the allegation in the
adjudication proceedings as well as the proceeding
for prosecution is identical and the exoneration of
the person concerned in the adjudication
proceedings is on merits. In case it is found on merit
that there is no contravention of the provisions of the
Act in the adjudication proceedings, the trial of the
person concerned shall be an abuse of the process of
the court."
14. From our point of view, para 38(vii) is important and
if the High Court had bothered to apply this parameter,
Page 16 of 30
then on a reading of the CVC report on the same facts, the
appellant should have been exonerated.
15. Applying the aforesaid judgments to the facts of this
case, it is clear that in view of the detailed CVC order
dated 22-12-2011, the chances of conviction in a criminal
trial involving the same facts appear to be bleak. We,
therefore, set aside the judgment [Ashoo Surendranath
Tewari v. CBI, 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 5042] of the High
Court and that of the Special Judge and discharge the
appellant from the offences under the Penal Code."
The Petitioners place their reliance on the judgment in Ashoo
Surendranath Tewari (supra) for two key reasons. First, it properly
acknowledges the prior decision of a coordinate Bench in Radheyshyam
Kejriwal (supra) on the same issue, in line with judicial propriety and
discipline. No Supreme Court decision by a Bench of three or more
Judges has contradicted it, making Ashoo Surendranath Tewari (supra)
the latest authoritative ruling on the matter. Second, the Ajay Kumar
Tyagi (supra) judgment relied on by a two-judge Bench decision in P.S.
Rajya vs. State of Bihar4, but not noticed to refer to Radheyshyam
Kejriwal (supra), violating the principle of binding precedent. Ashoo
Surendranath Tewari (supra) rightly referred to Radheyshyam Kejriwal
(supra) and addressed P.S. Rajya in a manner consistent with judicial
precedent. Thus, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that
Ajay Kumar Tyagi (supra) is considered per incuriam and should not be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 14
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
followed as precedent.
4
(1996) 9 SCC 1
Page 17 of 30
20. Mr. Dhal, learned Senior Counsel further contended that this Court
have dealt with a similar issue in Dr. Minaketan Pani v. State of Orissa5
and have reiterated similar principles as in Ashoo Surendranath Tewari
(supra) and Radheyshyam Kejriwal (supra) and held thus:-
"26. For all of the aforementioned reasons, in the facts
and circumstances of the present case where on the same
charges on which the Petitioner is facing criminal trial he
has been honourably exonerated in the departmental
proceedings, the Court adopts the reasoning of the
decisions in Radheyshyam Kejriwal v. State of West
Bengal (supra) and Ashoo Surendranath Tewari v. Deputy
Superintendent of Police, EOW, CBI (supra) and sets
aside the impugned order dated 15th January 2009,
passed by the Sub- Divisional Judicial Magistrate (S)
Cuttack in G.R. Case No.1057 of 2007."
Conclusively, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners submitted
that where an individual has been exonerated on merits in departmental
proceedings, and in the absence of any contravention of the relevant
provisions of the Act, continuing criminal prosecution based on the same
facts would constitute an abuse of the process of the Court, and such
proceedings must be quashed.
21. On the contrary, Mr. Niranjan Moharana, the learned Additional
Standing Counsel for the Vigilance Department has contended that the
above mentioned judgments are not applicable to the present scenario,
basing on the facts and circumstances of the matters arising before this
Court. He submitted that the ratio laid down by the judgment of the
5
(2022) SCC OnLine Ori 3304
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 15
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
Page 18 of 30
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra) is not applicable
to the present case for several reasons. Firstly, the Kejriwal (supra)
judgement dealt with adjudication and criminal proceedings under the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, not departmental and criminal
proceedings. Secondly, the adjudication in Kejriwal (supra) found no
contravention of the Act, and both proceedings were initiated by the same
authority. Thirdly, the present case involves offences under the Prevention
of Corruption Act (P.C. Act) and I.P.C., with the necessary sanction for
prosecution, unlike the Kejriwal (supra) case. Additionally, the Kejriwal
(supra) judgment did not consider earlier three-Judge Bench decisions that
are relevant to the issue of simultaneous departmental and criminal
proceedings. He has relied upon the judgment in Depot Manager v. Md.
Yousuf Miya6, State of Rajasthan v. B.K. Meena7, Capt. M. Paul
Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd.8, and State through SPE & CBI, AP
v. M. Krishna Mohan9. These cases allow for concurrent departmental
and criminal proceedings unless the charges are identical or significantly
overlapping, in which case it is preferable to stay the departmental
proceedings until the criminal case is concluded. Therefore, he has
asserted that the Kejriwal (supra) case does not apply to these matters.
6
(1997) 2 SCC 699
7
(1996) 6 SCC 417
8
(1999) 3 SCC 679
9
(2007) 14 SCC 667
Page 19 of 30
22. Mr. Moharana, learned Additional Standing Counsel further
submitted that the decision in Ashoo Surendranath v. CBI (supra)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 16
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
referred to the ratio of the Kejriwal (supra) judgment which does not
pertain to the interplay between the departmental proceedings and the
criminal prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (P.C.
Act), but rather concerns adjudication and criminal proceedings.
Furthermore, the case only considered the decision in P.S. Rajya Case
(supra) (two-Judge Bench), while escaping notice to take into account the
law laid down by the three-Judge Bench in State (NCT of Delhi) v. Ajaya
Kumar Tyagi (supra). In Ajaya Kumar Tyagi (supra), the Supreme Court,
after referring to P.S. Rajya (supra), M. Krishnan Mohan v. State of
Kerala10, CBI v. V.K. Bhutiani11, and Superintendent of Police (CBI) v.
Deepak Choudhury12, held that exoneration in a departmental proceeding
does not automatically lead to the quashing of a criminal prosecution
under the P.C. Act.
23. Mr. Moharana, learned ASC has also emphasized that in Ashoo
Surendranath (supra), the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC), after due
verification, had refused to grant sanction for prosecution, citing lack of
evidence, making the criminal case unsustainable. Since sanction is a
10
(2015) 13 SCC 215
11
(2009) 10 SCC 674
12
(1995) 6 SCC 225
Page 20 of 30
sine qua non for prosecuting a public servant under the P.C. Act, the
decision in Ashoo Surendranath (supra) is factually and legally
distinguishable from the present cases.
24. Mr. Moharana, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 17
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
Vigilance Department finally submitted that it is no more res integra that
the procedure established and the purpose of departmental proceedings
and criminal proceeding is all together different. Departmental
proceedings are simply an inquiry done by the Departmental Authorities
whereas criminal proceedings is conducted by the competent Court which
have jurisdiction as provided by the statutes. The standard of prove in
both the cases are different. In this regard, he refers to the judgment of the
three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Depot
Manager, A.P. SRTC v. Mohd. Yousuf Miya13, the relevant part of which
is reproduced here under: -
"........ The approach and the objective in the criminal
proceedings and the disciplinary proceedings is altogether
distinct and different. In the disciplinary proceedings, the
question is whether the respondent is guilty of such
conduct as would merit his removal from service or a lesser punishment, as the case may be,
whereas in the criminal proceedings the question is whether the offences registered against him
under the Prevention of Corruption Act (and the Penal Code, 1860, if any) are established and, if
established, what sentence should be imposed upon him. The standard of proof, the mode of
enquiry and the rules governing the enquiry and trial in both the cases are (1997) 2 SCC 699 entirely
distinct and different. Staying of disciplinary proceedings pending criminal proceedings, to repeat,
should not be a matter of course but a considered decision. Even if stayed at one stage, the decision
may require reconsideration if the criminal case gets unduly delayed."
8. We are in respectful agreement with the above view. The purpose of departmental enquiry and of
prosecution are two different and distinct aspects. The criminal prosecution is launched for an
offence for violation of a duty, the offender owes to the society or for breach of which law has
provided that the offender shall make satisfaction to the public. So crime is an act of commission in
violation of law or of omission of public duty. The departmental enquiry is to maintain discipline in
the service and efficiency of public service. It would, therefore, be expedient that the disciplinary
proceedings are conducted and completed as expeditiously as possible. It is not, therefore, desirable
to lay down any guidelines as inflexible rules in which the departmental proceedings may or may not
be stayed pending trial in criminal case against the delinquent officer. Each case requires to be
considered in the backdrop of its own facts and circumstances. There would be no bar to proceed
simultaneously with departmental enquiry and trial of a criminal case unless the charge in the
criminal trial is of grave nature involving complicated questions of fact and law. Offence generally
implies infringement of public (sic duty), as distinguished from mere private rights punishable
under criminal law. When trial for criminal offence is conducted it should be in accordance with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 18
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
proof of the offence as per the evidence defined under the provisions of the Evidence Act. Converse
is the case of departmental enquiry. The enquiry in a departmental proceedings relates to conduct or
breach of duty of the delinquent officer to punish him for his misconduct defined under the relevant
statutory rules or law. That the strict standard of proof or applicability of the Evidence Act stands
excluded is a settled legal position. The enquiry in the departmental proceedings relates to the
conduct of the delinquent officer and proof in that behalf is not as high as in an offence in criminal
charge. It is seen that invariably the departmental enquiry has to be conducted expeditiously so as to
effectuate efficiency in public administration and the criminal trial will take its own course. The
nature of evidence in criminal trial is entirely different from the departmental proceedings. In the
former, prosecution is to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt on the touchstone of human
conduct. The standard of proof in the departmental proceedings is not the same as of the criminal
trial. The evidence also is different from the standard point of the Evidence Act. The evidence
required in the departmental enquiry is not regulated by the Evidence Act. Under these
circumstances, what is required to be seen is whether the departmental enquiry would seriously
prejudice the delinquent in his defence at the trial in a criminal case. It is always a question of fact to
be considered in each case depending on its own facts and circumstances. In this case, we have seen
that the charge is failure to anticipate the accident and prevention thereof. It has nothing to do with
the culpability of the offence under Sections 304-A and 338, IPC. Under these circumstances, the
High Court was not right in staying the proceedings."
25. It is pertinent to note that the judgment in Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra) pertains to exoneration
in adjudication proceedings, whereas the issue in the present cases concerning the interplay
between departmental proceedings and subsequent criminal proceedings. Additionally, while the
judgment in Ajay Tyagi (supra) specifically addresses departmental proceedings, the subsequent
decision in Ashoo Surendranath (supra) did not rely on the ratio of Ajay Tyagi (supra) (a three-judge
bench decision) but instead referred to the rulings in P.S. Rajya (supra) (a two-judge bench
decision) and Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra), which may not be directly relevant to the issue under
consideration.
26. The rival submission of the learned counsels appearing for the parties prompt this Court to delve
upon the distinguishable elements between the departmental and adjudicative proceedings.
The key difference lies on the very nature of proceeding, departmental proceeding aims to the
disciplinary purpose of a delinquent officer on the basis of service rules and regulations which is an
administrative action whereas adjudication proceeding by its nature involves adjudication by a
Quasi-Judicial Authority. It determines the guilt of the persons facing the proceeding culminating
into penalty order. Therefore, the departmental proceeding deals with service related misconduct
within an organization while adjudication proceedings involve a legal dispute resolution process
conducted by an independent authority under statutory law. The law is no longer res integra that
"there is distinction between the procedure, purpose and finding of adjudication proceeding and
departmental proceeding." Adjudication proceedings are conducted by statutory bodies under the
Act, tribunals, or quasi-judicial authorities, adhering to procedures akin to a formal trial. In
contrast, departmental proceedings are inquiries conducted by departmental authorities, distinct in
their purpose and methodology from adjudicatory processes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 19
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
Since the departmental proceeding deals with internal disciplinary action rather than criminal
liability, the threshold for proof is lower and must establish that misconduct is more likely than not
to have occurred, purely the preponderance of probability. However, in the adjudication
proceedings clear and convincing evidence must be brought on record which should be stronger
than "Preponderance of Probability", but not as stricter as "Beyond Reasonable Doubt".
27. Therefore the attempt of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners to draw parallel between
the departmental proceeding with adjudication proceeding is misconceived. Hence, exoneration in
the departmental proceeding which is the culmination of much lower standard of prove cannot
enure to the advantage of the petitioners which would lead to quashing of the criminal proceeding.
28. Mr. Dhal, learned Senior Counsel tried to impress upon this Court that the coordinate Bench of
this Court has already settled the dispute and this Court is bound by the judgement in Dr.
Minaketan (supra). He rather suggested for referring the matter to a bench of larger combination, in
case this Court is not agreeing with the view of Dr. Minaketan (supra).
29. I have carefully evaluated the judgment in Dr. Minaketan (supra), in which the coordinate Bench
of this Court has only borrowed the reasoning of Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra) and quashed the
proceedings. Moreover, in Dr. Minaketan (supra) the exoneration in departmental proceeding had
undergone judicial scrutiny by the Orissa Administrative Tribunal (OAT) and then by this Court in
W.P.(C) No. 2225 of 2015 which was dismissed 19.12.2017. Again an S.L.P. was filed before Hon'ble
Supreme Court being SLP (Civil) No.23691 of 2018, which came to be dismissed on 19.07.2019.
Therefore the coordinate Bench of this Court by adopting the reasoning of the decision of
Radheshyam (supra) granted benefit of departmental exoneration to the delinquent officer and
quash criminal prosecution qua him. Hence, the judgment of the coordinate Bench of this Court in
Dr. Minaketan (supra) is clearly distinguishable and does not lay down subtle ratio as propounded
by the petitioners herewith.
30. It is further noteworthy to mention that in all the cases under consideration, notwithstanding
the exoneration of petitioners in departmental proceedings, the competent authority on evaluation
of the materials on record accorded sanction to prosecute the petitioners. After grant of sanction by
the competent authority, the effect of exoneration in departmental proceedings loses its sanctity
because the sanctioning authority accords sanction to prosecute the accused on the material placed
before him which form the part of the charge sheet and arrived at the satisfaction that prima facie
materials are there against the public servant which warrant prosecution.
31. It is relevant to note that the present set of cases involved the allegation of P.C. Act. The P.C. Act
is special statute and this Act is enacted keeping in view to curtail the rampant corruption by the
public servants. The corruption in our country not only possesses a grave danger to the constitution
of governance, it is also threatens the very foundation of Indian democracy under Rule of Law. The
magnitude of corruption coming to the liability has all potential to choke the development of the
nation and undermines the Rule of Law. Therefore, it is the duty of the Court to interpret the
corruption law to strengthen the fight against corruption. In R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay14, the
Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 20
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
".....Adopting this rule of construction, whenever a question of construction arises
upon ambiguity or where two views are possible of a provision, it would be the duty
of the court to adopt that construction which would advance the object underlying
the Act namely, to make effective provision for the prevention of bribery and
corruption and at any rate not defeat it."
32. From the foregoing discussion facts as well as law, this Court culled out the following
conclusion:-
(1984) 2 SCC 183
a) The standard of proof in the departmental proceedings being preponderance of
probability cannot be equated with the standard of proof required in a criminal
prosecution.
b) The exoneration of the petitioners in the departmental proceedings shall not enure
to the benefit of public servant who is facing charges of PC Act, 1988, which would
lead to quashing of the entire criminal prosecution.
c) The adjudication proceeding and departmental proceeding are distinct, the former
involves adjudication whereas the latter is not an adjudication.
d) The benefit of the judgment of Radheshyam (supra) cannot be extended to the
petitioners as the same judgment deals with adjudication proceeding, but not in
house departmental proceedings.
e) The judgment of the coordinate Bench of this Court in Dr. Minaketan (supra) is
factually distinguishable from the cases in hand.
f) Once the Sanctioning Authority accords sanction, the exoneration of the public
servant in the departmental proceeding loses its effect. Hence, dropping of the
criminal prosecution on exoneration in departmental proceeding is not tenable.
g) The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajay Tyagi (supra) passed in 2012
by three Judge Bench supersedes the ratio laid down by the Division Bench of
Supreme Court in PS Rajya (supra) in 1996.
h) The exoneration of accused in a departmental proceeding shall have limited
bearing in regard to the offences under special statute however, diminish the effect
once the sanction for prosecution under special statutes is granted.
33. Therefore, in light of the aforementioned discussion and judgements cited, this Court is of the
considered view that there exists a fundamental distinction between adjudication proceedings and
departmental proceedings. Moreover, given that the judgment in Ashoo Surendranath (supra)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 21
Rikhiram Chandrakar vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 10 April, 2025
primarily relied on Radheshyam Kejriwal (supra), which do not directly address the interplay
between departmental proceedings and criminal trial proceedings. This Court finds it appropriate to
emphasize that exoneration in departmental proceedings does not necessarily preclude the
prosecution to continue the proceedings.
34. Accordingly, this Court is of the view that even in cases where exoneration has taken place in
departmental proceedings, the criminal trial must proceed in accordance with law to ensure a
comprehensive adjudication of the matter.
35. With the above observation, the CRLMCs are disposed of. The petitioners are granted liberty to
raise all other point before the trial Court at the appropriate stage.
(S.S. Mishra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 10th of April, 2025/Swarna Designation:
Senior Stenographer Location: High Court of Orissa Date: 17-Apr-2025 20:47:38
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40000116/ 22
