Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3 March, 2025
Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3
March, 2025
Author: Rajnish Kumar
Bench: Rajnish Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:14636
Court No. - 4
Case :- FIRST APPEAL FROM ORDER No. - 170 of 2024
Appellant :- Rinki Dubey
Respondent :- Union Of India Thru. General Manager, Northern Railway New Delhi
Counsel for Appellant :- Manish Kumar Srivastava,Chandra Prakash Singh,Saroj Kumari
Counsel for Respondent :- Mahendra Kumar Misra
Hon'ble Rajnish Kumar,J.
I.A. No. 3 of 2025
1. Heard Shri Mahendra Kumar Misra, learned counsel for the respondent-applicant and Shri
Manish Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the appellant-respondent.
2. This is an application for recall of the order dated 18.07.2024, passed by this Court, by means of
which the appeal has been admitted.
3. Learned counsel for the respondent-applicant submits that this appeal has been filed against the
judgment and order dated 08.04.2024 passed by the Railway Claims Tribunal, Gorakhpur Bench,
Gorakhpur, whereas the appeal under Section 23 of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97374911/ 1
Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3 March, 2025
(hereinafter referred as "Railway Act") can be filed to the High Court having jurisdiction over the
place where the Bench of Railway Tribunal is located and this Court at Allahabad has jurisdiction
over Gorakhpur, where the Bench is located, therefore, it can be filed and entertained at Allahabad
only. He further submits that merely because the accident had occurred in District Ayodhya, which
is in the jurisdiction of this Court, cannot be a ground to entertain this appeal because the
jurisdiction of Ayodhya is before the Railway Claims Tribunal, Gorakhpur Bench, Gorakhpur and
jurisdiction of Gorakhpur is at Allahabad. Thus, inadvertently it has been admitted. Therefore, the
submission is that the aforesaid order may be recalled and the appeal may be dismissed for want of
jurisdiction.
4. Per contra learned counsel for the appellant-respondent submits that since the accident had
occurred in the Ayodhya District, which is under the jurisdiction of this Court, therefore, it has
rightly been entertained and admitted. There is no illegality or error in it. He relies on Sri
Nasiruddin vs. State Transport Appellate Tribunal; (1975) 2 SCC 671.
5. Having considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties, I have perused the records.
6. It is not in dispute that the jurisdiction of Faizabad now Ayodhya is before the Railways Claims
Tribunal, Gorakhpur Bench, Gorakhpur. It is provided in Schedule I of Railway Claims Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules, 1989, referable to Rule 3 of the said rules. Rule 3 is extracted hereinbelow:-
"3. Territorial jurisdiction of Benches.
(1) The number of Benches, the Headquarter of and the territorial jurisdiction of a
Bench shall be as specified in Schedule I and Schedule I(A).
(2) If an application is received by a Bench which does not have territorial
jurisdiction to deal with the matter, the Registrar of the Bench shall return the
application to the applicant.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2) the applicant may apply to
the Chairman and the Chairman may thereupon for reasons to be recorded in writing
direct a Bench other than the Bench before which an application has been filed to
hear such application and issue such orders as may be necessary for the transfer of
the application."
7. The relevant provision of Schedule I at Serial No. 11 of the Gorakhpur Bench is extracted below:-
11.
Gorakhpur Ambedkar Nagar, Azamgarh, Baharaich, Ballia, Balrampur, Basti, Deoria, Faizabad,
Gazipur, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Kushinagar, Maharajganj, Mau, Sant Kabir Nagar, Shravasti and
Siddharthnagar districts of Uttar Pradesh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97374911/ 2
Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3 March, 2025
8. Section 23 of the Railway Act provides that an appeal shall lie from every order, not being an
interlocutory order, of the Claims Tribunal, to the High Court having jurisdiction over the place
where the Bench is located. Section 23 is extracted hereinbelow:-
"23. Appeals .-(1) Same as provided in sub-section (2) and notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or in any other law, an
appeal shall lie from every order, not being an interlocutory order, of the Claims
Tribunal, to the High Court having jurisdiction over the place where the Bench is
located.
(2)No appeal shall lie from an order passed by the Claims Tribunal with the consent
of the parties.
(3)Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days
from the date of the order appealed against."
9. In view of above, it is apparent that the appeal can be filed before the High Court having
jurisdiction over the place where the Bench of the Railway Claims Tribunal is located. The impugned
judgment and order has been passed by the Railway Claims Tribunal, Gorakhpur Bench, Gorakhpur
and admittedly Allahabad now Prayagraj has jurisdiction over Gorakhpur, where the Bench of the
Railway Claims Tribunal is located. Thus, the appeal can be filed at Allahabad in view of the
aforesaid statutory provision.
10. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case of Sri Nasiruddin vs. State Transport Appellate Tribunal
(Supra), has held that if the cause of action arises wholly within oudh areas then the Lucknow Bench
will have jurisdiction. Similarly, if the cause of action arises wholly outside the specified areas in
oudh then Allahabad will have jurisdiction. If the cause of action in part arises in the specified oudh
areas and part of the cause of action arises outside the specified areas, it will be open to the litigant
to frame the case appropriately to attract the jurisdiction either at Lucknow or at Allahabad. The
relevant paragraph 38 is extracted below:-
"38. To sum up. Our conclusions are as follows. First there is no permanent seat of
the High Court at Allahabad. The seats at Allahabad and at Lucknow may be changed
in accordance with the provisions of the order. Second, the Chief Justice of the High
Court has no power to increase or decrease the areas in oudh from time to time. The
areas in oudh have been determined once by the Chief Justice and, therefore, there is
no scope for changing the areas. Third. the Chief Justice has power under the second
proviso to paragraph 14 of the order to direct in his discretion that any case or class of
cases arising in oudh areas shall be heard at Allahabad. Any case or class of cases are
those which are instituted at Lucknow. The interpretation given by the High Court
that the word "heard" confers powers on the Chief Justice to order that any case or
class of cases arising in oudh areas shall be instituted or filed at Allahabad, instead of
Lucknow is wrong. The word "heard" means that cases which have already been
instituted or filed at Lucknow may in the discretion of the Chief Justice under the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97374911/ 3
Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3 March, 2025
second proviso to paragraph 14 of the order he directed to be heard at Allahabad.
Fourth, the expression "cause of action" with regard to a civil matter means that it
should be left to the litigant to institute cases at Lucknow Bench or at Allahabad
Bench according to the cause of action arising wholly or in part within either of the
areas. If the cause of action arises wholly within oudh areas then the Lucknow Bench
will have jurisdiction. Similarly, if the cause of action arises wholly outside the
specified areas in oudh then Allahabad will have jurisdiction. If the cause of action in
part arises in the specified oudh areas and part of the cause of action arises outside
the specified areas, it will be open to the litigant to frame the case appropriately to
attract the jurisdiction either at Lucknow or at Allahabad. Fifth, a criminal case arises
where the offence has been committed or otherwise as provided in the Criminal
Procedure Code. That will attract the jurisdiction of the Court at Allahabad or
Lucknow. In some cases depending on the facts and the provision regarding
jurisdiction, it may arise in either place."
11. The appeal has been filed before this Court against the judgment and order passed by the
Railway Claims Tribunal, Gorakhpur Bench, whereas according to statutory provision made in
Section 23 of the Railway Act the High Court having jurisdiction over the place where the Bench is
located will have jurisdiction, therefore, appeal can not be filed on the basis of place of accident.
Admittedly, this Court at Allahabad has jurisdiction over the Gorakhpur, where the Bench of the
Railway Claims Tribunal is located, who has passed the impugned order, therefore, the order passed
by Gorakhpur Bench can be challenged in appeal at Allahabad in view of the statutory provision
made in the Railways Act.
12. In view of above, the order dated 18.07.2024 is liable to be recalled. The order dated 18.07.2024
is hereby recalled.
On Appeal
13. In view of above, the appeal is liable to be dismissed for want of jurisdiction.
14. At this stage, learned counsel for the appellant insisted that in view of amalgamation order, this
appeal can be transferred to this Court at Allahabad by the Hon'ble the Chief Justice, however,
despite the opportunity granted to learned counsel for the appellant to take appropriate steps, he
continued to argue on application and insisted to decide the aforesaid application, therefore after
hearing learned counsel for the parties, the application has been decided. Even otherwise, in view of
the aforesaid statutory provision the appeal can be filed at Allahabad.
15. The appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction. The appellant may file the appeal before the
appropriate court in accordance with law, if so advised.
16. The tribunal's record shall be remitted to the concerned tribunal forthwith and in any case
within a period of two weeks from today.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97374911/ 4
Rinki Dubey vs Union Of India Thru. General Manager, ... on 3 March, 2025
Order Date :- 3.3.2025/Raj
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97374911/ 5
