Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 June, 2019
Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21
June, 2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
W.P. No.11141/2019
(Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs. State of M.P. & Ors.)
Gwalior, Dated : 21.06.2019
Shri D.P. Singh, Counsel for the petitioner.
Shri R.K. Soni, Government Advocate for the
respondents/State.
This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed challenging the order
dated 12.6.2019 passed by the respondent No.1 by which the petitioner has been transferred from
Veterinary Hospital, Deenpura, District Bhind to Veterinary Hospital, Lakhanvas, Tahsil Byavra,
District Rajgarh.
2. Challenging the order passed by the respondents, it is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner
that the petitioner is the District President of Madhya Pradesh Sahayak Pashu Chikitsa Kshetra
Adhikari Sangh, District Bhind and, therefore, he may be exempted from transfer in view of clause
11.17 of the transfer policy. It is further submitted that the daughter of the petitioner is student of
Class 11th whereas the son of the petitioner is also a student of High School and the wife of the
petitioner is a Government employee serving as Adhyapika in Government Middle School, Ratva,
Mow District Bhind, therefore, the transfer of the petitioner in mid session would cause personal
inconvenience. The petitioner has made a representation, however, the said representation has not
been decided THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH so far.
3. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4. So far as the submission made by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is the President
of Madhya Pradesh Sahayak Pashu Chikitsa Kshetra Adhikari Sangh, District Bhind is concerned,
the petitioner has not clarified that whether he is an elected office bearer or has been nominated as
office bearer.
5. Clause 11.17 of the transfer policy reads as under:-
^^11-17 jkT; 'kklu ls i=kpkj djus dh ekU;rk izkIr deZpkjh laxBuksa ds
izns'k@laHkkx@ftyk@ rglhy@fodkl [k.M 'kk[kk ds inkf/kdkfj;ksa ;Fkk&v/; {k@
lfpo@dks"kk/;{k dks in ij fu;qfDr mijkar LFkkukarj.k ls nks inkof/k ds fy;s vFkkZr 4
o"kZ rd dh lkekU;r% NwV izkIr gksxhA ;g lqfo/kk mlds iwjs lsokdky esa fu;ekuqlkj
nks inkof/k ds fy;s feysxhA 4 o"kZ ls vf/kd inLFkkiuk vof/k iw.kZ gksus ij iz'kkldh;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179399257/ 1
Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 June, 2019
vko';drk vuqlkj ,sls inkf/kdkfj;ksa dks Hkh LFkkukarfjr fd;k tk ldsxkA laxBu ds inksa
esa fu;qfDr dh iwoZ lwpuk ds laca/k esa l{ke izkf/kdkjh dh larqf"V dk vk/kkj eq[;
gksxkA bl laca/k esa l{ke 'kklu ds i= dzekad ,Q 10&6@05@1&15d-d fnukad 24 vizSy]
2006 ds izko/kkuksa dk voyksdu djsa] ftlesa Li"V fd;k x;k gS fd ekU;rk izkIr deZpkjh
laxBuksa }kjk fuokZpu ds i'pkr fuokZfpr inkf/kdkfj;sa dh lwph muds dk;Zdky lfgr
lacaf/kr dysDVj dks nh tk;sxh blds lkFk&lkFk lacaf/kr foHkkx izeq[k] tgka os dk;Zjr
gksa] rFkk lkekU; iz'kklu foHkkx ¼deZZpkjh dY;k.k izdks"B½ dks fnukad 30 vizSy
dh fLFkfr esas lkSai nh xbZ gks] mUgha inkf/kdkfj;ksa dks LFkkukarj.k ls NwV dk
ykHk fn;k tkuk pkfg,A^^ Clause 11.17 of the transfer policy provides that the office
bearer would generally get an exemption from transfer for two tenure i.e. four years
and after completing the tenure of four years, they can THE HIGH COURT OF
MADHYA PRADESH be transferred and it is also specifically mentioned in this
clause that only those office bearers who have been elected would be entitled for
exemption from transfer. The petitioner has not clarified as to whether he is an
elected or nominated office bearer. Further the petitioner has not clarified the date
from which the petitioner is working at the present place of transfer. The clause 11.17
of the transfer policy is not an absolute clause and the exemption from transfer would
be available on satisfaction of the conditions mentioned in the said clause. In absence
of any averment, this Court is of the considered opinion that the petitioner has failed
to make out a case for exemption from his transfer on the ground of office bearer.
6. So far as the submission that the wife of the petitioner is also posted in same district is concerned,
clause 11.9 of the transfer policy reads as under:-
^^11-9 ifr&iRuh ds Lo;a ds O;; ij ,d gh lkFk inLFkkiuk ds fy, vkosnu i= izkIr gksus ij
LFkkukarj.k fd;k tk ldsxk] ijUrq inLFkkiuk dk LFkku iz'kkldh; vko';drk ds vuq:i
fu/kkZfjr gksxkA bldk vk'k; ;g ugha gS fd ifr@iRuh ;fn ,d gh ftys@eq[;ky; easa dk;Zjr
gksa rks mudk LFkkukUrj.k ugh fd;k tk ldrk gSA^^
7. Thus it is clear that there is no absolute bar that if the spouse of an employee is posted in same
district/Headquarter, then the employee cannot be transferred at all.
8. So far as the personal inconvenience is concerned, this court THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH while exercising powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot interfere
with the order of transfer which is an exigency of service.
9. The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and Others vs. S. L. Abbas reported in AIR 1993
SC 2444 has held as under:-
"6. An order of transfer is an incident of Government Service. Fundamental Rule 11
says that "the whole time of a Government servant is at the disposal of the
Government which pays him and he may be employed in any manner required by
proper authority."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179399257/ 2
Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 June, 2019
Fundamental Rule 15 says that "the President may transfer a Government servant from one post to
another". That the respondent is liable to transfer anywhere in India is not in dispute. It is not the
case of the respondent that order of his transfer is vitiated by mala fides on the part of the authority
making the order,- though the Tribunal does say so merely because certain guidelines issued by the
Central Government are not followed, with which finding we shall deal later. The respondent
attributed "mischief" to his immediate superior who had nothing to do with his transfer. All he says
is that he should not be transferred because his wife is working at Shillong, his children are studying
there and also because his health had suffered a set-back some time ago. He relies upon certain
executive instructions issued by the Government in that behalf. Those instructions are in the nature
of guidelines. They do not have statutory force.
7. Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the appropriate authority to decide. Unless the
order of transfer is vitiated by malafides or is made in violation of any statutory provisions, the
Court cannot interfere with it. While ordering the transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must
keep in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the subject. Similarly if a person makes
any representation with respect to his transfer, the appropriate authority must consider the same
having regard to the exigencies of administration. The THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
guidelines say that as far as possible, husband and wife must be posted at the same place. The said
guideline however does not confer upon the government employee a legally enforceable right.''
10. The scope of judicial review of transfer under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been
settled by the Supreme Court in Rajendra Roy v. Union of India [(1993) 1 SCC 148], National
Hydroelectric Power Corpn. Ltd. v. Shri Bhagwan [ (2001) 8 SCC 574], State Bank of India v. Anjan
Sanyal [(2001) 5 SCC 508] and it has been held that the transfer is a part of the service conditions of
an employee which should not be interfered with ordinarily by a court of law in exercise of its
discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 unless the court finds that either the order is mala fide
or that the service rules prohibit such transfer, or that the authorities who issued the orders, were
not competent to pass the orders.
The Supreme Court in the case of Gujarat Electricity Board v. Atmaram Sungomal Poshani, reported
in (1989) 2 SCC 602 has held as under :
"4. Transfer of a government servant appointed to a particular cadre of transferable
posts from one place to the other is an incident of service. No government servant or
employee of Public Undertaking has legal right for being posted at any particular
place. Transfer from one place to other is generally a condition of service and the
employee has no choice in the matter. Transfer from one place to other is necessary
in public interest and efficiency in the public THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH administration. Whenever, a public servant is transferred he must comply
with the order but if there be any genuine difficulty in proceeding on transfer it is
open to him to make representation to the competent authority for stay, modification
or cancellation of the transfer order. If the order of transfer is not stayed, modified or
cancelled the concerned public servant must carry out the order of transfer. In the
absence of any stay of the transfer order a public servant has no justification to avoid
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179399257/ 3
Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 June, 2019
or evade the transfer order merely on the ground of having made a representation, or
on the ground of his difficulty in moving from one place to the other. If he fails to
proceed on transfer in compliance with the transfer order, he would expose himself to
disciplinary action under the relevant rules......."
The Supreme Court in the case of Rajendra Singh v. State of U.P., reported in (2009) 15 SCC 178,
has held as under :
"8. A government servant has no vested right to remain posted at a place of his choice
nor can he insist that he must be posted at one place or the other. He is liable to be
transferred in the administrative exigencies from one place to the other. Transfer of
an employee is not only an incident inherent in the terms of appointment but also
implicit as an essential condition of service in the absence of any specific indication to
the contrary. No Government can function if the government servant insists that once
appointed or posted in a particular place or position, he should continue in such
place or position as long as he desires."
The Supreme Court in the case of Airports Authority of India v. Rajeev Ratan Pandey, reported in
(2009) 8 SCC 337, has held as under :
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH "10. In the writ petition, the transfer
order has been assailed by the present Respondent 1 on the sole ground that it was
violative of transfer policy framed by the appellant. The High Court, did not even find
any contravention of transfer policy in transferring Respondent 1 from Lucknow to
Calicut. In a matter of transfer of a government employee, scope of judicial review is
limited and the High Court would not interfere with an order of transfer lightly, be it
at interim stage or final hearing. This is so because the courts do not substitute their
own decision in the matter of transfer.
11. In the present case, the High Court fell into a grave error in staying the transfer
order which, if allowed to stand, may cause prejudice to the administrative
functioning of the appellant."
The Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. v. Gobardhan Lal, reported in (2004) 11 SCC 402 has
held as under :
"7. It is too late in the day for any government servant to contend that once appointed
or posted in a particular place or position, he should continue in such place or
position as long as he desires. Transfer of an employee is not only an incident
inherent in the terms of appointment but also implicit as an essential condition of
service in the absence of any specific indication to the contra, in the law governing or
conditions of service. Unless the order of transfer is shown to be an outcome of a
mala fide exercise of power or violative of any statutory provision (an Act or rule) or
passed by an authority not competent to do so, an order of transfer cannot lightly be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179399257/ 4
Ripudaman Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 June, 2019
interfered with as a matter of course or routine for any or every type of grievance
sought to be made. Even administrative guidelines for regulating transfers or
containing transfer policies at best may afford an opportunity to the officer or servant
concerned to approach their higher authorities for redress but cannot have the THE
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH consequence of depriving or denying the
competent authority to transfer a particular officer/servant to any place in public
interest and as is found necessitated by exigencies of service as long as the official
status is not affected adversely and there is no infraction of any career prospects such
as seniority, scale of pay and secured emoluments. This Court has often reiterated
that the order of transfer made even in transgression of administrative guidelines
cannot also be interfered with, as they do not confer any legally enforceable rights,
unless, as noticed supra, shown to be vitiated by mala fides or is made in violation of
any statutory provision.
8. A challenge to an order of transfer should normally be eschewed and should not be
countenanced by the courts or tribunals as though they are Appellate Authorities over
such orders, which could assess the niceties of the administrative needs and
requirements of the situation concerned. This is for the reason that courts or
tribunals cannot substitute their own decisions in the matter of transfer for that of
competent authorities of the State and even allegations of mala fides when made
must be such as to inspire confidence in the court or are based on concrete materials
and ought not to be entertained on the mere making of it or on consideration borne
out of conjectures or surmises and except for strong and convincing reasons, no
interference could ordinarily be made with an order of transfer."
The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and Others vs. S. L. Abbas reported in AIR 1993 SC
2444 has held as under:-
''7. Who should be transferred where, is a matter for the appropriate authority to
decide. Unless the order of transfer is vitiated by malafides or is made in violation of
any statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with it. While ordering the
transfer, there is no doubt, the authority must keep THE HIGH COURT OF
MADHYA PRADESH in mind the guidelines issued by the Government on the
subject. Similarly if a person makes any representation with respect to his transfer,
the appropriate authority must consider the same having regard to the exigencies of
administration. The guidelines say that as far as possible, husband and wife must be
posted at the same place. The said guideline however does not confer upon the
government employee a legally enforceable right.''
11. Accordingly, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia) (alok) Judge ALOK KUMAR 2019.06.25 17:30:33 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/179399257/ 5
