Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2
Others on 28 February, 2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:28799
Court No. - 85
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 883 of 2025
Petitioner :- Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 2 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Digvijay Singh,Shashi Kant Shukla
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
1. The oral prayer sought by the learned counsel for the petitioner to correct the prayer clause is
acceded.
2. Counsel for the applicant is permitted to carry out the necessary corrections in the prayer clause
during the course of the day.
3. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned AGA for the State.
4. The present petition has been filed seeking the following main reliefs:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 1
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
"(I) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned
order dated 23.12.2024 (Annexure No. 5 to this writ petition) to that extent passed by
respondent No. 2 and further allowing the stay application dated 02.12.2024 filed by
the petitioner in Appeal No. 3690/2024 (Computerized Case No.
C02403000003690) (Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya Vs. State of U.P.) U/s-6 of The
Uttar Pradesh Control of Goondas Act, 1970 pending before respondent No.2."
5. It is stated that the based upon the four criminal cases related to offence indicated under Sections
147, 323, 380, 427, 504, 90 IPC and one Beat report the respondent No.3-Additional Commissioner
of Police (Law and Order)/Executive Magistrate, Police Commissionerate, Kanpur Nagar passed the
order dated 26.11.2024, without considering the reply of the petitioner in its true spirit and as per
law, ought not to have passed order in the manner the same has been passed and further, the
petitioner can be treated as 'Goonda' under the U.P. Control of Goondas Act, 1970 and, therefore,
being aggrieved, the petitioner filed an appeal challenging the order dated 26.11.2024 passed by the
respondent No.3-Additional Commissioner of Police (Law and Order)/Executive Magistrate, Police
Commissionerate, Kanpur Nagar before the respondent No.2-Commissioner, Kanpur Division
Kanpur.
6. It is further stated that the respondent No.2-Appellate Authority, after due consideration of the
contents of the order dated 26.11.2024 and the grounds taken in the memo of appeal as also the
relevant provisions of the Act of 1970, as explained by this Court, admitted the appeal vide order
dated 23.12.2024 and by means of the same orders without recording reasons after taking note of
the grounds and facts indicated for seeking interim relief related to the order dated 26.11.2024,
rejected the interim relief prayed for. As such, the interference in the order dated 23.12.2024 is
required only to the extent of rejecting the prayer seeking interim protection.
7. Learned AGA opposed the contention of counsel for the petitioner.
8. Considering the aforesaid facts including the relevant part of order dated 23.12.2024 in issue.
9. The recording of reasons are necessary. It is well known that "conclusions" and "reasons" are two
different things and reasons must show mental exercise of authorities in arriving at a particular
conclusion.
10. Reasons substitute subjectivity by objectivity. The emphasis on recording reasons is that if the
decision reveals the 'inscrutable face of the sphinx', it can be its silence, render it virtually
impossible for the Courts to perform their appellate function or exercise the power of judicial review
in adjudging the validity of the decision. Right to reason is an indispensable part of a sound judicial
system, reasons at least sufficient to indicate an application of mind to the later before Court.
Another rationale is that the affected party can know why the decision has gone against him. One of
the salutary requirements of natural justice is spelling out reasons for the order made. In other
worlds, a speaking out. The inscrutable face of the sphinx' is ordinarily incongruous with a judicial
or quasi-judicial performance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 2
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
11. In Breen Vs. Amalgamated Engg. Union, reported in 1971(1) AIIER 1148, it was held that the
giving of reasons is one of the fundamentals of good administration.
12. In Alexander Machinery (Dudley) Ltd.Vs. Crabtress, reported in 1974(4) IRC 120 (NIRC) it was
observed that "failure to give reasons amounts to denial of justice. Reasons are live links between
the mind of the decision taker to the controversy in question and the decision or conclusion arrived
at.
13. In Union of India Vs. Mohan Lal Kapoor (1973) 2 SCC 836, as under:
"Reasons are the links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based
and the actual conclusions. They disclose how the mind is applied to the subject
matter for a decision whether it is purely administrative or quasi-judicial. They
should reveal a rational nexus between the facts considered and the conclusions
reached."
14. The Apex Court in the case of Uma Charan Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr. AIR 1981 SC 1915
said:
"Reasons are the links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based
and the actual conclusions. They disclose how the mind is applied to the subject
matter for a decision whether it is purely administrative or quasi-judicial. They
should reveal a rational nexus between the facts considered and the conclusions
reached. Only in this way can opinions or decisions recorded be shown to be
manifestly just and reasonable"
15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of S.N. Mukherjee v. Union of India, AIR 1990
SC 1984, has explained that reasons are necessary links between the facts and the findings recorded
in the administrative orders, which visit a party with evil civil consequences. In absence of reasons
such an order cannot be permitted to stand.
16. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Raj Kishore Jha v. State of Bihar and others,
(2003) 11 SCC 519, has held that reasons are the heartbeat of every conclusion and without the
same, it becomes lifeless.
17. The Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Dhaniram Luhar (2004) 5 SCC 568 while dealing with
the criminal appeal, insisted that the reasons in support of the decision was a cardinal principle and
the High Court should record its reasons while disposing of the matter. The Court held as under:
"8. Even in respect of administrative orders Lord Denning, M.R. In Breen v.
Amalgamated Engg. Union, (1971)2 QB 175, observed:(QB p.191 C) "The giving of
reasons is one of the fundamentals of good administration." In Alexander Machinery
(Dudley) Ltd. v. Crabtree it was observed: "Failure to give reasons amounts to denial
of justice." "Reasons are live links between the mind of the decision-taker to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 3
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
controversy in question and the decision or conclusion arrived at." Reasons
substitute subjectivity by objectivity. The emphasis on recording reasons is that if the
decision reveals the "inscrutable face of the sphinx", it can, by its silence, render it
virtually impossible for the Courts to perform their appellate function or exercise the
power of judicial review in adjudging the validity of the decision. Right to reason is an
indispensable part of a sound judicial system; reasons at least sufficient to indicate an
application of mind to the matter before Court. Another rationale is that the affected
party can know why the decision has gone against him. One of the salutary
requirements of natural justice is spelling out reasons for the order made; in other
words, a speaking-out. The "inscrutable face of the sphinx" is ordinarily incongruous
with a judicial or quasi-judicial performance."
18. In Mc Dermott International Inc. Vs. Burn Standard Co. Ltd. & Ors. (2006) 11 SCC 181 Apex
Court referring to Bachawat's Law of Arbitration and Conciliation, 4th Edn., pp. 855-56 in para 56
said:
"Reasons are the links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based
and the actual conclusions..."
19. In State of Rajasthan v. Rajendra Prasad Jain, (2008)15 SSC 711 stated that 'reason is the
heartbeat of every conclusion, and without the same it becomes lifeless.'
20. The Apex Court in Kranti Associates Private Limited & Anr. Vs. Masood Ahmed Khan & Ors.
(2010) 9 SCC 496 referring to the judgment in Mohan Lal Capoor (supra) in para(s) 23 and 47 said:
"Such reasons must disclose how mind was applied to the subject-matter for a
decision regardless of the fact whether such a decision is purely administrative or
quasi-judicial. This Court held that the reasons in such context would mean the link
between materials which are considered and the conclusions which are reached.
Reasons must reveal a rational nexus between the two.
xxxxxxxxxxxxx
47. Summarising the above discussion, this Court holds:
(a) In India the judicial trend has always been to record reasons, even in
administrative decisions, if such decisions affect anyone prejudicially.
(b) A quasi-judicial authority must record reasons in support of its conclusions.
(c) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice
that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 4
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
(d) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary
exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power.
(e) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision-maker on
relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.(f) Reasons have
virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision-making process as
observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi-judicial and even by
administrative bodies.
(g) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial review by superior courts.
(h) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and
constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts.
This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision-making justifying the principle that
reason is the soul of justice.
(i) Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges
and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose
which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively
considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice delivery
system.
(j) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and
transparency.
(k) If a judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her
decision-making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is
faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.
l) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of
reasons or rubber-stamp reasons? is process. not to be equated with a valid
decision-making process.
(m) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse
of judicial powers. Transparency In decision-making not only makes the judges and
decision-makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny.
(See David Shapiro in Defence of Judicial Candor ((1987) 100 Harvard Law Review
731-37].)
(n) Since the requirement to record reasons emanates from the broad doctrine of
fairness in decision-making, the said requirement is now virtually a component of
human rights and was considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence. See Ruiz Torija
v. Spain ((1994) 19 EHRR 553) EHRR, at 562 para 29 and Anya v. University of
Oxford [2001 EWCA Civ 405 (CA)), wherein the Court referred to Article 6 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 5
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
European Convention of Human Rights which requires, ? adequate and intelligent
reasons must be given for judicial decisions?.
(o) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up
precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving
reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of ?due process?.""
21. The Apex Court also in Competition Commission of India Vs. Steel Authority of India Ltd. & Anr.
JT 2010 (10) SC 26 in para 68 referring to the judgment in the case of Gurdial Singh Fijji (supra)
said:
"Reasons are the links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based
and the actual conclusions. By practice adopted in all courts and by virtue of judge-
made law, the concept of reasoned judgment has become an indispensable part of
basic rule of law and in fact, is a mandatory requirement of the procedural law.
Clarity of thoughts leads to clarity of vision and therefore, proper reasoning is
foundation of a just and fair decision."
22. It is well settled that an order without valid reasons cannot be sustained. To give reasons is the
rule of natural justice. Highlighting this rule, Hon'ble Supreme Court held in the case of The
Secretary & Curator, Victoria Memorial v. Howrah Ganatantrik Nagrik Samity and ors., JT
2010(2)SC 566 para 31 to 33 as under :
"31. It is a settled legal proposition that not only administrative but also judicial order
must be supported by reasons, recorded in it. Thus, while deciding an issue, the Court
is bound to give reasons for its conclusion. It is the duty and obligation on the part of
the Court to record reasons while disposing of the case. The hallmark of an order and
exercise of judicial power by a judicial forum is to disclose its reasons by itself and
giving of reasons has always been insisted upon as one of the fundamentals of sound
administration justice - delivery system, to make known that there had been proper
and due application of mind to the issue before the Court and also as an essential
requisite of principles of natural justice. The giving of reasons for a decision is an
essential attribute of judicial and judicious disposal of a matter before Courts, and
which is the only indication to know about the manner and quality of exercise
undertaken, as also the fact that the Court concerned had really applied its mind. "
[Vide State of Orissa Vs. Dhaniram Luhar (JT 2004(2) SC 172 and State of Rajasthan
Vs. Sohan Lal & Ors. JT 2004 (5) SCC 338:2004 (5) SCC 573].
32. Reason is the heartbeat of every conclusion. It introduces clarity in an order and
without the same, it becomes lifeless. Reasons substitute subjectivity by objectivity.
Absence of reasons renders the order indefensible/unsustainable particularly when
the order is subject to further challenge before a higher forum. [Vide Raj Kishore Jha
Vs. State of Bihar & Ors. AIR 2003 SC 4664; Vishnu Dev Sharma Vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh & Ors. (2008) 3 SCC 172; Steel Authority of India Ltd. Vs. Sales Tax Officer,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 6
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
Rourkela I Circle & Ors. (2008) 9 SCC 407; State of Uttaranchal & Anr. Vs. Sunil
Kumar Singh Negi AIR 2008 SC 2026; U.P.S.R.T.C. Vs. Jagdish Prasad Gupta AIR
2009 SC 2328; Ram Phal Vs. State of Haryana & Ors. (2009) 3 SCC 258; Mohammed
Yusuf Vs. Faij Mohammad & Ors. (2009) 3 SCC 513; and State of Himachal Pradesh
Vs. Sada Ram & Anr. (2009) 4 SCC 422].
33.Thus, it is evident that the recording of reasons is principle of natural justice and
every judicial 25order must be supported by reasons recorded in writing. It ensures
transparency and fairness in decision making. The person who is adversely affected
may know, as why his application has been rejected."
23. Non recording of reasons, non consideration of admissible evidence or consideration of
inadmissible evidence renders the order to be unsustainable. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Chandana Impex Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi , 2011(269)E.L.T. 433 (S.C.),
held as under :
"8. ?.It needs to be emphasised that every litigant, who approaches the court for relief
is entitled to know the reason for acceptance or rejection of his prayer, particularly
when either of the parties to the lis has a right of further appeal. Unless the litigant is
made aware of the reasons which weighed with the court in denying him the relief
prayed for, the remedy of appeal will not be meaningful. It is that reasoning, which
can be subjected to examination at the higher forums. In State of Orissa Vs.
Dhaniram Luhar2 this Court, while reiterating that reason is the heart beat of every
conclusion and without the same, it becomes lifeless, observed thus :
"8.......Right to reason is an indispensable part of a sound judicial system; reasons at
least sufficient to indicate an application of mind to the matter before court. Another
rationale is that the affected party can know why the decision has gone against him.
One of the salutary requirements of natural justice is spelling out reasons for the
order made;......."
24. Considering the facts and principle settled on the issue of recording of reasons in an order, this
Court is of the view that the present petition is liable to be allowed as while rejecting the prayer
seeking interim protection reasons, as required under law, have not been recorded by the
respondent No.2-Appellate Authority-Commissioner, Kanpur Division Kanpur in the order dated
23.12.2024. Accordingly, the order dated 23.11.2024 passed by the respondent No.2-Appellate
Authority-Commissioner, Kanpur Division Kanpur is hereby set aside only to the extent it rejects the
prayer seeking interim protection.
25. The matter is remanded back to the respondent No.2-Appellate Authority-Commissioner,
Kanpur Division Kanpur who shall pass a reasoned and speaking order on the prayer sought by the
petitioner seeking interim protection within a period of two weeks' from the date of production of a
certified copy of this order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 7
Rishabh @ Rishabh Singh Bhadauriya vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
Order Date :- 28.2.2025 NSC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7596615/ 8
