Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors
on 22 September, 2025
Author: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
Bench: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
HCP No. 29/2025
Reserved on: 11.09.2025
Pronounced on: 22 .09.2025
Riyaz Ahmad Channa through his wife
.........Petitioner(s)
Through:
Mr. B. A. Bashir, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Rasic, Advocate
Versus
UT of J&K and Ors.
......Respondent(s)
Through:
Ms. Nadiya Abdullah, AC vice Mr. Mohsin Qadri, Sr. Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS JUSTICE MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. This petition has been preferred by the petitioner, Safiya Riyaz, wife of Reyaz Ahmad Chana S/o
Abdul Aziz Chana R/o Chinkral Mohalla, Habakadal, Srinagar, (herein after referred to as
"detenue") thereby, challenging the order No. DIVCOM "K"/221/2024 dated 20.12.2024, for short
as impugned order issued by the Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir- respondent No.2 herein, in
terms of the provisions of Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1988, for short NDPS.
BRIEF FACTS
2. A detention order dated 8th of August, 2020 is stated to have been issued by the respondents
which, upon consideration by this Court, had been stayed vide order dated 24.09.2020, in writ
petition WP(Crl) No. 132/2020, pending before this Court. The said detention order is stated to
have been issued on the similar grounds as that of the impugned order. The respondents without
withdrawing or cancelling the said earlier detention order have issued a fresh one, challenged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 1
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
herein, the detenue has been taken into custody and lodged in Bhaderwah Sub Jail in pursuance
thereof.
3. The challenge to the impugned order is primarily made on the grounds that the grounds of
detention are frivolous, imaginary, highly vague, and without any substance, there are no specific
particulars which would identify the date, place and time in the grounds mentioned to enable the
detenue to make a representation against it; the status of the FIRs mentioned in the detention order
have not been stated in the grounds of detention, as such, there is no subjective satisfaction for
proposing the detention of the detenue under impugned detention order. There is no evidence or
any kind of material to support allegations raised in the grounds of detention. The assertion put
forth by the detaining authority that the petitioner has been given multiple chances to reform but
has continued his illegal drug trade, contradicts the very records of the FIRs; the material evidence
in the present case does not substantiate the claim that the petitioner is a hardcore drug peddler of a
kingpin of the drug mafia; the grounds indicate that there are reports, which have not been provided
to the detenue and on what basis said alleged reports have been received by the detaining authority;
the allegations made in the grounds of detention are substantive and unsupported by any concrete
evidence; as far as FIR No. 56/2024, under Sections 8/21, 29 of P/S Rajbagh is concerned, the
detenue was asked by the Police to come to Police station for questioning. The detenue visited the
Police station concerned and the police registered a false and frivolous case against the detenue; as
far as FIR No. 56/2018, under Sections 341, 307 of RPC of P/S Khanyar is concerned, same has been
closed at the stage of investigation itself as not proved; as far as FIR No. 08/2018 under Sections
447 of RPC of P/S Kralkhud is concerned, same also been dismissed as not admitted on 15th of May,
2018 by the police concerned, showing that it could not be proved even at the investigation stage,
therefore, came to be closed; as far as FIR No. 22/2019 under Sections 8/18-20-29 NDPS Act of P/S
Nowhatta is concerned, the detenue was not charged for more than a year. Now the case is still
pending for the evidence of prosecution.
4. Per contra, the respondents have filed counter affidavit, wherein it is stated that there is no
vagueness or staleness in the grounds coupled with definite indications, as to the impact thereof,
which has been precisely stated in the grounds of detention. The incidents clearly substantiate the
subjective satisfaction arrived at by the detaining authority. Even grant of bail in criminal offence
cannot debar the detaining authority to order preventive detention of an individual, when
preventive detention of such individual is found necessitated, as is the case in respect of the detenue.
The detention of the detenue was ordered strictly in accordance with the provisions of Prevention of
Illicit Traffic Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1988. The order of detention was
executed by the concerned Police on 21.12.2024 and the contents of grounds of detention were read
over and explained to the detenue in the language which he understood fully. The entire
material/documents of the case were provided to the detenue against proper receipt. The detenue
was also informed that he has a right to file a representation to the Government against the
detention order. The Advisory Board examined the case of the detenue in exercise of powers
conferred under Clause (f) of Section 9 read with Section (11) of Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1988, confirmed the detention of the detenue vide
Government order dated 24.01.2025 and detained the detenue for a period of one year in District
Jail, Bhaderwah.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 2
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
5. Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the submissions made.
6. Learned senior counsel for the detenue has stated that the detention order is unlawful on the
ground that the detaining authority has relied on vague and unsupportive material. Failure to
provide evidence like date, place and time by the detaining authority amounts to violation of
fundamental rights of the detenue.
7. Perusal of the record reveals that material, which was provided to detenue, includes grounds of
detention (04 leaves), PSA warrant (01 leaf), Dossier (06 leaves) along with copies of FIRs and other
documents (40 leaves) and the contents of the warrant and grounds of detention read over and
explained to him in languages, which he fully understood on 21.12.2024. The representation of the
detenue has also been considered and has been found without any merit.
8. Learned senior counsel for the detenue has stated that in the grounds of detention no details with
respect to FIR No. 22/2019 and FIR No. 56/2024, have been referred. The detenue was bailed out in
FIR No. 56/2024, which is duly reflected in the grounds of detention, however, the detenue was also
released on bail in FIR No. 22/2019, the said fact has not been reflected in the grounds of detention.
He has further stated that in the grounds of detention, the detaining authority has not referred the
details with respect to date place and time. In support of his claim he has referred to and relied upon
the Judgment of Apex Court delivered in case Chaju Ram Vs. The State of J&K, reported in AIR 1971
SC 263. Para 13 being relevant is reproduced as under:-
13. Even as to the grounds, we have something to say. The grounds charge him with
having conspired with some leaders of Democratic Conference and having incited
landless people of R S Pura Tehsil to forcibly occupy the land comprised in Nandpur
Mechanised Farm and to have persuaded them to resist violently and attempt to evict
them. No details of the leaders of the Conference or of the persons incited or the
dates on which he conspired or incited the squatters or the time when such
conference took place, are mentioned.
It would be impossible for anybody to make a representation against such grounds. These grounds,
on the authorities of this Court, too numerous to be cited here, must be held to be vague. Therefore,
on both the twin grounds, namely, that he was deprived of his right to make a representation and
also because the grounds in themselves were very vague, we must hold that there was no compliance
with the law as laid down in the Jammu & Kashmir Preventive Detention Act. The result, therefore,
is that the detention must be declared to be unlawful and Chaju must be declared to be entitled to
his liberty. He is ordered to be released. The detenu was question by us and he expressed a desire
that he may not be released in Delhi, because he has no means of going back. He asked to be
released in Jammu. We direct therefore that he shall be taken back to the place where he was in
detention in Jammu and released within the shortest possible time."
9. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner in support of his claim also relied upon the Judgment of
the Supreme Court delivered in case titled Rajinder Arora Vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors,
reported in AIR 2006 SC 1719. Para 19 being relevant is taken note of:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 3
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
"19. A Division Bench of this Court in K. S. Nagamuthu v. State of Tamil Nadu and
Ors. MANU/SC/2129/2005, AIR 2006 SC 374 struck down an order of detention on
the ground that the relevant material had been withheld from the detaining
authority, which in that case was a letter of the detenu retracting from confession
made by him."
10. Learned senior counsel has further stated that the detaining authority has not provided the
relevant documents to the detenue, thereby prejudicing the rights of the detenue. In order to
strengthen his submission, he has referred to and relied upon the Judgment of Supreme Court in
case titled A. Sowkath Ali Vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors., reported in AIR 2006 SC 2662.
Paragraph 7 being relevant is taken note of:-
"7. In M. Ahamed kutty Vs. Union of India and Anr., 1990 (2) SCC 1, this Court was
considering the detention of a detenu also under COFEPOSA Act, 1974. In this case
this Court held, bail application and bail orders constitute vital material. Its non-
consideration by the detaining authority or non- supply of its copy to the detenu is
violative of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and hence the detention order
was held to be illegal. This Court holds:-
Considering the facts in the instant case, the bail application and the bail order were
vital materials for consideration. If those were not considered the satisfaction of the
detaining authority itself would have been impaired, and if those had been
considered, they would be documents relied on by the detaining authority though not
specifically mentioned in the annexure to the order of detention and those ought to
have formed part of the documents supplied to the detenu with the grounds of
detention and without them the grounds themselves could not be said to have been
complete. We have, therefore, no alternative but to hold that it amounted to denial of
the detenus right to make an effective representation and that it resulted in violation
of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India rendering the continued detention of the
detenu illegal and entitling the detenu to be set at liberty in this case.
11. Learned senior counsel for the detenue has stated that the detenue has not been
provided with the bail order and the satisfaction of the detaining authority has not
been reflected with respect to the order passed in the bail application, which is in
violation of the Judgment supra. He has further stated that it was incumbent upon
the detaining authority to supply the material, which has been considered by the
detaining authority.
12. The detaining authority has specifically stated in the grounds of detention that the
conditions mentioned in the bail order, includes that the detenue will not indulge in
such activities, however, despite that condition, the detenue had discreetly involved
in such activities and the same cannot be agitated before the Court for cancellation of
the bail of the detenue, leaving no other option for Police to sponsor and recommend
the detention order under PIT NDPS. It is stated that the grounds of detention
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 4
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
provided by the sponsoring Agency squarely outweigh the bail conditions imposed by
the Court, however, it is not stated why ordinary course of law was not sufficient to
restrain the detenue from indulging in such activities.
13. Learned senior counsel has referred to and relied upon the Judgment of Supreme
Court in case titled Chowdarapu Raghunandan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.,
reported in AIR 2002 SC 1460. Paragraphs 6, 7 and 14 being relevant are taken note
of:-
" 6. In Mohd. Subrati alias Mohd. Karim v. State of West Bengal [(1973) 3 SCC 250,
256] this Court observed thus:
"It must be remembered that the personal liberty of an individual has been given an
honoured place in the fundamental rights which our Constitution has jealously
protected against illegal and arbitrary deprivation, and that this Court has been
entrusted with a duty and invested with a power to enforce that fundamental right."
7. Dealing with solitary act in a preventive detention matter, Krishna Iyer J. in Anil Dey v. State of
West Bengal [(1974) 4 SCC 514] observed as under: -
"A swallow cannot make a summer ordinarily, and a solitary fugitive act of
criminality may not normally form the foundation for subjective satisfaction about
the futuristic judgment that the delinquent was likely to repeat his offence and
thereby prejudicially affect the maintenance of supplies and services essential to
community."
14. The Court further observed thus:-
"Preventive detention admittedly is an 'invasion of personal liberty' and it is a duty
cast on the law Courts to satisfy itself in regard to the circumstances under which
such a preventive detention has been ordered in the event, however, the same does
not conform to the requirements of the concept of justice as is available in the justice
delivery system of the country, the law Courts would not shirk of its responsibility to
provide relief to the person concerned. The guardian-angel of the Constitution stands
poised with a responsibility to zealously act as a watchdog so that injustice does not
occur :
Let us not be understood to mean however that there ought to be any over
zealousness since the same may lend assistance to a situation which is otherwise not
compatible with social good and benefit."
14. Learned senior counsel has stated that the detenue has been deprived of making an effective and
purposeful representation as envisaged under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, as no
particulars/details have been providing for the documents referred in the detention order with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 5
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
respect to alleged activities of the detenue. He has further stated that the detaining authority has not
applied its mind and has relied upon the vague and substantive grounds, moreover, the bail order
has also not been provided to the detenue. There is a complete non-application of mind on part of
the detaining authority on the ground that in the bail order, there was a condition laid down that if
the detenue violates the conditions mentioned in the order, ordinarily law could have been availed
for cancellation of bail of the detenue.
15. The Supreme Court in case titled "Ameena Begum Vs. State of Telenganna" reported as (1987) 4
SCC 58, has held the detention order must be based on a reasonable prognosis of the further
behaviour of a person based his past conduct in light of the surrounding circumstances and requisite
satisfaction. It would be profitable to reproduce paragraphs 19,20, 28 and 29 of the said judgment
herein:
19. In holding that the order of detention therein was grounded on stale grounds, the
Court held that:
"17. The detention order must be based on a reasonable prognosis of the future
behaviour of a person based on his past conduct in light of the surrounding
circumstances. The live and proximate link that must exist between the past conduct
of a person and the imperative need to detain him must be taken to have been
snapped in this case. A detention order which is founded on stale incidents, must be
regarded as an order of punishment for a crime, passed without a trial, though
purporting to be an order of preventive detention. The essential concept of preventive
detention is that the detention of a person is not to punish him for something he has
done but to prevent him from doing it."
20. This was further affirmed by this Court in Khaja Bilal Ahmed vs. State of Telangana , where the
detention order dated 2nd November, 2018 issued under the Act had delved into the history of cases
involving the appellant- detenu from the years 2007 - 2016, despite the subjective satisfaction of the
Officer not being based on such cases. In quashing such an order, Hon'ble Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
(as the Chief Justice then was) observed:
"23. ... If the pending cases were not considered for passing the order of detention, it
defies logic as to why they were referred to in the first place 12 (2020) 13 SCC 632
978 [2023] 11 S.C.R. SUPREME COURT REPORT: DIGITAL in the order of
detention. The purpose of the Telangana Offenders Act 1986 is to prevent any person
from acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. For this
purpose, Section 3 prescribes that the detaining authority must be satisfied that the
person to be detained is likely to indulge in illegal activities in the future and act in a
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. The satisfaction to be arrived
at by the detaining authority must not be based on irrelevant or invalid grounds. It
must be arrived at on the basis of relevant material; material which is not stale and
has a live link with the satisfaction of the detaining authority. The order of detention
may refer to the previous criminal antecedents only if they have a direct nexus or link
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 6
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
with the immediate need to detain an individual. If the previous criminal activities of
the Appellant could indicate his tendency or inclination to act in a manner prejudicial
to the maintenance of public order, then it may have a bearing on the subjective
satisfaction of the detaining authority. However, in the absence of a clear indication
of a causal connection, a mere reference to the pending criminal cases cannot account
for the requirements of Section 3.It is not open to the detaining authority to simply
refer to stale incidents and hold them as the basis of an order of detention. Such stale
material will have no bearing on the probability of the detenu engaging in prejudicial
activities in the future."
28. In the circumstances of a given case, a Constitutional Court when called upon to test the legality
of orders of preventive detention would be entitled to examine whether (28.1) the order is based on
the requisite satisfaction, albeit subjective, of the detaining authority, for, the absence of such
satisfaction as to the existence of a matter of fact or law, upon which validity of the exercise of the
power is predicated, would be the sine qua non for the exercise of the power not being satisfied; 28.2
in reaching such requisite satisfaction, the detaining authority has applied its mind to all relevant
circumstances and the same is not based on material extraneous to the scope and purpose of the
statute; 28.3 power has been exercised for achieving the purpose for which it has been conferred, or
exercised for an improper purpose, not authorised by the statute, and is therefore ultra vires; 28.4
the detaining authority has acted independently or under the dictation of another body;
28.5 the detaining authority, by reason of self-created rules of policy or in any other manner not
authorized by the governing statute, has disabled itself from applying its mind to the facts of each
individual case;
28.6 the satisfaction of the detaining authority rests on materials which are of rationally probative
value, and the detaining authority has given due regard to the matters as per the statutory mandate;
28.7 the satisfaction has been arrived at bearing in mind existence of a live and proximate link
between the past conduct of a person and the imperative need to detain him or is based on material
which is stale;
28.8 the ground(s) for reaching the requisite satisfaction is/are such which an individual, with some
degree of rationality and prudence, would consider as connected with the fact and relevant to the
subject-matter of the inquiry in respect whereof the satisfaction is to be reached;
28.9 the grounds on which the order of preventive detention rests are not vague but are precise,
pertinent and relevant which, with sufficient clarity, inform the detenu the satisfaction for the
detention, giving him the opportunity to make a suitable representation; and 28.10 the timelines, as
provided under the law, have been strictly adhered to."
29. Preventive detention is, by nature, repugnant to democratic ideas and an anathema to the Rule
of law. No such law exists in the USA and in England (except during war time). Since, however,
Article 22(3) (b) of the Constitution of India permits preventive detention, we cannot hold it illegal
but we must confine the power of preventive detention within very narrow limits, otherwise we will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 7
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
be taking away the great right to liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India which
was won after long, arduous and historic struggles. It follows, therefore, that if the ordinary law of
the land (the Penal Code and other penal statutes) can deal with a situation, recourse to a preventive
detention law will be illegal.
16. The Senior Superintendent of Police, Srinagar in his dossier has stated at paragraph No. 4 as
under:
"that the subject has been given several chances to mend his ways but all in vain as
information received from field clearly depicts that the subject has continued his
illegal trade of drugs, besides after being bailed out from the afore mentioned case
FIRs/stay order. Granted bail by the Court of against detention warrant issued by
DIV COM for his drug peddling activities. Whenever, subject has been arrested in
substantive laws/preventive detention he managed bail as well as challenged
detention orders before Hon'ble Court by way of using influence and power, as the
subject is a kingpin of drug mafia in the Kashmir Valley for which subject took this
high position in a very short period of time and became hardcore drug peddler as well
as social evil in his area." (emphasis added) SSP, Srinagar has stated that the detenue
has been able to manage bail as well as to challenge the detention orders before this
Court only because of his influence and power, being a Kingpin in the Kashmir
Valley. This is not expected of SSP, Srinagar to reflect his mind set in such a casual
and cavalier manner in the dossier. He has not only expressed his opinion against the
detenue but has raised aspersions/allegations against the judiciary, which is uncalled
for. The Court has been informed by Ms. Nadiya Abdullah, learned assisting counsel
that Mr. Imtiyaz Hussain, the then SSP, Srinagar has prepared dossier in question.
Mr Imtiyaz Hussain, SSP is holding a very important role in Home department, as
such, he is expected to perform his duties with highly immense responsibility.
17. Learned senior counsel for the detenue has highlighted that there is non application of mind on
the part of SSP, Srinagar, in preparing the dossier. He has also stated that what has been stated by
the SSP, Srinagar, in the dossier is not only objectionable but contemptuous also, as it implies that
the decisions of this Court are made under the influence or power of the detenue, which is not only
baseless but also a direct challenge to the authority and integrity of this Court. Such language
questions the independence and impartiality of the judicial process.
18. The averments taken in the dossier prepared by the then SSP, Srinagar Mr. Imtiyaz Hussain,
inasmuch as the same pertains to the judicial process and judiciary are not only objectionable but
highly lamentable too. The said officer was neither entrusted with the authority nor was obliged
under law to demean this Institution and to act beyond his limits. The disrespectful language made
use of by the officer in the dossier, as rightly pointed by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner,
is contemptuous to say the least. This type of practice cannot be allowed to be nurtured lest that may
destabilize the entire democratic setup. In that background, this Court feels constrained to seriously
take note of paragraph No. 4 of the dossier, prepared by the SSP, Srinagar. The Director General of
Police is directed to seek explanation from the then SSP, Srinagar, Mr Imtiyaz Hussain, with respect
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 8
Riyaz Ahmad Channa Through His Wife vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 22 September, 2025
to the averments, as taken note of hereinbefore, made in the dossier and initiate action against him
for trying to demean the stature and integrity of judiciary and its judicial process.
Registry shall furnish a copy of this judgment to the Director General of Police, J&K for compliance.
The action taken pursuant to the direction by the Director General of Police shall be submitted to
the Registry of this Court without fail.
19. Viewed thus, the petition is allowed and detention order No. DIVCOM "K"/221/2024 dated
20.12.2024 of Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir- respondent No.2 herein, whereby Reyaz Ahmad
Chana Son of Ab. Aziz Chana Resident of Chinkral Mohalla Habbakadal District, Srinagar was
detained, is quashed and the respondents are directed to release the detenue forthwith, if not
required in any other case.
20. Detention record be returned to the learned counsel for the respondents against receipt.
21. Disposed of.
(MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI) JUDGE Srinagar 22.09.2025 "Mohammad Yasin Dar"
Whether the Judgment is reportable: Yes/No. Whether the Judgment is speaking:
Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21390401/ 9
