Rizwan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 September, 2019
Rizwan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 September, 2019
Author: Sunil Kumar Awasthi
Bench: Sunil Kumar Awasthi
1
M.Cr.C. No. 38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P.
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
M.Cr.C. No.38023/2019
Indore, dated:18/09/2019
Shri V.S. Parihar, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Vinit Hardia, learned Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
The applicant has preferred this petition under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short 'the Code') against order dated 20/08/2019 passed by Sessions Judge, Ujjain in S.T. No.
650/2015, whereby the application filed on behalf of the applicant under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C.
for calling Investigating Officer-Mahendra Singh Parmar (PW 31) for further cross-examination and
Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper for examination has been dismissed.
2. Briefly stated facts of the case are that the applicant is facing the trial for offence punishable
under Sections 307, 302, 201 and 120(B)/34 of the IPC alongwith Sections 25 and 27 of the Arms
Act for commission of murder of one Manish Meena. During the trial, the prosecution examined eye
witnesses Ganesh (PW 3) and Sanjay Rathore (PW 4) and they deposed that prior to the alleged
incident, they did not know the applicant either by his face or name. However, after arrest of the
applicant, when test identification was conducted by the police from the aforesaid persons, then
they have identified the applicant as a culprit and they have also identified the applicant in their
court statement. In their cross-examination a suggestion was given by the applicant that before test
identification parade, the photographs of the M.Cr.C. No. 38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P.
applicant were published in Daily News Paper-'Nai Duniya', therefore, they have already seen the
applicant before test identification parade, however, they have denied such suggestion. At that time,
the applicant was not having the newspaper, in which his photographs were published alongwith
news regarding his arrest in connection with murder of Manish Meena, therefore, he could not
exhibited the said document. Now the applicant got the copy of the newspaper, in which his
photographs were published and thus, he moved an application under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C.
before the trial Court for calling I.O.- Mahendra Singh Parmar (PW 31) for further
cross-examination and Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper for his
examination so that they can be confronted with the aforesaid news article. However, the trial Court
has rejected the said application by contending that during the trial, the applicant has not put any
question in the cross-examination of I.O.-Mahendra Singh Parmar (PW 31) regarding the aforesaid
publication and when the case has been listed for final arguments, then the applicant has moved this
application for calling I.O.-M.S. Parmar (PW 31) for further cross-examination and Crime
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155062028/ 1
Rizwan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 September, 2019
Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper for his examination, therefore, there is no
need to recalled these witnesses in his defence. The impugned order is a subject matter of challenge
in the present petition.
3. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the identification of the accused is vital question
in the trial, therefore, the applicant wanted to exhibit the newspaper-Nai M.Cr.C. No. 38023/2019
Rizwan Vs. State of M.P. Duniya published on 07/09/2015 and to cross-examine I.O.- Mahendra
Singh Parmar (PW 31) and to examine Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of 'Nai Duniya'
Newspaper so that the question can be asked from them regarding aforesaid publication that the eye
witnesses namely Ganesh (PW 3) and Sanjay Rathore (PW 4) have already seen the face of the
applicant before test identification parade, hence, the said TIP has no value. But the trial Court has
committed error in rejecting the application. Under these circumstances, learned counsel for the
applicant submits that the applicant be permitted to exhibited the Nai Duniya-news paper published
on 07/09/2015 in evidence and to call I.O.-Mahendra Singh Parmar (PW 31) for further cross-
examination and Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper for recording his
statement.
4. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent opposed the prayer by contending that the
applicant evidence is closed and the case is fixed for final arguments, therefore, there is no ground
available on record to permit the applicant to fill up his lacunas. Under these circumstances, learned
counsel for the respondent prays for rejection of the petition.
5. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6. From the perusal of the record, it appears that eye witnesses Ganesh (PW 3) and Sanjay Rathore
(PW 4) of the incident have not known the applicant by his name or face prior to the incident. They
categorically deposed in their statement recorded under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. that they did not
know M.Cr.C. No. 38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P. the applicant and they will identify him
when he would be brought before them. After arrest of the applicant, TIP was conducted, in which
they have identified the applicant as culprit, however, the applicant suggested in their
cross-examination that they have already seen the face of the applicant in the newspaper Nai Duniya
dated 07/09/2015, in which his photographs were published after his arrest, however, they have
been denied the said suggestion. Now the applicant got that newspaper in which news was published
alongwith his photographs, therefore, he wanted to exhibit that newspaper and call I.O.-M.S.
Parmar (PW
31) and Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief, Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper .
7. Section 311 Cr.P.C. empowers the court to summon a material witness, or to examine a person
present at "any stage" of "any enquiry", or "trial", or "any other proceedings" under the Cr.P.C., or to
summon any person as a witness, or to recall and re- examine any person who has already been
examined if his evidence appears to it, to be essential to the arrival of a just decision of the case.
Undoubtedly, the Cr.P.C. has conferred a very wide discretionary power upon the court in this
respect, but such a discretion is to be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily. The power of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155062028/ 2
Rizwan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 September, 2019
court in this context is very wide, and in exercise of the same, it may summon any person as a
witness at any stage of the trial, or other proceedings. The court is competent to exercise such power
even suo motu if no such application has been filed by either of the parties. However, the court must
satisfy itself, that it was in fact essential to examine such a witness, or to recall M.Cr.C. No.
38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P. him for further examination in order to arrive at a just
decision of the case.
8. In Mohanlal Shamji Soni v. Union of India & Anr., AIR 1991 SC 1346, this Court examined the
scope of Section 311 Cr.P.C., and held that it is a cardinal rule of the law of evidence, that the best
available evidence must be brought before the court to prove a fact, or a point in issue. However, the
court is under an obligation to discharge its statutory functions, whether discretionary or obligatory,
according to law and hence ensure that justice is done. The court has a duty to determine the truth,
and to render a just decision. The same is also the object of Section 311 Cr.P.C., wherein the court
may exercise its discretionary authority at any stage of the enquiry, trial or other proceedings, to
summon any person as a witness though not yet summoned as a witness, or to recall or re- examine
any person, though not yet summoned as a witness, who are expected to be able to throw light upon
the matter in dispute, because if the judgments happen to be rendered on an inchoate, inconclusive
and speculative presentation of facts, the ends of justice would be defeated.
9. The Hon'ble apex Court in the case of Mohanlal Shamji Soni (supra) in para 27 also observed that
the Criminal Court has ample power to summon any person as a witness or recall and re- examine
any such person even if the evidence on both sides is closed and the jurisdiction of the Court must
obviously be dictated by exigency of the situation, and fair play and good sense appear to be the only
safe guides and that only the requirements of justice command the examination of any person
M.Cr.C. No. 38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P. which would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case.
10. While dealing with Section 311 of the Code in the case of Rajendra Prasad Vs. Narcotic Cell,
(1999) 6 SCC 110, the Hon'ble apex Court explained what is lacuna in the prosectuion as under:-
"8. Lacuna in the prosecution must be understood as the inherent weakness or a
latent wedge in the matrix of the prosecution case. The advantage of it should
normally go to the accused in the trial of the case, but an over sight in the
management of the prosecution cannot be treated as irreparable lacuna. No party in a
trial can be foreclosed from correcting, errors. If proper evidence was not adduced or
a relevant material was not brought on record due to any inadvertence, the Court
should be magnanimous in permitting such mistakes to be rectified. After all,
function of the criminal Court is administration of criminal justice and not to count
errors committed by the parties or to find out and declare who among the parties
performed better.
11. Reference must also be made to the observations of the Hon'ble apex Court in the case of Zahira
Habibulla H. Sheikh Vs. State of Gujrat, (2004) 4 SCC 158, where the Hon'ble supreme court
described the scope of Section 311 of the Code as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155062028/ 3
Rizwan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 September, 2019
"44. ....... object of the Section is to enable the court to arrive at the trust irrespective
of the fact that the prosecution or the defence has failed to produce some evidence,
which is necessary for a just and proper disposal of the case. The power is exercised
and the evidence is examined neither to help the prosecution nor the defence, if the
court feels that there is necessity to act in terms of Section 311 but only to subserve
the cause of justice and public interest. It is done with an object of getting the
evidence in aid of a just decision and to uphold the truth."
12. In view of the law laid down by the apex Court in the cases of Mohanlal Shamji Soni, Rajendra
Prasad and Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh (supra) and after perusal of order passed by the trial M.Cr.C.
No. 38023/2019 Rizwan Vs. State of M.P. Court, I am of the opinion that truth has to be ascertained
and it is the prime object of the trial. Accordingly, this petition is allowed and the impugned order
dated 20/08/2019 passed by Sessions Judge, Ujjain in S.T. No. 650/2015 is hereby set aside. The
application under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. filed by the applicant is allowed. The trial Court is
directed to permit the applicant to exhibit the Nai-Duniya-Newspaper dated 07/09/2015 in his
defence and also to recall I.O- Mahendra Singh Parmar (PW 31) and Crime Reporter/Bereau Chief,
Ujjain of Nai Duniya Newspaper and afforded opportunity to applicant to examine these witnesses
regarding the publication of photographs of the applicant in the said news paper.
13. Let a copy of this order be sent to the concerned trial Court for information and necessary
compliance.
(S. K. Awasthi)
skt Judge
Santosh Kumar Tiwari
2019.09.20 14:46:40 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155062028/ 4
