Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 20 September, 2023
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others
on 20 September, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
WP (Crl) no.06/2023
Reserved on: 21.08.2023
Pronounced on: 20.09.2023
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan
....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Jagpaul Singh, Advocate
Versus
Union Territory of J&K and others
.....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr Vishal Bharti, Dy.AG
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Through the medium of this petition, quashment of Order no.07/PSA of 2022 dated 18.11.2022
(for brevity "order impugned") passed by District Commissioner, Samba (for short "detaining
authority"), in terms of Section 8(1)(a) of J&K Public Safety Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as "Act
of 1978"), whereby, detenu, namely, Rohit Kumar @ Makhan S/o Bodh Raj R/o Kotli Riyaan Tehsil
R.S.Pura District Jammu , has been placed under preventive detention so as to prevent him from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, is sought on the grounds made
mention of therein.
2. Respondents have filed Reply Affidavit, in which it is insisted by them that detenu is involved
prejudicial activities and if he is allowed to continue his criminal activities, he would sooner or later
become a great threat to the maintenance of public order.
Page 1
3. I have heard learned counsel for parties. I have gone through the detention record produced by
counsel for respondents and considered the matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188352309/ 1
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 20 September, 2023
4. It is stated by learned counsel appearing for petitioner that grounds of detention are verbatim
copy of dossier. Respondent no.2 has failed to record his subjective satisfaction before passing order
impugned. According to learned counsel for petitioner, if detenu was already in custody in
connection with one of the FIRs mentioned in grounds of detention, then there was no compelling
reason for detaining authority to pass order impugned. It is also contended that a representation
was submitted by mother of detenu to respondents which has not been considered / decided by
them. Learned counsel also states that the activities attributed to detenu in grounds of detention
could at the maximum fall within the purview of expression "law and order, i.e., alleged criminal
activities of detenu can create "law and order" problem and that the expression "law and order" and
"public order" makes a lot of difference inasmuch as both the expressions have different meanings
and cannot be used interchangeably.
5. The distinction between "law and order" and "public order" pointed out in Arun Ghosh v. State of
West Bengal, 1970 AIR SC 1228. The true distinction between the areas of "law and order" and
"public order" is that "one of degree and extent of the reach of the act in question upon society". The
Supreme Court pointed out that "the act by itself is not determinant of its own gravity. In its quality
it may not differ but in its potentiality it may be very different". [See: Babul Mitra alias Anil Mitra
Page 2 v. State of West Bengal and Ors. (1973 (1) SCC 393, Milan Banik v. State of West Bengal
(1974 (4) SCC 504].
6. The true distinction between the areas of law and order and public order lies not merely in the
nature or quality of the act, but in the degree and extent of its reach upon society. Acts similar in
nature, but committed in different contexts and circumstances, might cause different reactions. In
one case it might affect specific individuals only, and therefore touches the problem of law and order
only, while in another it might affect public order. The act by itself, therefore, is not determinant of
its own gravity. In its quality it may not differ from other similar acts, but in its potentiality, that is,
in its impact on society, it may be very different.
7. The two concepts have well defined contours, it being well established that stray and unorganized
crimes of theft and assault are not matters of public order since they do not tend to affect the even
flow of public life. Infractions of law are bound in some measure to lead to disorder but every
infraction of law does not necessarily result in public disorder. The expression "law and order"
represents the largest scale within which is the next circle representing "public order" and the
smallest circle represents the "security of State". The expression "law and order"
comprehends disorders of less gravity than those affecting "public order", just as the
expression "public order" comprehends disorders of less gravity than those affecting
"security of State". [Vide: Kuso Sah v.
The State of Bihar and Ors. (1974 (1) SCC 185, Harpreet Kaur v. State of Maharashtra
(1992 (2) SCC 177, T.K. Gopal v. State of Karnataka (2000 (6) SCC 168, State of
Maharashtra v. Mohd. Yakub (1980 (2) SCR 1158)].
Page 3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188352309/ 2
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 20 September, 2023
8. "Public Order", "law and order" and the "security of the State" draw three concentric circles, the
largest representing law and order, the next representing public order and the smallest representing
security of the State. Every infraction of law must necessarily affect order, but an act affecting law
and order may not necessarily also affect the public order. Likewise, an act may affect public order,
but not necessarily the security of the State. The true test is not the kind, but the potentiality of the
act in question. One act may affect only individuals while the other, though of a similar kind, may
have such an impact that it would disturb the even tempo of the life of the community. This does not
mean that there can be no overlapping, in the sense that an act cannot fall under two concepts at the
same time. An act, for instance, affecting public order may have an impact that it would affect both
public order and the security of the State.
9. The Supreme Court in Collector and Dist. Magistrate v. S. Sultan, AIR 2008 SC 2096, has held as
under:
"The crucial issue, therefore, is whether the activities of the detenu were prejudicial
to public order. While the expression 'law and order' is wider in scope inasmuch as
contravention of law always affects order. 'Public order' has a narrower ambit, and
public order could be affected by only such contravention which affects the
community or the public at large. Public order is the even tempo of life of the
community taking the country as a whole or even a specified locality. The distinction
between the areas of 'law and order' and 'public order' is one of the degree and extent
of the reach of the act in question on society. It is the potentiality of the act to disturb
the even tempo of life of the community which makes it prejudicial to the
maintenance of the public order. If a contravention in its effect is confined only to a
few individuals directly involved as distinct from a wide spectrum of public, it could
raise problem of law and order only. It is the length, magnitude and intensity of the
terror wave unleashed by a particular eruption of disorder that helps to distinguish it
as an act affecting 'public order' from that concerning 'law and order'. The question to
ask is : "Does it lead to disturbance of the current life of the community so as to
amount to a disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an individual
leaving the tranquillity of the society undisturbed" ? This question has to be faced in
every case on its facts.
Page 4
13. "Public order" is what the French call 'ordre publique' and is something more
than ordinary maintenance of law and order. The test to be adopted in determining
whether an act affects law and order or public order, is: Does it lead to disturbance of
the current life of the community so as to amount to disturbance of the public order
or does it affect merely an individual leaving the tranquility of the society
undisturbed? (See Kanu Biswas v. State of West Bengal (AIR 1972 SC 1656)."
10. In the instant case, the incidents made mention of in grounds of detention relate to and fall
within the purview of expression "law and order" and not "public order" and resultantly, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188352309/ 3
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 20 September, 2023
impugned order of detention vitiates.
11. Perusal of grounds of detention in the present case reveals that same are replica of dossier with
interplay of some words here and there, which indicates non-application of mind and in the process
of deriving of subjective satisfaction, has become causality. While formulating grounds of detention,
detaining authority has to apply its own mind. It cannot simply reiterate whatever is written in the
dossier. It will be appropriate to notice the observations of the Supreme Court in the case of "Jai
Singh and ors vs. State of J&K" (AIR 1985 SC 764), which are reproduced hereunder:
"First taking up the case of Jai Singh, the first of the petitioners before us, a perusal
of the grounds of detention shows that it is a verbatim reproduction of the dossier
submitted by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Udhampur, to the District
Magistrate requesting that a detention order may kindly be issued. At the top of the
dossier, the name is mentioned as Sardar Jai Singh, father's name is mentioned as
Sardar Ram Singh and the address is given as village Bharakh, Tehsil Reasi.
Thereafter it is recited "The subject is an important member of ......"
Thereafter follow various allegations against Jai Singh, paragraph by paragraph. In the grounds of
detention, all that the District Magistrate has done is to change the first three words "the subject is"
into "you Jai Singh, S/o Ram Singh, resident of village Bharakh, Tehsil Reasi". Thereafter word for
word the police dossier is repeated and the word "he" wherever it occurs referring to Jai Singh in the
dossier is Page 5 changed into "you" in the grounds of detention. We are afraid it is difficult to find
proof of non-application of mind. The liberty of a subject is a serious matter and is not to be trifled
with in this casual, indifferent and routine manner."
12.From above settled position of law, it is crystal clear that grounds of detention and dossier, if in
similar language, go on to show that there has been non-application of mind on the part of detaining
authority. As already noted, in the instant case, it is clear from the record that the dossier and the
grounds of detention contain almost similar wording which shows that there has been
non-application of mind on the part of the detaining authority. The impugned order of detention is,
therefore, unsustainable in law on this ground alone.
13.With respect to representation filed by detenu through his mother, there is no specific and
clearcut averment on behalf of respondents with respect thereof. Thus, there is substance in the
submission of learned counsel for petitioner that non-consideration of representation of detenu
vitiates impugned order of detention. Law in this regard is settled as the Supreme Court in Tara
Chand v. State of Rajasthan and others, 1980 (2) SCC 321 and Raghavendra Singh v.
Superintendent, District Jail, Kanpur and others (1986) 1 SCC 650, has held that if there is
inordinate delay in considering the representation that would clearly amount to violation of the
provisions of Article 22(5) as to render the detention unconstitutional and void.
14.In Rajammal v. State of Tamil Nadu and others, 1999(1) SCC 417, it has been held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188352309/ 4
Rohit Kumar @ Makhan vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 20 September, 2023
"It is a constitutional obligation of the Government to consider the representation
forwarded by the detenu without any delay. Though no period is prescribed by Article
22 of the Constitution for the decision to be taken on the representation, the words
"as soon as may be" in clause (5) of Article 22convey the message that the Page 6
representation should be considered and disposed of at the earliest."
15. In K. M. Abdulla Kunhi v. Unio of India (1991) 1 SCC 476, it has been held as follows:
".... it is settled law that there should not be supine indifference, slackness or callous
attitude in considering the representation. Any unexplained delay in the disposal of
the representation would be breach of the constitutional imperative and it would
render the continued detention impermissible and illegal."
16.In Ummu Sabeena v. State of Kerala, (2011) 10 SCC 781, the Supreme Court has held that the
history of personal liberty, as is well known, is a history of insistence on procedural safeguards. The
expression 'as soon as may be', in Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India, clearly shows the
concern of the makers of the Constitution that the representation, made on behalf of detenu, should
be considered and disposed of with a sense of urgency and without any avoidable delay.
17.For the reasons discussed above, the petition is disposed of and detention Order no.07/PSA of
2022 dated 18.11.2022, passed by District Magistrate, Samba, is quashed. Respondents, including
Superintendent Jail concerned, are directed to release the detenu forthwith, provided he is not
required in any other case. Disposed of.
18.Detention record be returned to counsel for respondents.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Jammu 20.09.2023 Ajaz Ahmad, PS Whether approved for reporting?
Yes Page 7
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188352309/ 5
