Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on
30 May, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
In The High Court Of Judicature At Allahabad
Sitting At Lucknow
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:34233
A.F.R.
Court No. - 15
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 4655 of 2025
Applicant :- Rohit Rajput
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Dhirendra Pratap Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Subhash Vidyarthi J.
1. Heard Sri Dhirendra Pratap Singh, the learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Anurag Verma,
the learned AGA-I for the respondent no. 1-State of U.P.
2. By means of the instant petition filed under Section 528 B.N.S.S., the applicant has challenged the
validity of an order dated 17.04.2025 passed by the learned IV Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate /
Special Judge MP/MLA, Raebareli in Warrant or Summon Criminal Case No. 12609/2024, arising
out of Case crime No. 415/2023, under Sections 406, 506, 420 IPC and Section 138 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 1
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
Negotiable Insruments Act, Police Station Kheeron, District Raebareli, whereby the trial court has
ordered for returning the pen-drive and cheques to the Investigating Officer for getting the same
examined by the Forensic Science Laboratory and submitting its report.
3. The aforesaid case has been registered on the basis of an FIR lodged on 23.09.2023 against the
applicant and his brother Rahul Rajpoot and his brother-in-law Krishna Kumar Lodhi stating that
the accused persons had extracted Rs. 9 lakhs from the informant for getting his brother employed
in a Government Service and they had handed over a forged joining letter of Fertilizer Corporation
of India. Upon coming to know about the fraud committed by the accused persons, the informant
demanded return of his money. They gave a cheque which was returned by the bank unpaid.
4. After investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted a charge-sheet dated 12.07.2024 against
the accused persons for offences under Sections 420, 406, 506 IPC and 138 of the NI Act. On
14.07.2024, the Investigating Officer submitted a supplementary charge-sheet stating that the
pen-drive containing conversations between the informant and the co-accused Rahul Lodhi and the
cheques in question had been sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory. Those have been received
back and the same were being attached to the case diary. The investigation stands closed.
5. The trial court took cognizance of the offence on 26.07.2024 and the accused persons were
summoned to face the trial.
6. On 17.04.2025, the Investigating Officer gave an application to the trial court stating that the
Superintendent of Police had directed him to submit the pen-drive and the cheques relating to the
present case to the Forensic Science Laboratory for obtaining a report in respect thereof.
Accordingly, the Investigating Officer requested the court for making available the pen-drive and the
cheques which are a part of the case diary, for being forwarded to the Forensic Science Laboratory,
Lucknow and obtaining a report in respect thereof.
7. The trial court has allowed the application by means of the impugned order dated 17.04.2025
holding that the pen-drive and the cheques are important prosecution evidence and the same had
been returned by the Forensic Science Laboratory because of some deficiencies in the docket. The
Investigating Officer did not send the pen-drive and the cheques again to the Forensic Science
Laboratory, which shows negligence on the part of the then Investigating Officer. The pen-drive
contains the recording of conversations between the complainant and the accused, which is an
important piece of evidence and its forensic examination is necessary for a just decision of a matter.
The Investigating Officer has failed to get the same examined by the Forensic Science Laboratory in
order to give undue advantage to the accused persons.
8. The trial court accepted the application, ordered returned of the pen-drive and the cheques to the
Investigating Officer for being examined by the Forensic Science Laboratory and for submitting its
report. The trial court further ordered institution of departmental proceedings against the then
Investigating Officer for his negligence in conducting investigation of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 2
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
9. Assailing the validity of the aforesaid order, the learned counsel for the applicant has submitted
that after submission of the charge-sheet and closure of investigation, the Investigating Officer had
no authority to demand return of the pen-drive and cheques for carrying out further investigation.
He has relied upon the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Amrutbhai
Shambhubhai Patel v. Sumanbhai Kantibhai Patel: (2017) 4 SCC 177 and Athul Rao v. State of
Karnataka: (2018) 14 SCC 298.
10. Replying to the aforesaid submissions, Sri Anurag Verma, the learned AGA-I has submitted that
the cases relied upon by the learned counsel for the applicant have been overruled by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in its latter judgment in the case of Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya v. State of Gujarat :
(2019) 17 SCC 1. Sri. Verma has also relied upon a decision rendered by a Division Bench of this
Court in Jitendra Singh @ Bablu v. State of U.P. & Ors.: 2023 (4) ACR 3507.
11. In Amrutbhai Shambhubhai Patel v. Sumanbhai Kantibhai Patel: (2017) 4 SCC 177, a Bench
consisting of two Hon'ble Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that: -
"49. On an overall survey of the pronouncements of this Court on the scope and
purport of Section 173(8) of the Code and the consistent trend of explication thereof,
we are thus disposed to hold that though the investigating agency concerned has been
invested with the power to undertake further investigation desirably after informing
the court thereof, before which it had submitted its report and obtaining its approval,
no such power is available therefor to the learned Magistrate after cognizance has
been taken on the basis of the earlier report, process has been issued and the accused
has entered appearance in response thereto. At that stage, neither the learned
Magistrate suo motu nor on an application filed by the complainant/informant can
direct further investigation. Such a course would be open only on the request of the
investigating agency and that too, in circumstances warranting further investigation
on the detection of material evidence only to secure fair investigation and trial, the
life purpose of the adjudication in hand."
12. The aforesaid ratio was followed by another Bench consisting of two Hon'ble Judges of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Athul Rao v. State of Karnataka: (2018) 14 SCC 298.
13. However, in Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya v. State of Gujarat: (2019) 17 SCC 1, a Bench consisting
of three Hon'ble Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that: -
"42. There is no good reason given by the Court in these decisions as to why a
Magistrate's powers to order further investigation would suddenly cease upon
process being issued, and an accused appearing before the Magistrate, while
concomitantly, the power of the police to further investigate the offence continues
right till the stage the trial commences. Such a view would not accord with the earlier
judgments of this Court, in particular, Sakiri [Sakiri Vasu v. State of U.P., (2008) 2
SCC 409], Samaj Parivartan Samudaya [Samaj Parivartan Samudaya v. State of
Karnataka, (2012) 7 SCC 407], Vinay Tyagi [Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali, (2013) 5 SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 3
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
762], and Hardeep Singh [Hardeep Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC
92; Hardeep Singh having clearly held that a criminal trial does not begin after
cognizance is taken, but only after charges are framed. What is not given any
importance at all in the recent judgments of this Court is Article 21 of the
Constitution and the fact that the Article demands no less than a fair and just
investigation. To say that a fair and just investigation would lead to the conclusion
that the police retain the power, subject, of course, to the Magistrate's nod under
Section 173(8) to further investigate an offence till charges are framed, but that the
supervisory jurisdiction of the Magistrate suddenly ceases midway through the
pre-trial proceedings, would amount to a travesty of justice, as certain cases may cry
out for further investigation so that an innocent person is not wrongly arraigned as
an accused or that a prima facie guilty person is not so left out. There is no warrant
for such a narrow and restrictive view of the powers of the Magistrate, particularly
when such powers are traceable to Section 156(3) read with Section 156(1), Section
2(h) and Section 173(8) CrPC, as has been noticed hereinabove, and would be
available at all stages of the progress of a criminal case before the trial actually
commences. It would also be in the interest of justice that this power be exercised suo
motu by the Magistrate himself, depending on the facts of each case. Whether further
investigation should or should not be ordered is within the discretion of the learned
Magistrate who will exercise such discretion on the facts of each case and in
accordance with law. If, for example, fresh facts come to light which would lead to
inculpating or exculpating certain persons, arriving at the truth and doing substantial
justice in a criminal case are more important than avoiding further delay being
caused in concluding the criminal proceeding, as was held in Hasanbhai Valibhai
Qureshi [Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat, (2004) 5 SCC 347].
Therefore, to the extent that the judgments in Amrutbhai Shambhubhai Patel, Athul
Rao and Bikash Ranjan Rout have held to the contrary, they stand overruled.
Needless to add, Randhir Singh Rana v. State (Delhi Admn.) [Randhir Singh
Rana v. State (Delhi Admn.), (1997) 1 SCC 361] and Reeta Nag v. State of W.B. [Reeta
Nag v. State of W.B., (2009) 9 SCC 129] also stand overruled."
14. The learned Counsel for the applicant has cited two judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
both of which stand expressly overruled in Vinubhai Haribhai Malaviya v. State of Gujarat: (2019) 17
SCC 1 decided on 16.10.2019.
15. In State of Orissa v. Nalinikanta Muduli: (2004) 7 SCC 19, faced with a similar situation, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that: -
"6. It is strange that a decision which has been overruled by this Court nearly a
quarter of a century back was cited by the Bar and the Court did not take note of this
position and disposed of the matter placing reliance on the said overruled decision. It
does not appear that the decision of this Court reversing the judgment of the High
Court was brought to the notice of the learned Single Judge who was dealing with the
matter. It is a very unfortunate situation that learned counsel for the accused who is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 4
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
supposed to know the decision did not bring this aspect to the notice of the learned
Single Judge. Members of the Bar are officers of the court. They have a bounden duty
to assist the court and not mislead it. Citing judgment of a court which has been
overruled by a larger Bench of the same High Court or this Court without disclosing
the fact that it has been overruled is a matter of serious concern. ... We can only
express our anguish at the falling standards of professional conduct..."
16. In present times, when the judgments are available on online portals, checking whether a
judgment has been overruled, is very easy compared to the previous times when the judgments were
available only in journals published in book forms and there was a possibility of a person missing
the subsequent judgment overruling a previous judgment. Nowadays, the online portals
prominently highlight that a particular judgment has been overruled and, in these circumstances,
citing an overruled judgment is a matter of even greater concern. The learned Counsel for the
applicant is cautioned to be careful in future and not repeat this conduct.
17. Sri. Anurag Verma has also relied upon a judgment rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in
Jitendra Singh v. State of U.P.: 2023 SCC OnLine All 2328 = 2023 (4) ACR 3525, wherein it was
held that: -
"32. ...it is settled principles of law that the police has a right to further investigate the
matter even after the submissions of the charge-sheet/report before the learned
Magistrate and even after the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the
report/charge-sheet. In exercise of power under Section 173(8) CrPC of the Code, it
has been statutorily recognised that there is no statutory requirement that before
initiating further investigation, investigation agency must take permission of the
Magistrate concerned. Further, investigation is very distinct from the
reinvestigation/de novo investigation or fresh investigation. Further investigation is
the continuance of the investigation, which has already been done and on discovery
of new facts or the facts which were left out during the investigation. Whereas in the
case of the fresh, denovo or reinvestigation, the investigation already done is required
to be wiped out and investigation is required to begun from its inception. Further
investigation can be carried out even without any permission from the Magistrate
concerned. However, fresh, de-novo or reinvestigation cannot be done without the
specific orders by the competent court."
18. Keeping in view the law as clarified by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in in Vinubhai Haribhai
Malaviya (Supra) and by a Division Bench of this Court in Jitendra Singh (Supra), I am of the
considered view that the trial court has acted well within its jurisdiction to order examination of the
pen-drive and cheques in question by the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow so as to enable it to
arrive at a just decision in the matter.
19. The inherent powers of this Court under Section 582 BNSS are meant to be exercised to make
such orders as may be necessary to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure
the ends of justice. Any interference in the impugned order dated 17.04.2025 passed by the trial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 5
Rohit Rajput vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 30 May, 2025
court would not secure the ends of justice, rather it will create unwarranted hurdle in securing the
ends of justice.
20. The impugned order does not suffer from any illegality warranting interference by this Court.
21. The application under Section 582 BNSS lacks merit and the same is accordingly dismissed.
(Subhash Vidyarthi, J.) Order Date: 30.05.2025 Pradeep/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91174134/ 6
