Roopsingh Badriji Solanki vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 January, 2019
Roopsingh Badriji Solanki vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on
28 January, 2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
1 WP No.1066/19
WP No.1066/2019
Indore, Dated : 28.1.2019
Ms. Shanno Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri H.Y. Mehta, learned counsel for the State submits
that though the intimation has been sent to the respondents
on 23.1.2019 but no instructions have been received till now.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has pointed out that the petitioner's daughter is victim
of acid attack and had received serious injuries on the hand and legs and that she is hospitalized
since 9.11.2018 and is presently in the M.Y. Hospital, Indore, where she is not getting the proper
treatment. She has also pointed out that till now only Rs.1 Lakh has been paid to the victim, whereas
in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the matter of Laxmi Vs. Union of India and others
reported in 2014(4) SCC 427 a sum of Rs.3 Lakhs is payable.
She has drawn the attention of this court to the order dated 10.4.2015 passed by the Supreme Court
in the matter of Laxmi Vs. Union of India and others in WP (Cri.) No.129/2006 and has submitted
that the petitioner should be referred to the Bombay Hospital (private hospital) so that she can get
proper treatment. The Supreme Court vide order dated 10.4.2015 in the case of Laxmi (supra) has
held as under:-
"We have gone through the chart annexed along with the affidavit filed by the
Ministry of Home Affairs and we find that despite the directions given by this Court
in Laxmi Vs. Union of India [(2014) 4 SCC 427], the minimum compensation of
Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees three lakhs only) per acid attack victim has not been fixed in
some of the States/Union Territories. In our HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
opinion, it will be appropriate if the Member Secretary of the State Legal Services
Authority takes up the issue with the State Government so that the orders passed by
this Court are complied with and a minimum of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees three lakhs
only) is made available to each victim of acid attack.
From the figures given above, we find that the amount will not be burdensome so far
as the State Governments/Union Territories are concerned and, therefore, we do not
see any reason why the directions given by this Court should not be accepted by the
State Governments/Union Territories since they do not involve any serious financial
implication.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140592986/ 1
Roopsingh Badriji Solanki vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 January, 2019
We also direct the Member Secretary of the State Legal Services Authority to obtain a
copy of the Victim Compensation Scheme from the concerned State/Union Territory
and to give it wide and adequate publicity in the State/Union Territory so that each
acid attack victim in the States/Union Territories can take the benefit of the Victim
Compensation Scheme.
Insofar as the proper treatment, aftercare and rehabilitation of the victims of acid
attack is concerned, the meeting convened on 14.03.2015 notes unanimously that full
medical assistance should be provided to the victims of acid attack and that private
hospitals should also provide free medical treatment to such victims. It is noted that
there may perhaps be some reluctance on the part of some private hospitals to
provide free medical treatment and, therefore, the concerned officers in the State
Governments should take up the matter with the private hospitals so that they are
also required to provide free medical treatment to the victims of acid attack.
The decisions taken in the meeting read as follows:
● The States/UTs will take a serious note of the directions of the Supreme Court with
regard to treatment and payment of compensation to acid attack victims and to
implement these directions through the issue of requisite orders/notifications.
● The private hospitals will also be brought on board for compliance and the
States/UTs will use necessary means in this regard. ● No hospital/clinic should
refuse treatment HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH citing lack of specialized
facilities. ● First-aid must be administered to the victim and after stabilization, the
victim/patient could be shifted to a specialized facility for further treatment,
wherever required.
● Action may be taken against hospital/clinic for refusal to treat victims of acid
attacks and other crimes in contravention of the provisions of Section 357C of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
We expect the authorities to comply with these decisions.
Although it is not made clear in the meeting held on 14.03.2015, what we understand
by free medical treatment is not only provision of physical treatment to the victim of
acid attack but also availability of medicines, bed and food in the concerned hospital.
We, therefore, issue a direction that the State Governments/Union Territories should
seriously discuss and take up the matter with all the private hospitals in their
respective State/Union Territory to the effect that the private hospitals should not
refuse treatment to victims of acid attack and that full treatment should be provided
to such victims including medicines, food, bedding and reconstructive surgeries.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140592986/ 2
Roopsingh Badriji Solanki vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 January, 2019
We also issue a direction that the hospital, where the victim of an acid attack is first
treated, should give a certificate that the individual is a victim of an acid attack. This
certificate may be utilized by the victim for treatment and reconstructive surgeries or
any other scheme that the victim may be entitled to with the State Government or the
Union Territory, as the case may be.
In the event of any specific complaint against any private hospital or government
hospital, the acid attack victim will, of course, be at liberty to take further action."
Having regard to the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court and the submission of counsel for
the petitioner that the petitioner is not being treated properly in the M.Y. Hospital, the respondent
No.3 is directed to shift the HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH petitioner in the Bombay
Hospital, Indore which in terms of the aforesaid judgment will extend the free treatment to the
victim.
Let the needful be done within a period of one week. The appropriate orders in respect of grant of
the remaining amount of compensation will also be passed by the concerned respondent within the
said period.
List thereafter.
C.C. as per rules.
(Prakash Shrivastava) Judge trilok/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140592986/ 3
