Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
S.No.131
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRTA No. 31/2018
IA Nos. 01& 02/2018
Reserved on : 18.03.2023
Pronounced on: 11.04.2023
Roop Krishan Bhat, age 63 years, ....Petitioner(s)
S/o Late Sh. Lassa Bhat, R/o Ladu Tehsil,
Pampore, District Srinagar.(Presently, residing
in Q.No.,32-A TRT(H), 32 Nagrota Camp,
Jammu.
Through :- Mr. K. L. Pandita, Advocate
V/s
1. State of J&K, through SHO P/S Handwara, ....Respondent(s)
District Kupwara.
2. Ajaz Ahmed Ganaie S/o Abdul Aziz Ganaie, R/o Ompura Budgam (through Superintendent
District Jail, Handwara).
Through :- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG with Ms. Shazia Asaf, Advocate for R-1, Mr. Mohd. Shaqir
Hussain, Advocate for R-2.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE JUDGME NT
1. By the medium of instant criminal transfer application filed under Section 526 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Svt. 1989, (hereinafter referred as 'Code'), petitioner seeks transfer of the
case/challan titled „State vs Ajaz Ahmed Ganaie & Ors(cid:129) bearing challan No. 142/2017 of Police
Station Handwara, pending in the Court of Principal District and Sessions Judge Handwara to any
other competent court of equal jurisdiction at Jammu on the grounds averred in the petition to the
effect, that petitioner is originally resident of village Ladu Tehsil Pampore District Srinagar Kashmir
and due to grim prevailing situation and subversive activities in the valley of Kashmir, the petitioner
alongwith his family members which also includes his son, namely, Sameer Bhat (now deceased)
migrated from the valley of Kashmir on the threat perception of militants and is presently residing
here at Jammu leaving behind their house and hearth in the valley of Kashmir. It is averred, that the
son of the petitioner, namely, Sameer Bhat was working as constable bearing No. 862-S of Police
component Srinagar and for non- response of the mobile call and not knowing the whereabouts,
petitioner lodged a written report in Police Station Shergari Srinagar to the effect that his son,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 1
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
namely, Sameer Kumar was performing his duty as constable in police component Srinagar and had
left from police component on 14.05.2017, his mobile phone is switched off and his whereabouts are
not known to the petitioner and on the receipt of the application a missing report vide DD Report
No. 25 dated 17.05.2017 was entered in Police Station Shergari and search set into motion and the
alleged FIR was lodged through Sh. Amrit Paul (IPS) Incharge SIT SDPO Shaheed Gunj who was
heading the SIT which was constituted by the State for ensuring the investigation, as the cause of
action was at Handwara and alleged case was transferred to Police Station Chougal Handwara for
further investigation and completion of challan, statements of witnesses were recorded during
search, call details records of the said missing constable were obtained which indicated that his
mobile phone is not in use since 14.05.2017 and during the course of investigation, the said SPO i.e.
respondent No.2 confessed his involvement in the killing of missing constable by revealing all the
incidents subsequently an FIR under section 302 RPC was registered in Police Station Shergari
Srinagar on dated 30.05.2017. It is moreso averred, that since the cause of action had accrued at
village Younsoo Handwara which is under the jurisdiction of Police Station Handwara (PP Chogal)
and the said FIR of Police Station Shergari Srinagar including all other documents near about 131
leaves where forwarded to Police Station Handwara for further investigation and after completion of
the challan, the charge sheet was presented in the Court of learned Principal District and Sessions
Judge Handwara, which is pending for prosecution evidence; that most of the witnesses cited in the
challan are police officials and only the petitioner who is complainant in the case, mother of the
deceased, namely, Smt. Nancy Bhat, deceased(cid:129)s brother, namely, Sanjay Kumar and uncle of the
deceased, namely, Daleep Kumar, are figuring at serial Nos. 21 to 24 are private witnesses and
figuring at serial Nos. 11,12,13 and 25 to 29 are also private witnesses; that the challan is at the initial
stage and all the family members who have now been arrayed as witnesses in the present challan
from serial Nos. 21 to 24 were pursuing the case when the petitioner lodged the FIR till it was
concluded and it has came to the knowledge of the relatives and the parents of the accused that
these persons are pursuing the case and as soon as they left from the court premises the parents of
the accused No.2 and some of his relatives who are not identified by the petitioner but by their own
admission they stated that they are close relatives of the accused and harassed and alarmed the
petitioner and his wife, son and brother and uncle that they shall not depose before the criminal
court in the pending case against the accused otherwise they will eliminate their lives and the
petitioner in response to that requested them that his son has been killed and it is for the Hon(cid:129)ble
Court to deliver the justice. It is stated, that the family members of the petitioner were harassed and
threatened by these persons to leave the court premises immediately otherwise they will also be
kidnapped by their well-wishers who are indulging in militant related activities in the valley of
Kashmir and also alarmed them not to depose their statements before the Hon(cid:129)ble court whenever
they will be summoned for getting their statements record, on this threat perception the petitioner
alongwith his family members left no option except to leave the court premises and in a frightened
position reached at Jammu; that admittedly the petitioner alongwith his family members have
migrated from Kashmir Valley on the threat perception leaving behind their houses and hearths in
the Valley and are presently residing here at Nagrota Jammu and deceased was the only earning
hand in the family of the petitioner which was only source of income to feed the family members of
the petitioner who was kidnapped and killed by respondent No.2; that if the case is not transferred
here at Jammu, the petitioner may suffer an irreparable loss, as petitioner and his other family
members who have been arrayed as witnesses are on constant threat by the parents and relatives of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 2
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
the accused by alarming them either to withdraw the case or make the statements in favour of the
accused. Prayer has been made for transfer of criminal challan titled „State vs Ajaz Ahmed Ganaie &
Ors(cid:129), pending in the Court of Principal District and Sessions Judge Handwara to any other equal
jurisdiction at Jammu.
2. Respondent No.1 has filed the status report contending therein that the police have alleged that
the accused (respondent No.2) has killed the deceased namely Sameer Kumar Bhat son of Roop
Krishan Bhat originally resident of Ladoo Pampore and presently Nagrota Jammu; that the police
concerned took custody of the corpse, prepared the sitemap of the place of its recovery and
photographed, and after investigation Police have produced the charge sheet against the accused on
18.09.2017 in the Court of CJM Handwara from where it was committed to the Court of learned
Principal District and Sessions Judge Handwara, where charges have been framed against the
accused for the commission of offences punishable u/ss 302, 201, 511 of the Penal Code on
16.04.2018. It is contended, that accused did not plead guilty but pleaded innocence and claimed the
trial, and during the period of about 4 years following twenty three (23) witnesses have been
examined out of the total fifty (50) listed witnesses as under:
Sr.No. Name Statement recorded on
PW-03 Ct.MohdQasim 02.06.2018
PW-01 Ct. Mohd Hussain 07.07.2018
PW-04 Abdul Rashid Bhat 30.03.2019
PW-02 Ct. Ghulam Mohd 03.09.2020
PW-07 SI Showkat Ahmed 03.12.2020
PW-06 SI Nazir Ahmed Wani 20.04.2019
PW-10 ASI Abdul Rashid 03.09.2020
PW-11 Showkat Ahmed Pandit 03.09.2020
PW-12 Bilal Ahmed War 17.09.2020
PW-13 Mohd Ashraf Lone 17.09.2020
PW-14 Ashiq Hussain Khan 27.10.2020
PW-15 Ashiq Hussain 13.12.2020
PW-16 Javid Ahmed Khan 03.12.2020
PW-17 Shahid Mustafa 10.02.2021
PW-18 Javid Ahmed Tandwa 10.02.2021
PW-19 Bashir Ahmed Dar 10.02.2021
PW-20 Jagdash Singh 02.12.2021
PW-25 Shabir Ahmed Mir 02.12.2021
PW-47 Insp. Showket Ahmed 12.08.2021
PW-50 Arief Hussain DySP KPS 07.10.2021
PW-27 Hilal Ahmed Malik 19.02.2022
PW-26 Javid Iqbal Khan 19.02.2022
PW-29 ASI Khurshid 17.03.2022
It is moreso contended, that the prosecution witnesses at serial Nos. 21 to 24 are the relatives of the
deceased, the prosecution has not yet produced them in this Court as witnesses, the accused is an
under trial prisoner and he is currently lodged in District Jail Kupwara, this Court has no objection
if the Hon(cid:129)ble High Court deems it fit to transfer the said case to any other court for disposal under
law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 3
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
3. Respondent No.2 has filed objections wherein it has been contended, that the present application
is not maintainable because the petitioner has earlier filed the replica of the present application
bearing CRTA No. 07/2018 which was dismissed by this Court and the present petition requires to
be dismissed being on the same set of grounds. It is contended, that the grounds taken in the
petition is a white lie and the petitioner wants to take the advantage of the Kashmir situation,
respondent No.2 has one brother just completed 12th class and mother is bed ridden undergone the
depression due to the case against the him, moreover, father is 100% disable by both the legs,
therefore, the story concocted in the present petition is based on the whims and surmise of the
petitioner, petitioner and their family members mostly residing at Laddo Pampore District Pulwama
and the brother of the petitioner namely, Dileep Kumar Bhat is in J&K Police as HC posted at DPL
Kupwara arrives on every hearing of the case at Court without any fear and threat, therefore claim of
the petitioner is baseless and without any truth. It is contended, that respondent No.2 is presently
lodged in District Jail Kupwara whereas the family members are residing at Ompura District
Budgam which is almost 100 km away from the Handwara Court, therefore, the allegation of threat
from the family members of the petitioner is an absolute lie, prayer has been made for dismissal of
the petition.
4. Mr. K. L. Pandita, Learned Counsel for the petitioner has sought the transfer of instant criminal
challan by vehemently canvassing arguments, that the petitioner in view of the prevailing
circumstances and targeted killings in the Valley apprehends threat to his life, therefore, is not in a
position to fairly face the trial in the court at Handwara Srinagar. It is argued, that the petitioner as
well as his family members would be facing great hardship, inconvenience in visiting the valley,
there is every likelihood of him being eliminated, the fair and impartial trial could not be guaranteed
in such an atmosphere where the petitioner apprehends threat to his life and if the trial is allowed to
be continued in the Court of Principal District and Sessions Judge Handwara. It is vehemently
argued, that a Coordinate Bench of this Court has already allowed transfer applications wherein the
cases have been transferred from competent court of jurisdiction at Srinagar to the competent court
of jurisdiction at Jammu on the ground security threat. To support his arguments, learned counsel
has placed reliance on the judgment of this Court, viz; "Sunny Mahajan & Ors versus State &Ors"
[CRTA No. 4/2014 & IA No. 5/2014].
5. Per contra, Mr. Mohd. Shaqir Hussain, learned counsel for the respondent No.2 has strenuously
argued, that the petitioner has no difficulty or hindrance to attend the court of Principal District and
Sessions Judge Handwara because the petitioner has earlier filed the replica of the present
application bearing CRTA No. 07/2018, which was dismissed by this Court. It is argued, that as per
the mandate of Section 179 Cr.P.C the accused is required to be tried in district where act is done or
where consequences ensues, the petitioner/complainant and their family members mostly reside at
Laddoo Pampore District Pulwama, brother of the petitioner is in J&K Police as HC posted at DPL
Kupwara arrives on every hearing of the case at Court without any fear and threat, all the witnesses
are resident of Kashmir which are required to be examined during the trial and it would be
impossible for them to appear in Jammu Court. It is moreso argued, that the petitioner is aware
about the fate of the case, so in order to linger on the case, the petitioner is reluctant to depose
before the learned court at Handwara and the mala-fide intention of the petitioner also appears
from the fact that petitioner rather to praying for deposing through video conferencing, filed the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 4
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
present petition without any reason and rhyme, and till date, the petitioner and his other family
members (prosecution witnesses Nos. 21 to 24) are avoiding their presence and are not appearing
before the Court of learned Principal District and Sessions Judge Handwara for recording their
witnesses, prayer has been made for dismissal of the application.
6. I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the averments of the transfer application,
objections filed by the respondents and the relevant law on the subject matter coupled with the
judgment relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner.
7. The issue of transfer of cases was considered by the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court in KulwinderKour @
KulwinderGurcharan Singh vs. Kandi Friends Education Trust and others, 2008 (3) SCC 659 and
while considering transfer of cases from one Court to another, Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court has held as
under;
"Although the discretionary power of transfer of cases cannot be imprisoned within a
strait-jacket of any cast-iron formula unanimously applicable to all situations, it
cannot be gainsaid that the power to transfer a case must be exercised with due care,
caution and circumspection. Reading Section 24 and 25 of the Code together and
keeping in view various judicial pronouncements, certain broad propositions as to
what may constitute a ground for transfer have been laid down by Courts. They are
balance of convenience or inconvenience to plaintiff or defendant or witnesses;
convenience or inconvenience of a particular place of trial having regard to the nature
of evidence on the points involved in the suit; issues raised by the parties; reasonable
apprehension in the mind of the litigant that he might not get justice in the court in
which the suit is pending; important questions of law involved or a considerable
section of public interested in the litigation; interest of justice demanding for transfer
of suit, appeal or other proceedings, etc. Above are some of the instances which are
germane in considering the question of transfer of suit, appeal or other proceedings.
They are, however, illustrative in nature and by no means be treated as exhaustive. If
on the above or other relevant considerations, the Court feels that the plaintiff or the
defendant is not likely to have a fair trial in the Court from which he seeks to transfer
a case, it is not only the power, but the duty of the Court to make such order."
8. Admittedly, the court of Principal Sessions Judge Handwara (Kashmir) during the trial of the case
has examined almost all the prosecution witnesses. The apprehension of the petitioner, who is
complainant in the case, is that it would be difficult for him alongwith his other family members
who are cited as prosecution witnesses Nos. 21 to 24 to defend/record their statements in the case in
the trial court in view of the threat perception to them being members of minority community. Fair
and impartial trial is the basic right of a litigant which right will be snatched in case the instant trial
is allowed to be continued in the court of Pr. Sessions Judge Handwara. Respondent No.1 has
pleaded no objections to the transfer application. Due to recent targeted killings in Kashmir Valley,
it would not be safe for the petitioner as well as his family members to attend the trial Court and see
the fruits of litigation. Petitioner being a complainant in the case and due to security concerns would
not get fair trial/justice in the trial court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 5
Roop Krishan Bhat vs State Of J&K on 11 April, 2023
9. Viewed thus, petitioner has carved out a strong case for transfer of criminal challan from the
court of learned Principal Sessions Judge Handwara (Kashmir) to the Court of competent
jurisdiction at Jammu. This being so, criminal transfer application is allowed. It is, accordingly,
ordered, that the Criminal Challan No. 142/2017 titled "State vs Ajaz Ahmed Ganaie & Ors"
under Section 302 RPC pending on the files of learned Principal Sessions Judge
Handwara (Kashmir) stands transferred to the court of learned Principal Sessions
Judge Jammu. The Court of Principal Sessions Judge Handwara shall forthwith
transmit the record of the case to the transferee Court. Petitioner shall bear the
expenses of the remaining unexamined any civil witnesses in the challan during the
trial of the case in the Court of learned Principal Sessions Judge Jammu. The
transferee court of Principal Sessions Judge Jammu shall deal with the case in
accordance with the provisions of law. On receipt of the file, the transferee court shall
ensure the attendance of the accused on virtual mode of hearing from District Jail
Kupwara where accused/respondent no.2 is presently lying in judicial custody on the
dates fixed for the proceedings in the case. Registry is directed to convey the order to
both the courts below. Stay granted by this court on 18.07.2018 on the trial of the
case in hand, stands vacated.
10. Disposed of accordingly.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Jammu:
11.04.2023
Vijay
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87611481/ 6
