Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 27/2022
Reserved on: 03.05.2023
Pronounced on:08.05.2023
Roshan Din .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Waheed Choudhary, Advocate
v/s
UT of J & K & Ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy AG
CORAM: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. District Magistrate, Kathua (hereinafter called 'Detaining Authority') in exercise of powers under
Section 8 of the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 (for short, „Act of 1978(cid:128)), passed the
detention Order No. PSA/113 Dated 28.05.2022 (for short 'impugned order'), in terms whereof the
detenue namely Roshan Din S/O Sher Wani R/O Hande Chak, Tehsil Marheen, District Kathua (for
short 'detenue') has been detained.
2. The impugned detention order has been challenged through the medium of the instant petition,
allegedly having been passed in breach of the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India
read with Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety Act, 1978.
3. It is being pleaded in the petition that the detaining authority-respondent No.2 has not attributed
any specific allegation against the detenue; that the detenue has been incapacitated in filing a
representation as the grounds of detention are not in a language which could be understood by the
detenue; that neither the petitioner is threat to the public order nor he has committed any such
crime which has disturbed the society at large; that the detenue is not an English literate person and
understands only Urdu language but the order of detention is in English and it is not possible for
him to understand such a hyper technical language; and that the order of detention and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 1
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
connected documents annexed with the petition clearly show violation of right of the detenue
guaranteed in terms of the Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
4. Respondents in their counter affidavits have stated that the detenue was ordered to be detained
for maintenance of 'public order' and had he been let free, there would have been every likelihood of
his re-indulging in criminal activities; that the power of preventive detention is different from
punishment as the preventive detention is aimed at stopping the illegal activities of an individual,
which, otherwise, under common law both criminal/civil cannot be stopped and the said individual
creates a havoc in the society which leads to public disorder, disturbing peace, stability and in
certain cases also raises alarm bells regarding the National Unity and Integrity; that petitioner's
activities, were threat to the public order, peace and stability in the society. It is also being stated
that the petitioner is involved in numerous criminal activities, was not likely to desist from his
criminal activities which were prejudicial to the maintenance of peace and public order in District
Kathua.
5. Learned counsel for the detenue while being heard makes reference to the grounds of the
detention and states that on a cursory look on the same it is manifest that same are vague. It is also
submitted that the Detaining Authority on the basis of dossier submitted by Senior Superintendent
of Police, Kathua, without application of mind and without evaluating the allegations alleged against
the detenue in the said dossier, copy of which was not even provided to the detenue, proceeded to
pass impugned detention order whereby the detenue has been detained and directed to be lodged at
Central Jail, Kot Bhalwal, Jammu. In addition, learned counsel submitted that the allegations
levelled against the detenue are totally vague as nothing specific has been stated in the grounds of
detention.
6. In rebuttal, learned Dy AG submits that the record reveals that there is no vagueness in the
grounds of detention. The procedural safeguards prescribed under the provisions of Public Safety
Act and the rights guaranteed to the detenue under the Constitution have strictly been followed in
the instant case. The detenue has been furnished all the material, as was required, and was also
made aware of his right to make representation to the detaining authority as well as government,
against his detention.
7. Heard learned counsel for both the sides at length and considered the record.
8. Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the Founding Fathers
enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the State to detain
a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanising the harsh
authority over individual liberty. In a democracy that of ours, governed by the rule of law, the drastic
power to detain a person without trial for security of the State and/or maintenance of public order,
must be strictly construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of
the security of the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger
interest of the nation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 2
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
9. Before appreciating the rival contentions of the parties, it would be appropriate to note that the
procedural requirements are the only safeguards available to the detenue since the Court cannot go
behind the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority as has been laid down by Hon'ble Apex
Court in a case titled Abdul Latif Abdul Wahab Sheikh Vs B.K. Jha &Anr., reported as (1987) 2 SCC
22. The procedural requirements are, therefore, to be strictly complied with, if any value is to be
attached to the liberty of the subject and the constitutional rights guaranteed to him in that regard.
10. The requirement of law is that whole of the record, on which the detention order is based, has to
be made available to the detenue in the language that he understands. As per the execution report,
he has been furnished copies of detention order (01) leaf, notice of detention (01) leaf, grounds of
detention (05) leaves and other related documents (08) leaves [Total 20 leaves]. However, he has
not been provided with copies of translated script of the grounds of detention, copies of FIR,
statements of witnesses as well as the material relied upon by the detaining authority under which
the petitioner has been detained. The detenue, thus cannot be said to be provided with whole of the
record which based his detention, so as to make an effective and meaningful representation. The
failure on the part of the detaining authority to supply material renders detention illegal and
unsustainable.
11. A three Judge Bench of the Apex Court in a case titled "Sushanta Kumar Banik versus State of
Tripura & Ors" (2022 SCC Online SC 1333), while dealing with preventive detention, held on
30.09.2022 in paragraph 28, as follows:
"The preventive detention is a serious invasion of personal liberty and the normal
methods open to a person charged with commission of any offence to disprove the
charge or to prove his innocence at the trial are not available to the person
preventively detained and, therefore, in prevention detention jurisprudence whatever
little safeguards the Constitution and the enactments authorizing such detention
provide assume utmost importance and must be strictly adhered to."
12. It shall also be quite apposite to reproduce the following portions from Paras 3 and 5 of the
judgment rendered by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case titled "Raziya Umar Bakshi Vs Union
of India &Ors." (AIR 1980 SC 1751):
"3.......The service of the ground of detention on the detenu is a very precious
constitutional right and where the grounds are couched in a language which is not
known to the detenu, unless the contents of the grounds are fully explained and
translated to the detenu, it will tantamount to not serving the grounds of detention to
the detenu and would thus vitiate the detention ex-facie.
5..........in cases where the detaining authority is satisfied that the grounds are
couched in a language which is not known to the detenu, it must see to it that the
grounds are explained to the detenu, a translated script is given to him and the
grounds bear some sort of a certificate to show that the grounds have been explained
to the detenu in the language which he understands."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 3
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
13. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment rendered in the case of "Sophia Gulam Mohd. Bham V.
State of Maharashtra &Ors. (AIR 1999 SC 3051), has also held as under:
"The right to be communicated the grounds of detention flows from Article 22(5)
while the right to be supplied all the material on which the grounds are based flows
from the right given to the detenu to make a representation against the order of
detention. A representation can be made and the order of detention can be assailed
only when all the grounds on which the order is based are communicated to the
detenu and the material on which those grounds are based are also disclosed and
copies thereof are supplied to the person detained, in his own language."
14. Vide impugned order, the Detaining Authority has though communicated to the detenue his
right to represent against the order to him and the government in Hindi/Dogri language, but no
time limit was communicated, in which, he could make a representation to him, till approval of the
detention order by the Government. In a case of National Security Act, titled "Jitendra Vs. Dist.
Magistrate, Barabanki &Ors.", reported as 2004 Cri.L.J 2967, the Division Bench of Hon'ble
Allahabad High Court, has held:-
"10. We make no bones in observing that a partial communication of a right (in the
grounds of detention) of the type in the instant case, wherein the time limit for
making a representation is of essence and is not communicated in the grounds of
detention, would vitiate the right fundamental right guaranteed to the detenue under
Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, namely, of being communicated, as soon as
may be the grounds of detention."
15. This is another reason, as to why the impugned order would be vitiated since the detenue's right
to make a representation to the detaining authority was only available to him till approval of
detention order by the Government, it follows as a logical imperative that the detaining authority
should have communicated to the detenue in the grounds of detention the time limit, in which, he
could make a representation to it i.e., till the approval of the detention order by the State
Government.
16. Reproducing the dossier prepared by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Kathua in the order of
detention, almost word by word; non furnishing of the whole of the record on which detention order
was based; furnishing the material in English and not the language of the detenue; and not
informing detenue of his right to make representation before the Detaining Authority within the
statutory period, all reflect that the Detaining Authority has not applied its mind to draw the
subjective satisfaction to detain the petitioner and detenue has also been deprived of his
fundamental right to make effective and meaningful representation against the detention order to
the Detaining Authority and the government.
17. The detention record, as produced, reveals that the detenue was involved in following cases
registered at Police Stations Rajbagh and Samba vide:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 4
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
(i) FIR No.137/2018 U/S 341, 323 RPC P/S Rajbagh;
(ii) FIR No. 72/2019 U/Ss 188 IPC and 2/3 PCA Act P/S Samba;
(iii) FIR No. 149/2020 U/Ss 341, 323, 382 IPC P/S Rajbagh;
(iv) FIR No. 37/2021 U/Ss 307, 353, 332, 427, 34, 188 IPC, 3 PDPP Act, 11 PCA Act
P/S Rajbagh;
Involvement of the detenue in the aforementioned cases appears to have heavily weighed with the
detaining authority while passing detention order.
18. The detention of the detenue has been ordered on the basis of four FIRs, one each had been
lodged in the years 2018 to 2021, out of which two have been lodged for smuggling of bovine
animals, thereafter no FIR had been lodged in this regard, whereas two more FIRs had been lodged
(from the year 2018 to 2021) for the commission of offences punishable U/S 341, 323, 382, 307,
353, 332,427, 34, 188 IPC, therefore, almost all the cases do not disclose any heinous offence. Live
and proximate link between the past conduct of the detenue and the imperative need to detain have
to be harmonised to rely upon the alleged illegal activities of the detenue. Old and stale incidents
shall be of no use as has been held in "Sama Aruna Vs State of Telangana &Anr." reported as (2018)
12 SCC 150. Relevant paragraph No.16 is extracted as under:
""16. Obviously, therefore, the power to detain, under the Act of 1986 can be
exercised only for preventing a person from engaging in or pursuing or taking some
action which adversely affects or is likely to affect adversely the maintenance of
public order; or for preventing him from making preparations for engaging in such
activities. There is little doubt that the conduct or activities of the detenu in the past
must be taken into account for coming to the conclusion that he is going to engage in
or make preparations for engaging in such activities, for many such persons follow a
pattern of criminal activities. But the question is how far back? There is no doubt that
only activities so far back can be considered as furnish a cause for preventive
detention in the present. That is, only those activities so far back in the past which
lead to the conclusion that he is likely to engage in or prepare to engage in such
activities in the immediate future can be taken into account. In Golam Hussain vs
State of W.B, this Court observed as follows:(SCC p.535 para 5) "No authority, acting
rationally, can be satisfied, subjectively or otherwise, of future mischief merely
because long ago the detenu had done something evil. To rule otherwise is to sanction
a simulacrum of a statutory requirement. But no mechanical test by counting the
months of the interval is sound. It all depends on the nature of the acts relied on,
grave and determined or less serious and corrigible, on the length of the gap, short or
long, on the reason for the delay in taking preventive action, like information of
participation being available only in the course of an investigation. We have to
investigate whether the causal connection has been broken in the circumstances of
each case".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 5
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 8 May, 2023
Suffice it to say that in any case, incidents which are said to have taken place nine to fourteen years
earlier, cannot form the basis for being satisfied in the present that the detenu is going to engage in,
or make preparation for engaging in such activities".
19. In both the cases against the detenue alleged to be that of bovine smuggling, the accusation is
essentially that of contravention of orders passed by the District Magistrate, not to transport the
milch animals from the district to other district without permission. The respondents have failed to
show as to how public order got disturbed due to contravention of the order passed by the District
Magistrate regarding inter district transportation animals. Therefore, in the considered opinion of
this Court, the detention order, other than not following the constitutional safeguards also suffers on
merit as well, as the bovine smuggling, or in other words illegal transportation of animals, cases
registered against the detenue way back before the year 2021 cannot be made basis to invoke the
preventive detention.
20. For the foregoing reasons and the law discussed hereinabove, this petition is allowed. Impugned
order of detention No. PSA/113 Dated 28.05.2022 passed by the District Magistrate, Kathua, is, as
such, quashed. The detenue namely Roshan Din S/O Sher Wani R/O Hande Chak, Tehsil Marheen,
District Kathua, is ordered to be released from the preventive custody, forthwith, provided he is not
required in connection with any other case(s).
21. Detention record, as produced, be returned to the learned Dy AG.
22. Writ petition is disposed of, accordingly.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 08.05.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35514987/ 6
