Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 30/2022
CrlM No. 1295/2022
Reserved on: 30.01.2023
Pronounced on:01.02.2023
Roshan Din .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. M.K. Bhardwaj, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Gagan Kohli, Advocate
v/s
UT of J & K & Ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy AG
CORAM: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE MA.CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
01.02.2023
1. District Magistrate, Kathua (hereinafter called 'Detaining Authority') in exercise of powers under
Section 8 (1)(a) (i) of the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 (for short, „Act of 1978(cid:128)),
passed the detention Order No. DMK/JC/2022-23/547-52 Dated 28.05.2022 (for short 'impugned
order'), in terms whereof the detenue namely Roshan Din S/O Feroz Dion R/O Spral Pain Tehsil
Marheen, District Kathua (for short 'detenue') has been detained.
2. The impugned detention order has been challenged through the medium of the instant petition,
being in breach of the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India read with Section 13 of
the J&K Public Safety Act, 1978.
3. It is being pleaded in the petition that the detaining authority-respondent No.2 has not attributed
any specific allegation against the detenue. Furthermore, it is stated that the detenue has been
incapacitated in filing a representation as the grounds of detention are not in a language which
could be understood by the detenue. It is also being stated that the neither the petitioner is threat to
the public order nor he has committed any such crime which has disturbed the society at large. It is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 1
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
also being stated that the detenue is not an English literate person and understands only Urdu
language but the order of detention is in English and it is not possible for him to understand such a
hyper technical language. It is also the submission of learned counsel for the detenue that the order
of detention and the connected documents annexed with the petition clearly show violation of right
of the detenue guaranteed in terms of the Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
4. Respondents in their counter affidavits have stated that the detenue was ordered to be detained
for maintenance of 'public order' and had he been let free there would have been every likelihood of
his re-indulging in criminal activities. It is being stated that the power of preventive detention is
different from punishment; preventive detention aimed at stopping the illegal activities of an
individual which otherwise under common law both criminal/civil cannot be stopped and the said
individual creates a havoc in the society which leads to public disorder, peace, stability and in
certain cases also raises alarm bells regarding the National Unity and Integrity; that the petitioner
falls under the category of Section 8 of the Public Safety Act, being a threat to the public order, peace
and stability in the society. It is also being stated that the petitioner is involved in numerous
criminal activities, was not likely to desist from his criminal activities which were prejudicial to the
maintenance of peace and public order in the District Kathua.
5. Heard learned counsel for both the sides at length and considered the record.
6. Learned counsel for the detenue while being heard makes reference to the grounds of the
detention and states that on a cursory look on the same it is manifest that same are vague. It is also
submitted that the Detaining Authority on the basis of dossier submitted by Senior Superintendent
of Police, Kathua, without application of mind and without evaluating the allegations alleged against
the detenue in the said dossier, copy of which was not even provided to the detenue, proceeded to
pass impugned detention order whereby the detenue has been detained and directed to be lodged at
Central Jail Jammu. In addition, learned counsel submitted that the allegations levelled against the
detenue are totally vague as nothing specific has been stated in the grounds of detention.
7. In rebuttal, learned Dy AG submits that the record reveals that there is no vagueness in the
grounds of detention. The procedural safeguards prescribed under the provisions of Public Safety
Act and the rights guaranteed to the detenue under the Constitution have strictly been followed in
the instant case. The detenue has been furnished all the material, as was required, and was also
made aware of his right to make representation to the detaining authority as well as government,
against his detention.
8. Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the Founding Fathers
enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the State to detain
a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanising the harsh
authority over individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic power to
detain a person without trial for security of the State and/or maintenance of public order, must be
strictly construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of the
security of the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 2
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
interest of the nation.
9. Before appreciating the rival contentions of the parties, it would be appropriate to note that the
procedural requirements are the only safeguards available to the detenue since the Court cannot go
behind the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority as has been laid down by Hon'ble Apex
Court in a case titled Abdul Latif Abdul Wahab Sheikh Vs B.K. Jha &Anr., reported as (1987) 2 SCC
22. The procedural requirements are, therefore, to be strictly complied with, if any value is to be
attached to the liberty of the subject and the constitutional rights guaranteed to him in that regard.
10. The detention record, as produced, reveals that the detenue was involved in following cases
registered at Police Station Rajbagh vide:-
(i) FIR No.133/2005 U/S 188 RPC;
(ii) FIR No. 43/2006 U/Ss 188 RPC and 3 PCA Act;
(iii) FIR No. 198/2006 U/Ss 188 RPC and 3 PCA Act;
(iv) FIR No. 39/2012 U/Ss 188 RPC and 3 PCA Act;
(v) FIR No. 209/2019 U/Ss 341, 323, 336, 147, 436 IPC;
(vi) FIR No. 223/2021 U/S 341, 323, 506 IPC.
Involvement of the detenue in the aforementioned cases appears to have heavily weighed with the
detaining authority while passing detention order.
11. The detention of the detenue has been ordered on the basis of six FIRs, out of which, three had
been lodged from the year 2005 to 2012 for smuggling of bovine animals from the State of J&K to
other States thereafter no FIR had been lodged in this regard, however, two more FIR had been
lodged (one in the year 2019 and one in 2021) for the commission of offences punishable U/S 341,
323, 336, 147, 436 & 506 IPC, therefore, almost all the cases do not disclose any heinous offence.
Live and proximate link between the past conduct of the detenue and the imperative need to detain
have to be harmonised to rely upon the alleged illegal activities of the detenue. Old and stale
incidents shall be of no use as has been held in "Sama Aruna Vs State of Telangana &Anr." reported
as (2018) 12 SCC 150. Relevant paragraph No.16 is extracted as under:
""16. Obviously, therefore, the power to detain, under the Act of 1986 can be
exercised only for preventing a person from engaging in or pursuing or taking some
action which adversely affects or is likely to affect adversely the maintenance of
public order; or for preventing him from making preparations for engaging in such
activities. There is little doubt that the conduct or activities of the detenu in the past
must be taken into account for coming to the conclusion that he is going to engage in
or make preparations for engaging in such activities, for many such persons follow a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 3
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
pattern of criminal activities. But the question is how far back? There is no doubt that
only activities so far back can be considered as furnish a cause for preventive
detention in the present. That is, only those activities so far back in the past which
lead to the conclusion that he is likely to engage in or prepare to engage in such
activities in the immediate future can be taken into account. In Golam Hussain vs
State of W.B, this Court observed as follows:(SCC p.535 para 5) "No authority, acting
rationally, can be satisfied, subjectively or otherwise, of future mischief merely
because long ago the detenu had done something evil. To rule otherwise is to sanction
a simulacrum of a statutory requirement. But no mechanical test by counting the
months of the interval is sound. It all depends on the nature of the acts relied on,
grave and determined or less serious and corrigible, on the length of the gap, short or
long, on the reason for the delay in taking preventive action, like information of
participation being available only in the course of an investigation. We have to
investigate whether the causal connection has been broken in the circumstances of
each case".
Suffice it to say that in any case, incidents which are said to have taken place nine to fourteen years
earlier, cannot form the basis for being satisfied in the present that the detenu is going to engage in,
or make preparation for engaging in such activities".
Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, the detention order, other than not following the
constitutional safeguards also suffers on merit as well, as the bovine smuggling cases registered
against the detenue way back before the year 2013 cannot be made basis to invoke the preventive
detention.
12. The requirement of law is that whole of the record, on which the detention order is based, has to
be made available to the detenue in the language that he understands. As per the execution report,
he has been furnished copies of detention order (01) leaf, notice of detention (01) leaf, grounds of
detention (04) leaves, dossier of detention (06) leaves and copies of FIR, Statements of witnesses
and other related documents (10) leaves total twenty four leaves. However, he has not been provided
with copies of charge-sheets and the statements of witnesses as well as the material relied upon by
the detaining authority under which the petitioner has been detained. The detenue, thus cannot be
said to be provided with whole of the record which based his detention, so as to make an effective
representation. The failure on the part of the detaining authority to supply material renders
detention illegal and unsustainable.
13. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a case titled Chaju Ram Vs The State of Jammu & Kashmir,
reported as AIR 1971 SC 263, held in Para-9 of the judgment as under:-
".........The detenu is an illiterate person and it is absolutely necessary that when we
are dealing with a detenu who cannot read or understand English language or any
language at all that the grounds of detention should be explained to him as early as
possible in the language he understands so that he can avail himself of the statutory
right of making a representation. To hand over to him the document written in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 4
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
English and to obtain his thumb impression on it in token of his having received the
same does not comply with the requirements of the law which gives a very
valuable-right to the detenu to make a representation which right is frustrated by
handing over to him the grounds of detention in an alien language. We are therefore
compelled to hold in this case that the requirement of explaining the grounds to
the-detenu in his own language was not complied with."
14. It shall also be quite apposite to reproduce the following portions from Paras 3 and 5 of the
judgment rendered by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case titled "Raziya Umar Bakshi Vs Union
of India &Ors." (AIR 1980 SC 1751):
"3.......The service of the ground of detention on the detenu is a very precious
constitutional right and where the grounds are couched in a language which is not
known to the detenu, unless the contents of the grounds are fully explained and
translated to the detenu, it will tantamount to not serving the grounds of detention to
the detenu and would thus vitiate the detention ex-facie.
5..........in cases where the detaining authority is satisfied that the grounds are
couched in a language which is not known to the detenu, it must see to it that the
grounds are explained to the detenu, a translated script is given to him and the
grounds bear some sort of a certificate to show that the grounds have been explained
to the detenu in the language which he understands."
15. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment rendered in the case of "Sophia Gulam Mohd. Bham V.
State of Maharashtra &Ors. (AIR 1999 SC 3051), has also held as under:
"The right to be communicated the grounds of detention flows from Article 22(5)
while the right to be supplied all the material on which the grounds are based flows
from the right given to the detenu to make a representation against the order of
detention. A representation can be made and the order of detention can be assailed
only when all the grounds on which the order is based are communicated to the
detenu and the material on which those grounds are based are also disclosed and
copies thereof are supplied to the person detained, in his own language."
16. Vide impugned order, the Detaining Authority has though communicated to the detenue his
right to represent against the order to him and the government in Hindi/Dogri language, but no
time limit was communicated, in which, he could make a representation to him, till approval of the
detention order by the Government. In a case of National Security Act, titled "Jitendra Vs. Dist.
Magistrate, Barabanki &Ors.", reported as 2004 Cri.L.J 2967, the Division Bench of Hon'ble
Allahabad High Court, has held:-
"10. We make no bones in observing that a partial communication of a right (in the
grounds of detention) of the type in the instant case, wherein the time limit for
making a representation is of essence and is not communicated in the grounds of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 5
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
detention, would vitiate the right fundamental right guaranteed to the detenue under
Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, namely, of being communicated, as soon as
may be the grounds of detention."
17. This is another reason, as to why the impugned order would be vitiated since the detenue's right
to make a representation to the detaining authority was only available to him till approval of
detention order by the Government, it follows as a logical imperative that the detaining authority
should have communicated to the detenue in the grounds of detention the time limit, in which, he
could make a representation to it i.e., till the approval of the detention order by the State
Government.
18. Learned counsel for the respondents has also relied upon the judgment, passed in LPA No.
4/2022 (O&M) titled „Gaggu Din alias Gaggu vs Union Territory of J&K & Ors', wherein the Hon'ble
Division Bench of this Court, in an intra-court appeal upheld detention order passed under PSA
holding:
"9. It would be appropriate to note that order of preventive detention can be issued
on the basis of one solitary incident also (See Shiv Ratan Makim v. Union of India,
(1986) 1 SCC 404). In fact allegations in all the remaining FIRs are very serious in
nature and particularly in FIR No. 17/2019 u/s 341, 147, 332, 353, 307 and 382 RPC
registered with Police Station, Rajbagh, the appellant along with his associates at a
road attacked the Police officials and fled away after snatching their motorcycle. This
act of the appellant has the propensity of disturbing public order and in fact every
year the appellant has indulged in at least one illegal act and there is justification on
the part of respondent No.2 in issuing the order of detention. No fault can be found
with the issuance of order impugned. The judgment relied upon by learned counsel
for the appellant in case, titled, Banka Sneha Sheela vs. State of Telangana & Ors,
(2021) 9 SCC 415 is not applicable in the present facts and circumstances of the case."
19. In the case relied upon by the learned Dy. AG, the facts of that case and the present case are
materially different as in that case the detenue was alleged to have committed heinous offence like
attempt to murder, dacoity, use of arms and cow slaughter besides other offences, whereas in this
case the detenue is alleged to have committed offences of bovine smuggling only upto the year 2012
as reflected in the impugned detention order. The preventive detention of the detenue has been
justified by detaining authority, due to the accusation of the bovine smuggling, however, it is settled
law that the remote incidence of offence without proximate and live link to the detention order, the
same is not justifiable to invoke the preventive detention, therefore, the case cited by the learned Dy.
AG is distinguishable, on the facts of this case from the fact of that case.
20. Reproducing the dossier prepared by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Kathua in the order of
detention, almost word by word; non furnishing of the whole of the record on which detention order
was based; furnishing the material in English and not the language of the detenue; and not
informing detenue of his right to make representation before the Detaining Authority within the
statutory period, all reflect that the Detaining Authority has not applied its mind to draw the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 6
Roshan Din vs Ut Of J & K & Ors on 1 February, 2023
subjective satisfaction to detain the petitioner and detenue has also been deprived of his
fundamental right to make effective and meaningful representation against the detention order to
the Detaining Authority and the government.
21. For the foregoing reasons and the law discussed hereinabove, this petition is allowed. Impugned
order of detention No. DMK/JC/2022-23/547-52 Dated 28.05.2022 passed by the District
Magistrate, Kathua, is, as such, quashed. The detenue namely Roshan Din S/O Feroz Dion R/O
Spral Pain Tehsil Marheen, District Kathua, is ordered to be released from the preventive custody,
forthwith, provided he is not required in connection with any other case(s).
22. Detention record, as produced, be returned to the learned Dy AG.
23. Writ petition is disposed of, accordingly along with pending application(s), if any.
(MA.Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 01.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56370737/ 7
