Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May,
2019
Author: Vinod Kumar Sinha
Bench: Aditya Kumar Trivedi, Vinod Kumar Sinha
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No.21 of 2013
Arising Out of PS. Case No.-54 Year-1997 Thana- SIWAN CITY District- Siwan
======================================================
Rustam Khan, son of Late Annul Haque Khan, Resident of Village-
Machkana, P.S.- Hussainganj, District- Siwan.
... ... Appellant/s
Versus
The Union of India through CBI
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Surendra Singh, Sr. Advocate,
Mr. Akhalesh Kumar Singh,Adv.
Mr. Ajay Kumar Thakur, Advocate.
Mr.Ramadhar Shekhar, Advocate.
Mr. Bikramdeo Singh, Advocate.
For the Respondent/s : Mr.Bipin Kumar Sinha SC, CBI
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR TRIVEDI
and
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD KUMAR SINHA
CAV JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD KUMAR SINHA)
Date : 10-05-2019
1. Heard learned counsels for the parties.
2. The sole appellant stood convicted under Sections
302/149, 307/149 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code as well as
Section 27 of the Arms Act and sentenced him to undergo
imprisonment for life under Sections 302/149 of the Indian
Penal Code and to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/- and in case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 1
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
default, further to undergo S.I. for one year. He has further been
sentenced to undergo R.I. for ten years under Sections 307/149
of Indian Penal Code and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/- and in
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
2/56
case of default to suffer S.I. of six months. The appellant has
also been sentenced R.I. for seven years under Section 120B of
the Indian Penal Code and R.I. for five years under Section 27
of the Arms Act with a fine of Rs. 5,000/- and all sentences were
directed to run concurrently vide judgment dated 7.11.2012 and
order dated 9.11.2012 passed by Sri Choudhary B.K.Rai,
Additional Sessions Judge-14, Patna in Sessions Trial No. 948
of 2001.
3. Prosecution case is based on the fardbeyan of
Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW12) recorded on 31.03.1997 at
17.00 hours, stating therein, inter alia that on 31.03.1997 at 3
P.M., Shyam Narayan Yadav (deceased) and District Committee
Member of CPI (ML), Chandrashekhar Prasad (deceased)
Former President Jawahar Lal Nehru University, Bhrigurashan
Patel, a Member of CPI (ML) of Barhtharia Prakhand
Committee (PW 2) and Ramdeo Ram, a District Committee
Member, proceeded by a Tempo on a campaign for success of
Bihar Band and reached J.P. Chowk as soon as the tempo
stopped, accused appellant Dhruw Sah armed with service
revolver, accused - appellant Munna Khan armed with service
revolver, Reyazuddin Khan armed with service revolver and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 2
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
Mantu Khan armed with sten gun rushed towards the said tempo
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
3/56
and started indiscriminate firing and in the said firing,
Chandrashekhar Prasad died on the spot and Shyam Narayan
Yadav received severe injury, Bhrigurashan Patel (PW2) also
received firearm injury and Ram Deo Ram (PW 20) fell from
the tempo and managed to save himself. Further case of the
prosecution is that in the said firing, the passers by have also
received firearm injury. Further case of prosecution is that
deceased Chandrashekhar Prasad and injured Shyam Narayan
Yadav were taken to Sadar Hospital by same Tempo, where,
Shyam Narayan Yadav was under treatment, and Shyam
Narayan Yadav also disclosed to the informant the names of
accused-appellants in presence of Satyadeo Ram. Bhrigurashan
Patel after bringing the injured to hospital went to the party
office to inform the incident.
4. On the basis of the aforesaid fardbeyan, Town Police
Station Case No. 54/1997 was registered under Sections 302,
307, 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code against the appellant
and other accused persons.
5. Later on, vide notification dated 28.07.1997 of the
State Government (Ext. 17) and also vide notification dated
31.07.1997
(Ext. 18) C.B.I. was entrusted with the investigation of the case. Accordingly, RC 2(S)/97-SCB-II/DI
(Ext. 16) was Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 registered against the sole appellant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 3
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
and other accused persons namely Dhruv Kumar Jaiswal @ Dhrub Sah, Sheikh Munna and Ilyas
Waris @ Ilham Waris @ Mintu Kha @ Mintu. As the appellant was absconding, his trial was
separated and his case was committed to the court of sessions by the learned Special Magistrate,
CBI, Patna on 20.12.2001. Sessions Trial No. 948/2001 was opened. It is relevant to mention here
that for the other accused persons, a separate trial being S.T.No. 213 of 2001 was also initiated.
6. In the present case, sole appellant had been charged for the offence punishable under Sections
302/149, 307/149 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code read with Sections 302/307 of the Indian
Penal Code and Section 27 of the Arms Act.
7. During Trial altogether twenty witnesses were examined on behalf of prosecution. They are:-
(i) PW-1 Satyadeo Ram, the then M.L.A. of CPI(ML) Party, Mairwa and he claims to
reach the place of occurrence after receiving information and thereafter he reached at
the hospital and according to him, deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav, prior to his
death, named the appellant and other accused persons as assailants.
(ii) PW-2, Bhrigurashan Patel, claimed to be eye witness Patna High Court CR. APP
(DB) No.21 of 2013 of the occurrence and according to his evidence, he is an injured
and eye witness of the occurrence and named the appellant and other accused
persons.
(iii) PW -3 is Kaushalya Devi, mother of deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad. She
claims that on information she reached at Sadar Hospital and saw dead body of her
son Chandra Shekhar Prasad. She also disclosed that Sahabuddin had threatened her
to ask her son to mend his way otherwise he would be killed.
(iv) PW-4 Chandraketu Singh is also one of the injured and as per his evidence, while
he was coming from the Court he received gun shot injury. This witness has not
named the assailants including the appellant.
(v) PW-5, Indra Kumar, is the driver of Tempo No. B.R.
-04-A0087, who was, according to his evidence, engaged for campaigning and he
supported the factum of occurrence and he brought the deceased persons and PW-
2 to the Hospital, but he did not name any accused persons including appellant.
(vi) PW-6 is Dr. Lakshman Prasad, who has conducted postmortem examination on the dead bodies
of deceased Chandrashekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav on Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.21 of 2013 01.04.1997 and postmortem reports are marked as Ext. 2 and 2/1. This witness has
also treated PW-4 Chandra Ketu Singh and PW-7 Md. Alam Khan and their injury reports are
marked as Ext. 1 and 1/ 1. He sent information to the police by Ext. 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 4
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
(vii) PW-7, Md. Alam Khan, has also received injury in the occurrence but he has not named the
assailants and appellant.
(viii) PW-8, Dr. Bimal Kumar, is the doctor who has examined Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2).
(ix) PW-9, Rafik Ahmad Khan, is Sub Inspector, who has recorded the statement of Ramesh Singh
Kushwaha (PW-
12) on 31.03.1997 on the basis of which fardbeyan (Ext.
4) was recorded.
(x) PW-10, Rajbanshi Baitha, is then A.S.I. of Town Police Station and according to his evidence,
while he was coming near J.P.Chauraha, he heard sound of firing and saw some persons fleeing, he
chased them. His evidence also disclosed that for that he has lodged FIR being Town P.S.Case No.
55 of 1997, which is marked as Ext. 6.
(xi) PW-11, Ram Sagar Rai, is Sub Inspector of Town Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
Police Station and is the first Investigating Officer of the case.
(xii) PW-12, Ramesh Singh Kushwaha, is the informant in this case though this witness has turned
hostile but his evidence disclosed that the occurrence took place on 31.03.1997. His evidence further
disclosed that later on, he heard that Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav were
killed on 31.03.1997 at 4 O'clock by the accused persons at J.P.Chauraha.
(xiii) PW-13 Md. Samsuddin, who has been declared hostile. However, his examination-in-chief
disclosed that in support of Bihar Band , meetings were scheduled to be held at different places on
31.03.1997. In his evidence, he also disclosed that Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan
Yadav were killed on 31.03.1997 and the occurrence took place at J.P.Chauraha.
(xiv) PW-14 is Nag Narayan Singh, the then Dy.S.P., CBI, Special Crime Branch, New Delhi. He had
received the documents relating to Siwan Nagar P.S.Case No. 54 of 1997 in connection with RC
2(S)/97/SCB-II from Sri Ram Sagar Rai, S.I. Guthani P.S. (PW-11) and handing and taking over
charge were prepared.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
(xv) PW-15 is Rashid Ahmad Khan, the then District Magistrate-cum-Collector, Siwan, who
approved the prosecution sanction report as Ext.-11.
(xvi) PW-16 is Rajdeep Singh Rawat, who was Inspector, CBI and also was one of the Investigating
Officers and his evidence disclosed that on the order of the Superintendent of Police, he had issued
notice to Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12) under Section 160 Cr.P.C. which is Ext.-9 and Ramesh
Singh Kushwaha appeared before him and Ramesh Singh Kushwaha had not told him that his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 5
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
signature was obtained in plain paper.
(xvii) PW-17 is K.Nand Kumar, who was working as Upper Division Clerk in CPWD and as per his
disclosure, statement of Dhruv Kumar Jaiswal was recorded by the CBI in front of him, which is in
the writing and signature of Hari Kumar. This witness has identified the same and marked as Ext.
13.
(xviii) PW-18 is Surya Bhan Sinha, who was the Dy.S.P., Special Crime Branch, CBI, at the time of
occurrence and he identified the writing and signature of Sri I.S. Saroha, the then Superintendent of
Police, on the FIR RC Case No. 2(s)/97-SCB-II/CBI dated 07.08.1997 (Ext. 16) and Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 also identified the Notification dated 28.07.1997 (Ext. 17) and
second Notification as Ext. 18.
(xix) PW-19 is Y.Hari Kumar, the then Inspector, CBI, Special Crime Branch, who was entrusted
with further investigation in the CBI case.
(xx) PW-20 is Ramdeo Ram, though has turned hostile, but his evidence-in-chief also disclosed the
factum of occurrence on 31.03.1997 and Shyam Narayan Yadav and Chandra Shekhar Prasad and
Bhrigurasan Patel were also present and at 4:00 P.M. a meeting was to be held at J.P.Chauraha.
8. On behalf of defence also, four witnesses have been examined and they are:-
(i) DW-1 Satyapal Shrivastava @ Dhiraj, as per his evidence, on 31.03.1997 he heard
the sound of firing but he has stated that Nepalis were firing. His evidence in
cross-examination disclosed that he came to know that on 31.03.1997 at 4:00 P.M.,
Chandra Shekhar Prasad, Shyam Narayan Yadav and Bhuteli Mian were killed.
(ii) DW-2 is Dharmendra Kumar Patha and his evidence also disclosed about the
occurrence of firing but stated that Nepali Bhutias were firing. His evidence in cross-
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 examination in para 4 however disclosed that
Chandra Shekhar Prasad, Shyam Narayan Yadav were died in that firing.
(iii) DW-3 is Amit Kumar. He has admitted about the occurrence took place on 31.03.1997 and
further disclosed that he was not summoned and Bhutias were firing.
(iv) DW-4 is Birendra Singh. He is on the point of alibi of Rustam Khan.
9. On conclusion of trial, the trial court, relying on the evidence of PW-2, being the eye witness of
the occurrence, and also disclosure of deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav to PW-1 soon before his
death, convicted the sole appellant under Section 302/149, 307/149 and 120B of the Indian Penal
Code and Section 27 of the Arms Act.
10. Being aggrieved by, criminal appeal has been preferred by sole appellant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 6
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
11. The impugned judgment has been assailed by Mr. Surendra Singh, learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellant, on the ground that all witnesses have been declared either
hostile or not have identified the accused persons, except PW-2, Bhrigurasan Patel, who claims
himself to Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 be eye witness of the occurrence, but his
presence is doubtful in the background of evidence of PW-8, as PW-2 was examined on 01.04.1997
and not on 31.03.1997 i.e., the date of occurrence, secondly, on the ground that there are
contradictions in between the evidence of PW-2 and PW-8, so far injury is concerned and
furthermore, he is highly interested witness as he was a member of CPIML (MALE). It has been
argued that in the above background, conviction cannot be sustained on solitary evidence of PW-2
in absence of any corroboration, relying on the decision of Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade & Anr. vs. State
of Maharashtra reported in AIR 1973 SC 2622 and in the case of Anil Phukan vs State of Assam
reported in AIR 1993 SC 1462.
12. Further contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that occurrence took place at
J.P.Chawk at 4:00 P.M. which is crowded place but in spite of that, no independent witness has
been examined in this case and that also makes the prosecution case doubtful.
13. Further contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that the prosecution has also relied
upon on the oral dying declaration of deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav made before PW-1, Satya Deo
Ram, the then M.L.A., however, prosecution story of oral dying declaration does not appear to be
reliable and Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 trustworthy in the background of
evidence of PW-6, Dr. Lakshman Prasad, who has conducted postmortem examination of deceased
Shyam Narayan Yadav as his evidence in cross- examination fully shows that Shyam Narayan Yadav
was not in a fit state of mind to make any disclosure and furthermore, in the background of evidence
of PW-7, Md. Alam Khan, that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav was unconscious. Further
submission is that prosecution evidence suggests that he disclosed the name in the hospital but in
spite of that there is no certification of doctor that he was in a fit state of mind. Referring to the
decision of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Umakant and Anr. vs. State of Chhattisgarh reported
in AIR 2014 SC 2943, it has been submitted that as per principle settled in the above judgment, no
reliance can be placed on the oral dying declaration of deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav.
14. Further submission of learned counsel for the appellant is that apart from that, FIR lodged by
the CBI is hit under Section 162 Cr.P.C.
15. On the above submission, it has been submitted that the learned trial court has not considered
the above discrepancy and inconsistency in the prosecution story while convicting the appellant as
such impugned judgment cannot be sustained. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
16. Defending the impugned judgment, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the CBI, Mr. Bipin
Kumar Sinha, submitted that in this case informant (PW-12) has been declared hostile, but his
evidence supports the prosecution case so far date of occurrence and manner of occurrence and also
about the death of deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav in the occurrence
and as such even though he has been declared hostile, his evidence cannot be washed out in toto,
that is the settled principle of law held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in several judgments.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 7
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
17. Further contention of learned counsel for the CBI is that evidence of PW-2, PW-4, PW-7, PW-12
and PW-20 supports the prosecution case so far manner of occurrence is concerned and evidence of
PW-10 further disclosed the name of accused persons including the appellant and the evidence of
PW- 2 cannot be doubted on the ground that he is interested witness especially in the background
that he has also received injury in the occurrence. In support of his contention, learned counsel for
the CBI referred the decision of Piara Singh and Others vs. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1977 SC
2274 and of Seeman alias Veeranam vs. State by Inspector of Police reported in 2005 Cri.L.J 2618. It
has also been submitted that Dr. Bimal Kumar Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
(PW-8) has also found injuries over PW-2 and evidence of injured witness is always considered to be
on high pedestral than of other witness.
18. It has further been submitted that though Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12) and Ramdeo Ram
(PW-20) have been declared hostile by the prosecution but they have supported the prosecution
case so far factum of occurrence and date of occurrence is concerned and there is nothing in their
cross- examination to doubt the above evidence, as such in the light of several decisions of Hon'bel
Apex Court e.g. in the case of Khuji alias Surendra Tiwari vs. State of M.P. reported in 1991 Cri. L. J.
2653 as well as of Arjun and Anr. vs. State of Chhatisgarh reported in (2017) 3 SCC 247, their
evidence is also admissible.
19. Further submission is that even Chandra Ketu Singh (PW-4) injured, Indra Kumar, Tempo
driver (PW-5), Md. Alam Khan (PW-7) injured and Rajbanshi Baitha (PW-10), a police official, who
reached at the place of occurrence, have also supported the factum of occurrence. It has also been
submitted that the aforesaid facts found corroboration from Ext.-4, the fardbeyan, which has been
lodged immediately after the occurrence disclosing the prosecution case and showing the Patna
High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 names of accused persons including appellant and further
showing that PW- 2 also received injury and Shyam Narayan Yadav, deceased, named all the
accused persons including the appellant.
20. Defending the prosecution story of oral dying declaration, it has been submitted that PW-1 has
stated that deceased disclosed the names of the appellant and other accused persons before him
when he reached at the hospital and no suggestion has been given to PW-6, who had conducted the
postmortem examination regarding that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav was not in a condition to
speak. None of the witnesses including the informant (PW-12) or Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) or Rafik
Ahmad Khan (PW-9), who were the authors of the fardbeyan, have been suggested that Shyam
Narayan Yadav was not in a condition to speak. In such a situation, story of oral dying declaration
cannot be disbelieved specially when it is made immediately after the occurrence, which is
admissible under Section 6 of the Indian Evidence Act and in this connection, learned counsel of
CBI relied upon a decision of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Gian Chand & Ors. vs. State of
Haryana reported in 2013(4) PLJR SC 7.
21. Considering the arguments advanced by the learned Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of
2013 counsels on behalf of the appellant as well as the CBI and on close scrutiny of the materials
available on record, it appears that fardbeyan of PW-12, Ramesh Singh Kushwaha, has been
recorded by PW-9, Rafik Ahmad Khan, the then Officer-in- charge of Town Police Station at 1700
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 8
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
Hours and occurrence is said to be of about 1600 Hours that shows promptness in lodging of the
case. Fardbeyan disclosed that there was a call of Bihar Band by CPIML (MALE) and both deceased
along with Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) and Ramdeo Ram (PW-20), who were workers of MALE, were
on campaign for Bihar Band. They reached near J.P.Chawk at 4:00 P.M. Accused persons including
the appellant reached there and started indiscriminate firing causing death of Chandra Shekhar
Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav. Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) received injuries and passers- by also
received injuries. Shyam Narayan Yadav disclosed the names of accused persons in presence of
Satya Deo Ram that shows that FIR has been lodged by PW-12 showing the names of accused
persons including appellant as assailant and also disclosed the presence of Bhrigurasan Patel
(PW-2) and Satyadeo Ram (PW-1) and also about disclosure made by Shyam Narayan Yadav,
deceased. Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) was also shown as an eye witness in the fardbeyan. Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
22. On scrutiny of evidence of PW-12, Ramashish Singh Kushwaha, his evidence in
examination-in-chief, disclosed about the call of Bihar Band and occurrence is of 31.03.1997 at
about 4:00 P.M. It further disclosed that several Nukkar meetings were held and there was meeting
at J.P.Chawk at 4:00 P.M., which has to be addressed by deceased Chandra Shekhar, Shyam
Narayan Yadav, Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) and Ramdeo Rai(PW-20). He did not have to address the
meeting and he did not have knowledge whether Chandra Shekhar and Shyam Narayan Yadav
reached there or not. Further, this witness has proved his signature on the fardbeyan as Ext. 5, but
stated that he had made his signature on a plain paper. His evidence further disclosed that he has
not stated about the signature being obtained in any plain paper to the party office or the CBI
officials. His evidence further disclosed that he heard later on that Chandra Shekhar and Shyam
Narayan Yadav were killed by accused persons on 31.03.1997 at 4:00 P.M. however, his evidence
does not disclose from whom he gathered information. This witness has been later on declared
hostile and has been cross-examined at length but there is nothing available in his
cross-examination to doubt about his evidence which supports the prosecution case so far
occurrence of 31.03.1997, meeting Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 was to be held on
31.03.1997 at 4:00 P.M. and deceased were killed on 31.03.1997. Evidence of this witness also
disclosed that earlier he was a member of the District Committee of CPIML but thereafter he left.
His attention has also been drawn towards statements made before PW-9, Rafik Ahmad Khan and
to the statements made before C.B.I. officials though he denied to have made such statements.
PW-16, CBI officer, has been confronted in para-6 towards the statement made by PW-12 and he has
stated that PW-12 had made such statements, as such it appears that this witness is concealing
material facts, due to fear or he has been gained over. However, his evidence shows that PW-2 and
PW-20 were also to address the meeting at J.P.Chawk.
23. PW-9 is Officer-in-charge, who has recorded the fardbeyan of Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12)
and his evidence disclosed that he received information about firing at J.P.Chawk, Siwan on
31.03.1997 at 1600 hours and went to hospital and found Chandra Shekhar dead and Shyam
Narayan Yadav, Chandraketu , Allauddin Ansari, Bhrigurasan Patel and Buteli Mian were in injured
condition. Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12) got recorded his statement, which is in his writing
and signature and in all four pages, Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12) put his signatures after
going through it. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Fardbeyan is Ext.-4. He prepared
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 9
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
inquest reports and on the basis of statement of Ramesh Singh Kushwaha, FIR was lodged, which is
Ext.-5. A suggestion has been given to him that FIR was not recorded on 31.03.1997 rather on
01.04.1997 which he denied. He has also identified formal FIR in the writing of Mr. K.L.Das, the
then Officer-in-charge as Ext. 15.
24. PW-16, Rajdeep Singh Rawat, has also assisted in the investigation on behalf of CBI and stated
that he has recorded the statement of Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12) who disclosed about the
call of Bihar Band and deceased as well as PW-2 and PW-20 were on campaign on a tempo and at
4:00 P.M., when they reached J.P. Chawk, accused persons came and made indiscriminate firing
causing death of Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav received serious injuries,
Bhrigurasan Patel also received injury and Ramdeo Ram fallen down and did not receive any injury.
25. PW-1 is Satyadeo Ram, the then M.L.A. and FIR (Ext.5) also disclosed about his presence at
Sadar Hospital and his evidence disclosed that for 02.04.1997, there was call of Bihar Band and on
31.03.1997, Chandra Shekhar, Shyam Narayan Yadav, Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) and Bhrigurasan Patel
(PW-2) were on campaign and he received information at 4:00 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.21 of 2013 P.M that there was firing on them. He came to J.P.Chawk and came to know that they
were taken to Sadar Hospital by Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12), Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) and
Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2), he reached hospital and found Chandra Shekhar in dead condition and
Shyam Narayan Yadav disclosed before him the name of appellant and other accused persons that
they fired on him. In the meantime, Daroga came and he disclosed the same to the Daroga also. He
identified the appellant and further stated that Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12) had got his
statement recorded before the Officer-in- charge of Town Police Station on which after going
through it, PW-12 put his signature, sometime thereafterafter Shyam Narayan Yadav became
unconscious. His evidence disclosed that Shyam Narayan Yadav and Buteli Mian both died. This
witness has been cross-examined at length about his evidence made earlier in S.T.No. 213 of 2001
and about the expenses of the parties. Even after his cross-examination, there is nothing in his
evidence to doubt his credibility. So far, disclosure by Shyam Narayan Yadav is concerned, no
suggestion has been made to this witness to the extent that no such disclosure has been made by
Shyam Narayan Yadav and his evidence found corroboration from the fardbeyan also (Ext.-4 ) about
factum of disclosure Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 made by Shyam Narayan Yadav
to PW-1.
26. PW-2, Bhrigurasan Patel, claims to be eye witness in this occurrence and has received injury. He
has supported the prosecution case so far date of occurrence and manner of occurrence is concerned
and his evidence disclosed that he was on campaign for Bihar Band and at J.P.Chauk at 4:00 P.M.,
meeting was to be addressed by Chandra Shekhar Prasad , Shyam Narayan Yadav and Ramesh
Singh Kushawaha. They reached at J.P.Chauk at 4:00 P.M. Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam
Narayan Yadav were sitting on the back seat of the tempo and he and Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) were
sitting beside the driver and as soon as he started to address, all named accused persons, including
the appellant came and started indiscriminate firing. His evidence also disclosed that Ramesh Singh
Kushawaha (PW-12) and Samsuddin Ansari reached by motorcycle. His evidence also disclosed that
in the firing, Chandra Shekhar, Shyam Narayan Yadav and he himself received injuries and Shyam
Narayan Yadav became unconscious. Ramdeo Ram did not receive any injury as he concealed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 10
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
himself beneath the tempo. Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12) and Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) took the
injured to Sadar hospital where the doctor declared Chandra Shekhar dead and he Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 and Shyam Narayan Yadav were under treatment. In the meantime,
Satyadeo Ram (PW-1) reached there. His evidence also disclosed that Ramdeo Ram (PW-20) has
donated blood to Shyam Narayan Yadav. His evidence also disclosed that police recorded the
statement of Shyam Narayan Yadav, after written application of Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12)
earlier given to police by him. Police also recorded the statement of Ramesh Singh Kushwaha
(PW-12) and at about 6/6:30 P.M., Shyam Narayan Yadav died and Buteli Mian also died in that
occurrence. Evidence of PW-2 also disclosed that all accused persons are men of M.P. Shahabuddin
and at his instance, they have committed the occurrence. This witness has been cross- examined at
length. Even in his cross-examination, this witness has stated that meeting was to be presided over
by Ramesh Singh Kushawaha (PW-12). His cross-examination also disclosed that when he initiated
speech, firing starts and there was stamped. In his cross-examination, he has stated that bullet hit,
crossed him touching his body and there was bleeding. On scrutiny of his entire testimony, there is
nothing in his cross- examination to doubt his evidence about the firing by accused persons causing
injuries to the deceased and him and even no suggestion has been given to him that he had not
received any Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 injury and the injury report is
manufactured one. A general suggestion has been given that he has deposed falsely.
27. PW-3, Kaushalya Devi, is mother of Chandra Shekhar Prasad (deceased) and her evidence is that
her son was the President of Student Union of Jawahar Lal Nehru University and Shahabuddin had
threatened her to ask her son to mend his way otherwise he has to loss his life and she even went to
Delhi to advise him. There is no cross-examination to this witness on the above point of threatening
given by Shahabuddin.
28. PW-4, Chandra Ketu Singh, is one of another injured, who has received injury in the occurrence
and according to his evidence, while coming to J.P.Chawk from Court to office, he reached near
J.P.Chawk, he saw that there was crowd and in the meantime, he received one injury. His evidence
disclosed that he was treated by Dr. Laxman Prasad (PW-6). He had seen two dead bodies, one of
Chandra Shekhar Prasad and another of Shyam Narayan Yadav and heard that they had gone to
campaign for Bihar Band and in that, they received firearm injuries. This witness is an injured
witness. As such his evidence disclosed that deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan
Yadav received injury in such occurrence but he has not named anybody.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
29. PW-5, Indra Kumar, is a tempo driver and as per his evidence, tempo was hired for campaigning
Bihar Band and when they reached at J.P. Chawk, there was indiscriminate firing, he fled away and
when he returned, Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav, who were in unconscious
condition, were brought to Sadar Hospital where Chandra Shekhar was declared dead. Shyam
Narayan Yadav died after 2- 5 minutes. Even in his cross-examination, he supports the occurrence
of indiscriminate firing.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 11
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
30. PW-7, Md. Alam Khan, is also one of the injured and his evidence also disclosed that occurrence
is of 31.03.1997 and when he reached near J.P. Chawk, he received one firearm injury. Thereafter,
he was taken to hospital. His evidence also disclosed in cross-examination that one person died at
hospital and other was not speaking anything. Both PW-5 and PW-7 though has stated that
occurrence is of 31.03.1997 at about 4:00 P.M. but not named any of the accused persons.
31. PW-10, Rajbanshi Baitha, the then ASI of Town Police Station and as per his evidence, while he
was coming from court and reached near J.P.Chawk, he heard sound of firing. He parked his
motorcycle and saw accused persons fleeing towards Registry Office, he chased them and fired on
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 them and when came back to J.P. Chawk, he saw
three persons in injured condition, who were taken to hospital. There is nothing else in his evidence
and he has not named the appellant or any other accused persons.
32. PW-20 is Ramdeo Ram. According to evidence of this witness and also as per FIR, he is eye
witness of the occurrence. His evidence disclosed that there was call of Bihar Band on 2 nd April,
1997 and on 31st March, 1997, there were campaign for that, and Shyam Narayan Yadav, Chandra
Shekhar and Bhrigurasan Patel were with him. There were several street corner meetings held and
there was an announcement that at 4:00 P.M. there would be a meeting at J.P.Chawk and Shyam
Narayan Yadav, Chandra Shekhar and Bhrigurasan Patel were on tempo but he had not gone there
and remained in the office till 4:00 P.M. and at 4:00 P.M., receiving information of firing, he
reached there and found Chandra Shekhar has died, Shyam Narayan Yadav had fallen and
Bhrigurasan Patel also received injury on his back and they have taken them to hospital by same
tempo and the doctor declared Chandra Shekhar dead. Shyam Narayan Yadav was alive, he donated
blood to Shyam Narayan Yadav. His evidence also disclosed that Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12),
Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) and Satyadeo Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Ram (PW-1)
came there. Kaushalya Devi (PW-3) also came there after half an hour and Shyam Narayan Yadav
died after 2- 3 minutes. He has also stated that his evidence was not recorded by the police.
Thereafter, this witness has been declared hostile by the prosecution and his attention has been
drawn towards the statement made before the police which he has denied to have made before CBI.
However, from the evidence of PW-16, his attention has been drawn towards statement made by
him before PW-16. It appears that he is suppressing the fact before the court to shield the accused
persons including appellant.
33. PW-6 Dr. Laxman Prasad, who has conducted postmortem examination (Ext. 2) on the dead
body of Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav and also examined Chandra Ketu Singh
(PW-4) and Md. Alam Khan (PW-7). His evidence disclosed that on 31.03.1979, he was posted at
Sadar Hospital, Siwan and he has conducted postmortem of deceased Chandra Shekhar (Ext. 2) and
found one gun shot injury in the region of back and also found several injuries caused by firearm
and on the same day at 7:20 P.M., he conducted postmortem on the dead body of Shyam Narayan
Yadav and found several injuries caused by firearm on his body. He further examined Md. Alam
(PW-7) and Chandra Ketu Singh (PW-4) and found Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
firearm injuries on their persons. In his cross-examination, this witness has stated that in case of
Shyam Narayan Yadav there were three holes which he cannot say whether it was caused by bullet
or pellet. His cross-examination also disclosed that massive laceration of lungs in both cases will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 12
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
cause immediate haemorrhage, which will cause immediate acute respiratory distress. Both these
condition will cause loss of speech, excessive haemorrhage laceration will cause mental imbalance.
34. PW-8, Dr. Bimal Kumar, examined Bhrigurasan Patel (PW-2) and in his evidence, he stated that
on 31.03.1997, he was posted at Sadar Hospital and he had sent the information about death of
Shyam Narayan Yadav to the Officer-in-charge and he examined Bhrigurasan Patel on 31.03.1997
and again on 01.04.1997 at 10:00 A.M. and found one circular injury 1cm diameter with black
margin on left lateral chest at the lebel of sixth inter poster ribs space. The patient was advised X-ray
of chest but not submitted report. He has also stated that he has examined the patient on request of
police. This witness has been cross-examined but there is no cross-examination on the point that he
has not examined him on 31.03.1997 rather on 01.04.1997.
35. From the above discussions of the evidence, PW-2 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of
2013 appears to be eye witness, however, his evidence is doubted by the learned counsel for the
appellant on the ground of discrepancy in his evidence in the background of evidence of PW-8,
showing that injury report disclosed that PW-2 was examined on 01.04.1997 and as such his
presence is doubtful and his evidence in cross-examination disclosed that bullet crossed touching
his body whereas he has stated in his examination-in-chief that he received injury on his back.
However, as discussed above, PW-8 has categorically stated in his examination-in-chief that he
examined PW-2 on 31.03.1997 and again on 01.04.1997 at 10:00 A.M. but neither PW-8 has been
cross-examined nor any suggestion has been given to him that PW-2 has been examined on
01.04.1997 and not on 31.03.1997. So far contradiction in the evidence of PW-2 is concerned that
appears to be minor and furthermore, PW-8 has found injury over his person and no suggestion has
been given to him that injury was manufactured one. Even though, there are some discrepancies but
that is bound to occur in his evidence as PW-2 was deposing long time after the occurrence. On the
other hand, his name is mentioned in the fardbeyan (Ext. 4) and though the informant (PW-12) has
been declared hostile but his evidence in his examination-in-chief also disclosed that meeting Patna
High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 was to be addressed by PW-2, deceased persons and
PW-20.
36. The Hon'ble Apex Court, in a case of Smt. Shamim v. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in 2019
Cri.L.J. 732 SC, has considered the aspect of discrepancies in the evidence of witnesses, para-12 of
the judgment reads as follows:-
"12. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether the
evidence of the witness read as a whole inspires confidence. Once that impression is
formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more
particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks and infirmities pointed out
in the evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the
general tenor of the evidence and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is
shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not
touching the core of the case, hypertechnical approach by taking sentences torn out
of context here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some technical
error without going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 13
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
the evidence as a whole. Minor omissions in the police statements are never
considered to be fatal".
37. Further, in the case of Sohrab and Anr. vs. State of M.P. reported in AIR 1992 SC 220, the
Hon'ble Apex Court has also considered the evidence of injured witnesses and held that merely
because there have been discrepancies and contradictions in the evidence of some or all the
witnesses, the same does not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 mean that entire
evidence of prosecution has to be discarded. It is only after exercising caution and care shifting the
evidence to separate the truth from untruth, exaggeration, embellishment and improvement, the
Court had come to the conclusion that what could be accepted implicated the appellants and
convicted them as the Court has held that falsus in uno falsus in omnibus. is not a sound rule for the
reason that hardly any one comes across witness whose evidence does not contain a grain of untruth
or at any era some exaggeration or embellishment.
38. Further in the case of Mukesh and Anr. vs. State of NCT of Delhi reported in 2017 Cri.L.J. 4365,
the Hon'ble Apex Court, while considering the evidence of injured witness, taking into consideration
several judgments of the Apex Court, observed that "the evidence of injured witness is entitled to a
greater weight and the testimony of such a witness is considered to be beyond reproach and reliable.
Firm, cogent and convincing ground is required to describe the evidence of injured witness. It is to
be kept in mind that the evidentiary value of an injured witness carries great weight".
39. Further, in the case of State of Maharashtra vs. Tulshiram Bhanudas Kamble reported in AIR
2007 SC 3042 has observed that the evidence of an eye witness, who is also an Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 injured witness, cannot be doubted merely on the ground that he is inimical
to the respondents and held in paragraph 29, which reads as follows:-
"29. Each of the reasoning assigned by the High Court, in our opinion, is contrary to
the well-settled legal principle. The witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution,
apart from being eye-witnesses, were injured witnesses. Their presence at the place of
occurrence, therefore, cannot be doubted. Only because they were inimical to the
respondents, the same by itself cannot be a ground to discard their evidences.
Although in accepting the same, some amount of caution is required to be
maintained.
40. Learned counsel for the appellant also assailed the judgment on the ground that on the evidence
of solitary eye witness and that too, when his evidence suffers from discrepancies and his presence is
doubtful, conviction cannot be based and in this case, there is no other evidence available on record
to support the prosecution case. So far number of witnesses to be examined in a trial to prove its
case, Section 134 of Indian Evidence Act, provides that; no particular number of witnesses shall in
any case be required for the proof of any fact.
41. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Vadivelu Thevar vs The State of Madras reported in AIR 1957
SC 614, has also considered the same and held in para 11 and 12, which read as Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 14
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
"11. In view of these considerations, we have no hesitation in holding that the
contention that in a murder case, the court should insist upon plurality of witnesses,
is much too broadly stated. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act has categorically
laid it down that "no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for
the proof of any fact." The legislature determined, as long ago as 1872, presumably
after due consideration of the pros and cons, that it shall not be necessary for proof or
disproof of a fact, to call any particular number of witnesses. In England, both before
and after the passing of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, there have been a number of
statutes as set out in Sarkar's 'Law of Evidence' - 9th Edition, at pp. 1100 and 1101,
forbidding convictions on the testimony of a single witness. The Indian Legislature
has not insisted on laying down any such exceptions to the general rule recognized in
s. 134 quoted above. The section enshrines the well recognized maxim that "Evidence
has to be weighed and not counted". Our Legislature has given statutory recognition
to the fact that administration of justice may be hampered if a particular number of
witnesses were to be insisted upon. It is not seldom that a crime had been committed
in the presence of only one witness, leaving aside those cases which are not of
uncommon occurrence, where determination of guilt depends entirely on
circumstantial evidence. If the Legislature were to insist upon plurality of witnesses,
cases where the testimony of a single witness only could be available in proof of the
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 crime, would go unpunished. It is here
that the discretion of the presiding judge comes into play.
The matter thus must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of
the evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either accepted or
rejected. If such a testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable, there is no
legal impediment to the conviction of the accused person on such proof. Even as the
guilt of an accused person may be proved by the testimony of a single witness, the
innocence of an accused person may be established on the testimony of a single
witness, even though a considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming to
testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound
and well-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not
with the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally
speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three categories,
namely :
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
12. In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion
either way - it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be
above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 15
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
category, the court, equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial. There
is another danger in insisting on plurality of witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the oral
evidence of a single witness, if courts were to insist on plurality of witnesses in proof of any fact, they
will be indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses. Situations may arise and do arise where
only a single person is available to give evidence in support of a disputed fact. The court naturally
has to weigh carefully such a testimony and if it is satisfied that the evidence is reliable and free
from all taints which tend to render oral testimony open to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon
such testimony. The law reports contain many precedents where the court had to depend and act
upon the testimony of a single witness in support of the prosecution. There are exceptions to this
rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or of the testimony of an approver; both these are cases
in which the oral testimony is, by its very nature, suspect, being that of a participator in crime. But,
where there are no such exceptional reasons operating, it becomes the duty of the court to convict, if
it is satisfied that the testimony of a single witness is entirely reliable.We have, therefore, no reasons
to refuse to act upon the testimony of the first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in support
of the prosecution".
42. In the case of Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that "even if the
case against the accused hangs on the evidence of a single eye-witness it may be enough to sustain
the, conviction given sterling testimony of a Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013
competent, honest man, although as a rule of prudence courts call for corroboration. It is a platitude
to say that witnesses have to be weighed and not counted since quality matters more than quantity
in human affairs".
43. Further, in the case of Anil Phukan (supra), it has been held by Hon'ble Apex Court that
"conviction can be based on the testimony of a single eye-witness and there is no rule of law or
evidence which says to the contrary provided the sole eye witness passes the test of reliability. So
long as the single eye-witness is a wholly reliable witness the courts have no difficulty in basing
conviction on his testimony alone. However, where the single eye- witness is not found to be a
wholly reliable witness, in the sense that there are some circumstances which may show that he
could have an interest in the prosecution, then the courts generally insist upon some independent
corroboration of his testimony, In material particulars, before recording conviction. It is only when
the courts find that the single eye-witness is a wholly unreliable witness that his testimony is
discarded in toto and no amount of corroboration can cure that defect".
44. Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Piara Singh (supra) relied upon by the CBI,
has observed that Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 "evidence of interested or inimical
witnesses is to be scrutinised with care but cannot be rejected merely on the ground of being a
partisan evidence. If on a perusal of the evidence the Court is satisfied that the evidence is
creditworthy there is no bar in the Court relying on the said evidence". Similar view has also been
taken by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Seemon alias Veeranam v. State through Inspector of
Police reported in 2005 CriLJ 2618".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 16
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
45. In the background of above settled law, on close scrutiny of evidence, it appears that, so far
factum of occurrence, place of occurrence, date of occurrence and manner of occurrence is
concerned, PW-4, PW-5 and PW-7 also support the prosecution case in their evidence, as discussed
above, and their evidence also shows that occurrence has taken place and on the date of occurrence
deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav received injuries and both of them
died.
46. Apart from that PW-12, who is the informant in this case, no doubt he has been declared hostile,
but, as discussed above, his evidence disclosed the time of occurrence, place of occurrence and
factum of occurrence of firing and his evidence also disclosed that at J.P.Chawk at 4:00 P.M.,
meeting was to be addressed by deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad, Shyam Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Narayan Yadav, Bhrigurashan Patel (PW-2) and Ramdeo Ram (PW-20)
though this witness has turned hostile but his evidence further disclosed that he heard that Chandra
Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav were killed by accused persons on 31.03.1997 at 4:00
P.M. and he has proved his signature on the fardbeyan also and attention of this witness has been
drawn towards statement made before the police as well as to the CBI which he has denied but
PW-16, CBI Officer, has been confronted with the statement of PW-12, and he has stated that PW-12
has disclosed about Bihar Band and deceased persons as well as PW-2 and PW-20 were on
campaign and accused persons came and made indiscriminate firing. Considering the fact as stated
above, it appears that PW-12 is not coming with true fact and is concealing the same. In the present
case, occurrence is at 16:00 hours and FIR has been lodged immediately after the occurrence at
17:00 hours in which all accused persons are named and there is also mention of disclosure made by
Shyam Narayan Yadav (deceased) and further, disclosed that PW-2 and PW-20 were present at the
time of occurrence and as such lodging of prompt FIR rules out the possibility of manipulation and
addition in FIR. The Hon'ble Apex Court also considered this aspect of matter in a decision in Patna
High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 the case of Ravinder Kumar & Anr. v. State of Punjab
reported in AIR 2001 (SC) 3570 and observed that " of course, a prompt and immediate lodging of
F.I.R. is the ideal as that would give the prosecution a twin advantage. First is that it affords
commencement of the investigation without any time lapse. Second is that it expels the opportunity
for any possible concoction of a false version".
47. PW-13 and PW-20 have also been declared hostile in this case, but evidence of PW-13 has also
disclosed that Chandra Shekhar Prasad and Shyam Narayan Yadav were killed on 31.03.1997 at
J.P.Chawk and evidence of PW-20 also disclosed the presence of deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav,
Chandra Shekhar Prasad and PW-2 at J.P.Chawk at 4:00 P.M. in connection with Bihar Band and
he, receiving information of firing, reached there and saw Chandra Shekhar Prasad had died and
Shyam Narayan Yadav had fallen and PW-2 received injury on his back. According to this witness
(PW-20), he has also donated blood to Shyam Narayan Yadav. His attention has also been drawn
towards the statement made before the CBI and the CBI officer (PW-16) has also been confronted
with the same and that disclosed, he is suppressing the material fact and that appears to be liar.
Hence, his evidence is of no help to the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 appellant. On
the other hand, their evidence supports the prosecution case about the factum of occurrence, date of
occurrence and place of occurrence and also about the fact that deceased persons received injuries
and died in the occurrence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 17
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
48. It is well settled principle that evidence of such witness cannot be treated as effaced or washed
off the record altogether, but the same can be accepted to the extent his version is found to be
dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof (reported in Khuji alias Surendra Tiwari (supra) and Arjun
(supra).
49. Hence, from the discussions made above, it is evident that PW-12, PW-13 and PW-20 tried to
conceal the material fact with the purpose of shielding and protecting the appellant, may be due to
fear or they might have been gained over and for that appellant will not be allowed to get any
benefit.
50. Apart from that in the case of Hemudan Nanbha Gandhi vs. State of Gujarat reported in 2019
Cri.L.J 736, wherein the prosecutrix-informant has been declared hostile, the Hon'ble Apex Court,
considering the judgment in the case of State vs. Sanjeev Nanda reported in (2012) 8 SCC 450, has
observed that "...if a witness becomes hostile to subvert the judicial process, the court shall not stand
as a mute spectator and every effort should be made to bring home the truth. Criminal Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 justice system cannot be overturned by those gullible witnesses
who act under pressure, inducement or intimidation. Further, Section 193 IPC imposes punishment
for giving false evidence but is seldom invoked" and further held in paras 9 and 10 of its judgment,
which reads thus:-
"9. A criminal trial is but a quest for truth. The nature of inquiry and evidence
required will depend on the facts of each case. The presumption of innocence will
have to be balanced with the rights of the victim, and above all the societal interest
for preservation of the rule of law. Neither the accused nor the victim can be
permitted to subvert a criminal trial by stating falsehood and resort to contrivances,
so as to make it the theatre of the absurd. Dispensation of justice in a criminal trial is
a serious matter and cannot be allowed to become a mockery by simply allowing
prime prosecution witnesses to turn hostile as a ground for acquittal, as observed in
Zahira Habibullah Sheikh vs. State of Gujarat, (2006) 3 SCC 374 and Mahila Vinod
Kumari vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2008) 8 SCC
34. If the medical evidence had not confirmed sexual assault on the prosecutrix, the
T.I.P. and identification therein were doubtful, corroborative evidence was not
available, entirely different considerations may have arisen.
10. It would indeed be a travesty of justice in the peculiar facts of the present case if
the appellant were to be acquitted merely because the prosecutrix turned hostile and
failed to identify the appellant in the dock, in view of the other overwhelming
evidence available. In Iqbal vs. State of U.P., 2015 Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.21 of 2013 (6) SCC 623, it was observed as follows:
"15. Evidence of identification of the miscreants in the test identification parade is
not a substantive evidence. Conviction cannot be based solely on the identity of the
dacoits by the witnesses in the test identification parade. The prosecution has to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 18
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
adduce substantive evidence by establishing incriminating evidence connecting the
accused with the crime, like recovery of articles which are the subject matter of
dacoity and the alleged weapons used in the commission of the offence."
51. Considering the same, it appears that even though PW-12 and PW-20 have been declared hostile
but their evidence also supports the prosecution case so far date of occurrence, place of occurrence
and manner of occurrence are concerned, as such their such evidence3 can be used for coming to
just decision of the case.
52. One of the arguments of learned counsel for the appellant is that no independent witness has
been examined in the present case in spite of the occurrence taken place in a crowded place,
however, this court cannot shut its eyes towards the situation prevailing in the society where
witnesses are not willing to come forward to support the prosecution case. The Hon'ble Apex Court,
in the case of Ramesh and others v. State of Haryana reported in 2017 Cri. L.J. 352 SC, has observed
this Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 fact in paras 35 and 36 of the judgment, which
reads as follows:-
"35. We find that it is becoming a common phenomenon, almost a regular feature,
that in criminal cases witnesses turn hostile. There could be various reasons for this
behaviour or attitude of the witnesses. It is possible that when the statements of such
witnesses were recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
by the police during investigation, the Investigating Officer forced them to make such
statements and, therefore, they resiled therefrom while deposing in the Court and
justifiably so. However, this is no longer the reason in most of the cases. This trend of
witnesses turning hostile is due to various other factors. It may be fear of deposing
against the accused/delinquent or political pressure or pressure of other family
members or other such sociological factors. It is also possible that witnesses are
corrupted with monetary considerations.
36. In some of the judgments in past few years, this Court has commented upon such
peculiar behaviour of witnesses turning hostile and we would like to quote from few
such judgments. In Krishna Mochi v. State of Bihar, this Court observed as under:
"31. It is matter of common experience that in recent times there has been sharp
decline of ethical values in public life even in developed countries much less
developing one, like ours, where the ratio of decline is higher. Even in ordinary cases,
witnesses are not inclined to depose or their evidence is not found to be credible by
courts for manifold reasons. One of the reasons may be that they Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 do not have courage to depose against an accused
because of threats to their life, more so when the offenders are habitual criminals or
high-ups in the Government or close to powers, which may be political, economic or
other powers including muscle power.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 19
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
53. In the case of Appabhai and another vs. State of Gujarat reported in AIR 1988 SC 696, the
Hon'ble Apex Court has also considered this aspect of the matter and has observed in para 36, which
reads as follows:-
" 36. It is no doubt true that the prosecution has not been able to produce any
independent witness to the incident that took place at the bus stand. There must have
been several of such witnesses. But the prosecution case cannot be thrown out or
doubted on that ground alone. Experience reminds us that civilized people are
generally insensitive when a crime is committed even in their presence. They
withdraw both from the victim and the vigilante. They keep themselves away from
the Court unless it is inevitable. They think that crime like civil dispute is between
two individuals or parties and they should not involve themselves. This kind of
apathy of the general public is indeed unfortunate, but it is there everywhere whether
in village life, towns or cities. One cannot ignore this handicap with which the
investigating agency has to discharge its duties. The court, therefore, instead of
doubting the prosecution case for want of independent witness must consider the
broad spectrum of the prosecution version and then search for the nugget of truth
with due regard to probability if any, suggested by the accused. The Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Court, however, must bear in mind that witnesses to a
serious crime may not react in a normal manner. Nor do they react uniformly. The
horror stricken witnesses at a dastardly crime or an act of egregious nature may react
differently. Their, course of conduct may not be of ordinary type in the normal
circumstances. The Court, therefore, cannot reject their evidence merely because they
have behaved or reacted in an unusual manner. In Rana Pratap v. State of Haryana
1988 (3) S.C.C. 327 O. Chinnappa Reddy J. speaking for this Court succinctly set out
what might be the behaviour of different persons witnessing the same incident".
54. Besides that, this Court is aware of the fact that in the present case, earlier deceased Chandra
Shekhar Prasad's mother was threatened and thereafter while he along with others were
campaigning for Bihar Band, they have been killed at a crowded place at J.P.Chawk and as such if
the witnesses turned hostile or not named the accused persons, the Court cannot ignore the fact that
due to fear or any gainful means, some of the witnesses have turned hostile and others have not
come forward with truth.
55. Considering the above facts, the evidence of PW-2, on discussion, is found to be wholly reliable
and that has also been corroborated by the evidence of PW-4, PW-5, PW-7, PW- 10 as well as PW-12
and PW-20 ,so far date of occurrence, place of occurrence and factum of occurrence is concerned, in
which deceased persons were shot dead and PW-2 has received injuries Patna High Court CR. APP
(DB) No.21 of 2013 and PW-5 and PW-7 have also received injuries. The evidence of PW-6 and
PW-8, who are doctors, also corroborates the evidence of PW-2 and other witnesses, as they found
the injuries over the persons of PW-2, PW-5, PW-7 and PW-8, and PW-6 conducted the postmortem
examination on the dead body of deceased persons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 20
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
56. Besides that, PW-1, though not an eye witness of the occurrence, but he reached at the place of
occurrence and the hospital immediately after the occurrence and his evidence disclosed that
deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav disclosed him the names of accused persons including the appellant
and that part of the evidence of PW-1 appears to be in relation to the fact in issue and part of the
same transaction. Hence, that appears to be relevant under Section 6 of the Indian Evidence Act.
However, the evidence of PW-1 was assailed by the learned counsel for the appellant, firstly, on the
ground that the evidence of PW-6 does not show that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav was in a fit
state of mind and secondly, on the ground that though the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 shows that
oral dying declaration has been made in presence of police officials, but there is no such evidence of
police officials available on record.
57. On scrutiny of evidence of PW-1, it appears that when Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of
2013 he reached hospital, Chandra Shekhar Prasad had died and Shyam Narayan Yadav was in
injured condition, he was uttering something and officer-in-charge of Town Police Station also
reached there and Shyam Narayan Yadav disclosed that appellant and other accused persons fired at
them. Even in his cross-examination, PW-1 has stated that whatever Shyam Narayan Yadav was
telling, same was listened by others also and further after statement of PW-12, deceased became
unconscious. Evidence of PW-2 also disclosed recording of statement of Shyam Narayan Yadav by
the Officer-in-charge and Satyadeo Ram (PW-1), Ramesh Singh Kushwaha (PW-12) and Samsuddin
Mian (PW-13) were present there. Though there is slight variation in the evidence of PW-1 and
PW-2, but as discussed above, some discrepancies are bound to occur as the power of observation
differs from person to person and what one may notice another may not and they can only be
recalled the version and it is unrealistic to expect a witness to depose like a parrot.
58. Apart from that, Officer-in-Charge (PW-9) has not been cross-examined. So far evidence of
PW-6 is concerned, no doubt he was cross-examined about the state of deceased Shyam Narayan
Yadav to show that he was not in a position to speak but his cross-examination clearly disclosed that
he has stated in Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 case of Shyam Narayan Yadav, there
were three holes of wounds, which he cannot say whether it was caused by bullet or pellet, massive
laceration of lungs in both case will cause immediate haemorrhage, which will cause immediate
acute respiratory distress. Both these condition will cause loss of speech. However the aforesaid
opinion of doctor is suggestive only and no suggestion was given to doctor that deceased was not in a
condition to speak at the time of admission whereas there are oral evidence of PW-1 and PW-2
available on record, which has been corroborated by the fardbeyan (Ext. 4) that shows that deceased
Shyam Narayan Yadav has named the appellant.
59. So far submission of learned counsel for the appellant that there is no certification by the doctor,
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Dal Singh reported in AIR 2013 SC
2059, has considered this aspect and held in para 14, which reads as follows:-
14. The law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that law does not provide
who can record a dying declaration, nor is there any prescribed form, format, or
procedure for the same. The person who records a dying declaration must be satisfied
that the maker is in a fit state of mind and is capable of making such a statement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 21
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
Moreover, the requirement of a certificate provided by a Doctor in Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 respect of such state of the deceased, is not essential in
every case.
Undoubtedly, the subject of the evidentiary value and acceptability of a dying declaration, must be
approached with caution for the reason that the maker of such a statement cannot be subjected to
cross-examination. However, the court may not look for corroboration of a dying declaration, unless
the declaration suffers from any infirmity.
So far as the question of thumb impression is concerned, the same depends upon facts, as regards
whether the skin of the thumb that was placed upon the dying declaration was also burnt. Even in
case of such burns in the body, the skin of a small part of the body, i.e. of the thumb, may remain
intact. Therefore, it is a question of fact regarding whether the skin of the thumb had in fact been
completely burnt, and if not, whether the ridges and curves had remained intact".
60. The Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Pothakamuri Srinivasulu alias Mooga Subhaiah v. State of
Andhra Pradesh reported in AIR 2002 SC 2780, while dealing with the similar facts observed in
para -8 of its judgment, reads as follows:-
"8 It was submitted by Ms. Nanita Sharma, the learned counsel for the appellant that
for several reasons the dying declaration cannot be believed. She submitted that
looking to the nature of the injuries suffered by the deceased possibly she could not
have spoken and must have become unconscious instantaneously. However, no such
suggestion has been made to any of the witnesses including the two doctors who
respectively conducted the medico-legal examination and post- Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 mortem examination of the victim. On the contrary the three
eye-witnesses have positively stated that the deceased was speaking when they had
met her soon after the incident. The victim had died tow days after the incident. We
cannot in the face of this positive evidence just assume that the injured must have
become unconscious and speechless because of the injuries and discard on such
assumption the dying declaration deposed to by independent witnesses corroborated
by the promptly lodged FIR.
61. As discussed above, PW-9, who has recorded the statement of deceased, has not been
cross-examined on the point whether deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav was able to speak, even no
suggestion has been given to that witness and no suggestive has also been given to PW-1 and PW-2
that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav was not in a fit state of mind to speak, as cited by learned
counsel for the CBI, held in case of Gian Chand & Others v. State of Haryana reported in 2013 (4)
PLJR (SC) 7, in para-11 and 12 which reads as follows:
11. The effect of not cross-examining a witness on a particular fact/circumstance has
been dealt with and explained by this Court in Laxmibai (Dead) Thr. L.Rs. & Anr. v.
Bhagwanthuva (Dead) Thr.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 22
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
L.Rs. & Ors., AIR 2013 SC 1204 observing as under:
"31. Furthermore, there cannot be any dispute with respect to the settled legal
proposition, that if a party wishes to raise any doubt as regards the correctness of the
statement of a witness, the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 said
witness must be given an opportunity to explain his statement by drawing his
attention to that part of it, which has been objected to by the other party, as being
untrue. Without this, it is not possible to impeach his credibility. Such a law has been
advanced in view of the statutory provisions enshrined in Section138 of the Evidence
Act, 1872, which enable the opposite party to cross-examine a witness as regards
information tendered in evidence by him during his initial examination in chief, and
the scope of this provision stands enlarged by Section 146 of the Evidence Act, which
permits a witness to be questioned, inter-alia, in order to test his veracity. Thereafter,
the unchallenged part of his evidence is to be relied upon, for the reason that it is
impossible for the witness to explain or elaborate upon any doubts as regards the
same, in the absence of questions put to him with respect to the circumstances which
indicate that the version of events provided by him, is not fit to be believed, and the
witness himself, is unworthy of credit. Thus, if a party intends to impeach a witness,
he must provide adequate opportunity to the witness in the witness box, to give a full
and proper explanation. The same is essential to ensure fair play and fairness in
dealing with witnesses."
12. The defence did not put any question to the Investigating Officer in his cross-examination in
respect of missing chits from the bags containing the case property/contraband articles. Thus, no
grievance could be raised by the appellants in this regard.
62. Learned counsel for the appellant has also referred Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of
2013 to a decision in the case of Umakant (supra)with respect to dying declaration, wherein,
Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down certain guidelines in para-20 of the said judgment which also
disclosed that where the court is satisfied that declaration is true and voluntarily, it can base its
conviction without further corroboration. In the present case, as discussed above, evidence of PW-2
disclosed that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav disclosed the names of assailants including appellant
and that has also found mentioned in fardbeyan (Ext.4) lodged promptly after occurrence. In that
background, this oral dying declaration appears to be reliable and trustworthy. Now the question
arises, as to whether statement made by deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav before his death is relevant
in determining the cause of death of deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad or not. The said question
was considered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Tejram Patil v. State of Maharashtra
reported in 2015 Cri.L.J.1829 in which the Hon'ble Apex Court after considering Sections 6 and 32
of the Indian Evidence Act as well as several other pronouncements of Hon'ble Apex Court including
the cases Kashiram Tukaram Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra reported in 1984 Cri.L.J. 1447 (Bom),
of Ratan Gond v. State of Bihar reported in AIR 1959 SC 18, of Sharad Birdhi Chand Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Sarda v. State of Maharashtra reported in (1984) 4 SCC 116 as
well as in the case of Pakala Narayan Swami v. Emperor reported in AIR 1939 PC 47, has held in
para 25 of the judgment that "it is thus clear that the DD is admissible not only in relation to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 23
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
cause of death of the person making the statement and as to circumstances of the transaction which
resulted in his death, if the circumstances of the said transaction relate to death of another person,
the statement cannot be held to be inadmissible when circumstances of "his" death are integrally
connected to the circumstances of death of such other person." In the present case, the statement
made by the Shyam Narayan Yadav before his death is not only relates to circumstances of the
present case resulting in his death but it also shows the transaction resulting in death of deceased
Chandra Shekhar Prasad and as such his evidence is admissible with regard to circumstances of
transaction resulting in his death as well as the death of deceased Chandra Shekhar Prasad.
63. Learned counsel for the appellant also argued that FIR lodged by the CBI is the second FIR, as
already FIR has been lodged by the Bihar police on the statement of PW-12 as such second FIR is hit
under Section 162 Cr.P.C. However, from perusal of record, it appears that FIR lodged by the CBI is
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 nothing else but reiteration of statement made by
PW-12 and on that basis investigation continued and even charge sheet has been submitted by the
CBI but no such objection was raised before the trial court as such trial cannot be vitiated on that
ground specially when there are enough cogent and reliable materials available on record.
64. Apart from that, defence has also examined 04 witnesses and even according to Dws-1,2 and 3,
occurrence of firing took place on 31.03.1997 though those witnesses has tried to develop that some
Bhutias were firing and there is evidence of DW-4 on the point of alibi of appellant, but their
evidence clearly disclosed that they have not depose earlier before the police or CBI during
investigation and for the first time, they are appearing before the court and taking such plea. Besides
that, the evidence of DW-1 and DW-2 also disclosed that deceased Shyam Narayan Yadav and
Chandra Shekhar Prasad died in that occurrence.
65. The statement of appellant recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. also disclosed that he has not
taken any plea of alibi in his statement.
66. So far motive of occurrence is concerned, the evidence available on record disclosed that local
M.P. was not Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 happy with the deceased persons and
he had threatened Chandra Shekhar Prasad earlier. As per evidence of PW-3, appellant and other
accused persons are men of local M.P. and as such while the deceased persons and others were
campaigning for Bihar Band and addressing the meeting, they were killed in broad day light in a
crowded place as such there are materials to prove the motive behind the occurrence.
67. The appellant was convicted under Sections 302/149, 307/149 and 120B of the Indian Penal
Code as well as under
Section 27 of the Arms Act, however, learned counsel for the appellant has also
assailed his conviction under Section 120B on the ground that there is no evidence
available on record to show that accused persons conspired with someone to kill the
deceased.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 24
Rustam Khan vs The Union Of India Through Cbi on 10 May, 2019
68. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Yogesh alias Sachin Jagdish Joshi vs. State of
Maharashtra reported in (2008) 10 SCC 394 has considered the said aspect of the matter and it is
manifest that meeting of mind of two or more persons for doing an illegal act by illegal means is sine
qua non of the criminal conspiracy but it may not be possible to prove the agreement between them
by direct proof. Nevertheless, existence of the conspiracy and it objective can be inferred from Patna
High Court CR. APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 the surrounding circumstances must form a chain of events
from which a conclusion about the guilt of the accused could be drawn. It is well settled that an
offence of conspiracy is substantive offence and renders the mere agreement to commit an offence
punishable even if an offence does not take place pursuant to the illegal agreement, as such, this
Court does not find force in the argument of learned counsels for the appellant that no case under
Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code is made out against the appellant.
69. Considering the entire discussions made, we find that PW-2 is an injured and eye witness and
his evidence found to be reliable and trustworthy, he supported the prosecution case so far date of
occurrence, place of occurrence, manner of occurrence and named the appellant and other accused
persons as assailants and the same has been corroborated by oral dying declaration of deceased
Shyam Narayan Yadav, just after the occurrence, further been corroborated in part by other
evidence as discussed above. As such there are sufficient cogent and reliable evidence available on
record against the appellant.
70. We, thus, find no infirmities in the impugned judgment and order. As such conviction and
sentence of the appellant under Sections 302/149, 307/149 and 120B of the Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.21 of 2013 Indian Penal Code and Section 27 of the Arms Act is upheld.
71. Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.
( Vinod Kumar Sinha, J)
Aditya Kumar Trivedi, J I agree.
(Aditya Kumar Trivedi, J)
sujit/-
AFR/NAFR NAFR
CAV DATE 26.02.2019
Uploading Date 10.05.2019
Transmission Date 10.05.2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/25689065/ 25
