S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25
July, 2022
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 25TH DAY OF JULY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SACHIN SHANKAR MAGADUM
R.F.A NO. 120 OF 2008(RES)
C/W
R.F.A NO.262 OF 2008(RES)
IN RFA NO.120/2008
BETWEEN:
M/S HOTEL AJANTHA
REP BY ITS MANAGING PARTNER
A PRABHAKAR(DEAD)
SRI P J BAGILTHAYA
S/O LATE DASAPPAYYA
AGED ABOUT 85 YEARS
MANAGING PARTNER
M/S HOTEL AJANTHA
NO.22, M G ROAD, BANGALORE-1
1. SRI.P.SUBRAMANYA BAGILTHAYA
S/O LATE P.J.BAGILTHAYA
AGED ABOUT 52 YEARS
(AMENDED AS PER COURT ORDER
DATED 12.12.2011)
2. SMT LAKSHMI BAGILTHAYA
W/O SRI P J BAGILTHAYA
AGED ABOUT 76 YEARS
3. SMT SHOBA BAGILTHAYA
W/O SRI SUBRAMANYA BAGILTHAYA
AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
2
ALL ARE R/AT NO 18, INDIRANAGAR
BANGALORE-560038
4. SMT P SHASHIKALA
W/O SRI A PRABAHAKAR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 1
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
AGED ABOUT 50 YEARS
R/AT NO 817,17TH 'F' MAIN, I CROSS
6TH BLOCK, KORAMANGALA
BANGALORE-92
...APPELLANTS
(BY SRI.K.SUMAN, SR.COUNSEL FOR
SRI.SIDDARTH SUMAN, ADOVATE)
AND:
SMT KAMALA(DEAD)
W/O V P SUDARSHANAM NAIDU
(BY THEIR LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES & ALSO
THE PLAINTIFFS IN THE TRIAL COURT)
1. SRI S GOPAL KRISHNA
S/O LATE V P SUDARSHANAM NAIDU
A/A 64YRS, R/AT NO 42, LINDEN STREET
AUSTIN TOWN, BANGALORE-47
2. SMT SHANTHI NAIDU
D/O LATE V P SUDARSHANAM NAIDU
A/A 65 YEARS,
R/AT NO 62, UAS LAYOUT, R M V EXTENSION II
BANGALORE-54
3. SMT PREMA NAIDU
D/O LATE V P SUDARSHANAM NAIDU
A/A 57 YEARS, R/AT NO 26, SHAMSEY ROAD
LANGFORD GARDENS, BANGALORE-25
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.K.B.S.MANIAN,ADVOCATE FOR
3
SRI.K M JAGANATH, ADVOCATE)
THIS RFA IS FILED U/S.96 OF CPC AGAINST THE JUDGMENT
AND DECREE DT.23.10.2007 PASSED IN O.S.NO.10786/1995 ON
THE FILE OF THE XXVI ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESS. JUDGE, MAYO
HALL UNIT, BANGALORE, DISMISSING THE SUIT FOR EVICTION.
IN RFA NO.262/2008
BETWEEN:
1. S GOPAL KRISHNA
S/O.LATE.V.P.SUDARSHANAM NAIDU,
AGED ABOUT 65 YEARS,
R/AT.NO.42, LINDEN STREET, AUSTIN TOWN,
BANGALORE-47.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 2
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
2. SHANTI NAIDU
D/O LATE.V.P.SUDARSHANAM NAIDU,
AGED ABOUT 67 YEARS,
R/AT.NO.62, U.A.S.LAYOUT,
BANGALORE-94.
3. PREMA NAIDU
D/O.LATE.V.P.SUDARSHANAM NAIDU,
AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS, R/AT.NO.26,
'SHAUGHNESSY' ROAD, LANGFORD GARDENS,
BANGALORE-25.
...APPELLANTS
(BY SRI.K.B.S.MANIAN, ADVOCATE FOR SRI.K MUNIVENKATAPPA &
SRI.K.M.JAGANATH, ADVOCATES)
AND:
1. HOTEL AJANTHA
REP BY ITS MANAGING PARTNER
A.PRABHAKAR(DEAD)
P.J.BAGILATHAYA
4
S/O LATE.DASAPPAYYA,
AGED ABOUT 86 YEARS,
MANAGING PARTNER HOTEL AJANTHA,
R/AT.NO.22-A, MAHATMA GANDHI ROAD,
BANGALORE-01.
(DELETED VIDE COURT ORDER
DATED 18.01.2010.
SRI.SUBRAMANYA BAGILTHAYA
(SUBSTITUTED VIDE COURT ORDER
DATED 18.01.2010)
2. LAKSHMI BAGILATHAYA
W/O.P.J.BAGILATHAYA,
AGED ABOUT 72 YEARS
3. SHOBHA BAGILATHAYA
W/O SUBRAMANYA BAGILATHAYA
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS
BOTH R/AT.NO.18, INDIRANAGAR,
BANGALORE-38.
4. P SHASHIKALA
W/O LATE.A.PRABHAKAR,
AGED ABOUT 44 YEARS,
R/AT.NO.817, 17TH 'F' MAIN,
1ST CROSS, VI BLOCK, KORAMANGALA,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 3
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
BANGALORE-92.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.K.SUMAN, SR.COUNSEL FOR SRI.SIDDARTH SUMAN,
ADVOCATE FOR R1 TO R3;
SRI.M.MOHAN RAO, ADVOCATE FOR R4)
THIS RFA IS FILED U/S.96 OF CPC AGAINST THE JUDGMENT
AND DECREE DT.23.10.2007 PASSED IN O.S.NO.10786/1995 ON
THE FILE OF THE XXVI ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESS. JUDGE, MAYO
HALL UNIT, BANGALORE, DISMISSING THE SUIT FOR EVICTION.
5
THESE APPEALS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR
JUDGMENT ON 05.04.2022, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT OF
JUDGMENT THIS DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
The captioned appeal in RFA.No.262/2008 is filed by the unsuccessful plaintiffs questioning the
judgment and decree passed in O.S.No.10786/1995 wherein the Court below has dismissed the suit
for ejectment filed by the plaintiffs where as the connected appeal in RFA.No.120/2008 is filed by
the defendants questioning the findings recorded by the Trial Court on issue No.5 and additional
issue No.2.
2. For the sake of brevity, the parties are referred to as per their rank before the Court below.
3. The facts leading to the case are as under:
The subject matter of the suit is a commercial building bearing Municipal No.22/A
situated at M.G.Road. The plaintiffs have instituted the present suit seeking recovery
of possession. It is the specific case of the plaintiffs that their father namely
Sudarsanam Naidu had a limited right in the suit schedule property. The plaintiffs
claim that their grandfather V.Papaiah Naidu bequeathed the suit schedule property
thereby creating right, title and interest in favour of the plaintiffs' father namely
Sudarsanam Naidu. It is the specific case of the plaintiffs that lease is created by their
father Sudarsanam Naidu and his brother V.P.Perumalswamy Naidu for a period of
25 years commencing from 1st day of March 1974 with an option for renewal for a
further period of 5 years is illegal. The plaintiffs claim that their father had only life
interest and therefore, he could not have created lease during his lifetime. The
plaintiffs specifically contended that on account of death of their father
V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu, the lease stood determined and therefore, the plaintiffs are
entitled to recover possession of the suit schedule property from the defendants. The
plaintiffs claim that they have issued a legal notice on 08.03.1994 and 12.02.1995
requesting the defendants to vacate and handover possession.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 4
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
The present suit is filed as defendants refused to handover vacant possession.
4. On receipt of summons, the defendant No.1 tendered appearance and filed written statement. The
defendant No.1 specifically contended that the present suit is not at all maintainable and if plaintiffs
intend to seek possession, they have to take recourse to the provisions of the Karnataka Rent
Control Act, 1961. The defendant No.1 also questioned the locus standi of plaintiffs and stoutly
denied the averments questioning the lessors authority to lease the property in their favour. The
defendant No.1 claimed that suit schedule property is jointly purchased by V.P.Perumalswamy
Naidu and V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu, who are the sons of one V.Papaiah Naidu under registered sale
deed dated 22.10.1936. The defendant No.1 claimed that they have acquired leasehold rights
pursuant to registered lease deed dated 04.03.1974. The period stipulated under the registered lease
deed is 25 years which would commence from 04.03.1974. The defendants have also placed reliance
on a declaration dated 01.09.1989 given by V.P.Sudarshanam Naidu consenting for further lease.
Under the said agreement, defendant No.1 claimed that he is entitled to seek extension of lease by
another 25 years. The defendant No.1 also contended that they have improved the suit schedule
property by putting up further construction and the suit schedule property is developed by investing
huge amount.
5. Questioning the locus of plaintiffs, the defendant No.1 also contended that the present plaintiffs
are not the absolute owners of the suit schedule property and therefore, in absence of other
co-owners, the present suit is not maintainable and therefore, contended that plaintiffs are not
entitled to recover possession for a total period of 55 years commencing from 01.03.1974. The
defendants also contended that there is an arbitration clause in the lease deed and on these set of
defences, the defendant No.1 sought for dismissal of the suit.
6. The defendant Nos.2 to 4 have adopted the written statement filed by the defendant No.1.
7. Based on the rival contentions, the Trial Court formulated the following issues:
"1) Whether the plaintiffs prove that V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu had only life interest in the Suit
Schedule Property?
2) Whether the plaintiffs prove that with the death of V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu, the leasehold right in
favour of the defendant stands extinguished?
3) Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is barred under Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1963?
4) Whether the defendants prove that the suit property has been purchased jointly by
V.Perumalswamy Naidu and Sri V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu?
5) Whether the defendants prove that defendant firm is entitled to continue in view of declaration
made on 01.09.1989 by V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu?
6) To what relief parties are entitled?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 5
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
7) What Order or Decree?
Additional Issues:
1) Whether plaintiffs are entitled to any mesne profits; if so, at what rate?
2) Whether defendants prove that its lease is extended after the expiry of option
period as per declaration of V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu dated 01.09.1989?
3) Whether plaintiffs have properly terminated the tenancy of the defendants?"
8. The plaintiffs to substantiate their claim have let in ocular evidence and have examined plaintiff
No.3 as PW.1 and have relied on documentary evidence vide Exs.P-1 to P-13. The defendants to
counter the claim of plaintiffs have examined the Managing Partner as DW.1 and one independent
witness as DW.2 and have produced documentary evidence vide Exs.D-1 to D-66.
9. The learned Judge having examined the rival contentions has answered issue Nos.1 and 2 in the
negative. The learned Judge has come to conclusion that plaintiffs have failed to prove that their
father V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu had life interest in the suit schedule property. While answering issue
No.2, learned Judge has come to conclusion that plaintiffs have failed to prove that on account of
death of V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu, the leasehold rights in favour of defendants stands terminated.
While answering issue No.4, the learned Judge has come to conclusion that defendants have
succeeded in proving that suit schedule property was jointly purchased by the plaintiffs' father
Sudarsanam Naidu and their uncle Perumalswamy Naidu. While examining issue No.5 and
additional issue No.2, the learned Judge has recorded a finding that defendants are not entitled to
continue based on declaration dated 01.09.1989 alleged to have been made by V.P.Sudarsanam
Naidu. On these set of reasonings, the learned Judge has proceeded to dismiss the suit. Questioning
the dismissal decree, the plaintiffs have preferred appeal in RFA.No.262/2008 and questioning the
findings on issue No.5 and additional issue No.2, the defendants have preferred appeal in
RFA.No.120/2008.
10. Learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs reiterating the grounds urged in the appeal memo
would contend that the contention of the defendants that suit is premature is not at all tenable. He
would also point out that the finding recorded by the Trial Court on Ex.D-1 which is the alleged
agreement executed by V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu thereby agreeing to extend the lease period for a
further period of 25 years is not only perverse but contrary to the findings recorded on issue No.5.
He would submit that while dealing with issue No.5, learned Judge has rightly held that there is
absolutely no evidence that in terms of Ex.D-1, parties have mutually agreed to extend the period.
Learned counsel would stress more on the expiry of the lease period. He would contend that even as
per the defendants' case, the lease was executed on 04.03.1974 vide Ex.D-2 and therefore, he would
contend that the lease period of 25 years and with further extension for 5 years as agreed under the
lease deed would expire on 28.02.2004. Therefore, he would contend that the Court below has not
taken cognizance of subsequent events.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 6
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
11. To buttress his arguments, learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgment rendered by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Vithalbhai (P) Ltd. vs. Union Bank of India1. Placing reliance on
the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court cited supra, he would contend that even if a suit
is found to be premature, the Court can still mould the reliefs, if no manifest injustice or prejudice is
caused to the defendants. Placing reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in
the case of Virgo Industries (Eng.) Private Limited vs. Venturetech Solutions Private Limited2, he
would emphasis on the principle that there is no universal rule to dismiss the suit in the event it is
found that it is premature unless the question of a suit being premature does not go to the root of
the jurisdiction of the Court. He (2005) 4 SCC 315 (2013) 1 SCC 625 would further place reliance on
the judgment rendered in the case of Chennai Sri Ekambaraswarar Devasthanam vs. Dungarchand
Narasingji3. Placing reliance on the said judgment, he would contend that it is well within the
jurisdiction of this Court to grant appropriate reliefs which would shorten the litigation and avoid
multiplicity of litigation. Placing reliance on the said judgment, he would contend that it is
permissible under law to mould the relief and allow the ejectment suit.
12. To counter the defence of defendants that all co- owners have not joined in the present suit for
ejectment, he has place reliance on the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
India umbrella Manufacturing Co. and Others vs. Bhagabandei Agarwalla (Dead) By Lrs. Savitri
Agarwalla (Smt.) and others4. Placing reliance on the dictum rendered by the Apex Court in the
judgment cited supra, he would contend that consent of other co-owners 1991 SCC Madras 214
(2004) 3 SCC 178 is assumed as taken unless it is shown that the other co- owners have not
consented for ejectment of the tenant and the suit is filed inspite of their objections. Questioning the
admissibility of Ex.D-1, he would submit that the said declaration which creates a new lease cannot
be looked into as Ex.D-1 creates a new lease and a creation of new lease can be only by way of
registered instrument. Therefore, he would contend that mere alleged declaration as per Ex.D-1
cannot supersede the terms of registered document vide Ex.P-2 dated 04.03.1974 wherein lease was
created in favour of defendants for a period of 25 years.
13. Learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs has also brought to the notice of this Court that the
subsequent suit filed by defendants in O.S.No.6325/2005 who are claiming that they are the tenants
in view of extension of lease under Ex.D-1 is stayed by the Court. He would also take this Court
through the orders passed by the Court below on I.A.No.6 in O.S.No.6325/2005. He would conclude
his arguments by contending that lease, even otherwise, has expired way back in 2004 and
respondents/defendants taking undue advantage of pending litigation are squatting over the suit
premises without any semblance of right and therefore, he would request this Court to allow the
appeal and consequently direct the defendants to handover vacant possession.
14. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the defendants repelling the contentions canvassed by
the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs would reiterate the defence set up by the defendants
in the suit. Learned counsel would point out that the present plaintiffs cannot maintain a suit for
ejectment without impleading other co-owners. Referring to the recitals in the registered lease deed
vide Ex.P-2, he would bring to the notice of this Court that lease was admittedly executed by two
brothers and therefore, the present plaintiffs who are the legal heirs of V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu
cannot assert absolute title over the suit schedule property and initiate ejectment suit. Referring to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 7
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
the averments made in the plaint, he would submit that plaintiffs are asserting absolute title and in
absence of consent by other co-owners, there is no valid termination. Taking this Court through the
reply issued by the defendants, he would contend that defendants have amply replied to the legal
notice and the plaintiffs are notified that they cannot terminate the lease unilaterally which was
created under the registered lease deed for a period of 25 years commencing from 1974. He would
also refer to that part of the averments made in the reply notice wherein defendants have also
notified the plaintiffs that they are entitled for further renewal after expiry of initial period of 30
years.
15. To buttress his arguments, learned counsel has placed reliance on the Full Bench judgment of
the Gujarat High Court rendered in the case of Nanalal Girdharlal and Others vs. Gulamnabi
Jamalbhai Motorwala and Others5. Taking this Court through the dictum rendered by the Full
Bench of AIR 1973 Guj 131 Gujarat High Court, he would contend that in absence of co- owners, the
present plaintiffs are not entitled to maintain a suit for recovery of possession. Referring to para 11
of the said judgment, he would contend that the present plaintiffs are precluded from claiming that
they are the exclusive owners of the lease property and therefore, the present quit notice issued by
the plaintiffs asserting absolute title is therefore not sufficient to determine the lease. It is in this
background, he would vehemently argue and contend before this Court that there is no valid
termination and therefore, the ejectment suit is not at all maintainable.
16. To counter the claim made by the plaintiffs in the light of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble
Apex Court in the case of India Umbrella Manufacturing Co. (supra), he would point out that the
principles laid down by the Apex Court in the judgment cited supra are not at all applicable to the
present case on hand. Referring to para 6 of the very same judgment, he would contend that the
concept of implied agency cannot be applied to the present case. Referring to the facts of this case,
he would contend that in the said case, the suit was filed by two co-owners and one co-owner sold
his portion and therefore, it was an eviction under the Rent Act. The principles laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment cited supra are not at all applicable to the present case on hand
as the facts are totally different.
17. He would counter the contentions of plaintiffs by placing reliance on the judgment rendered by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sri Ram Pasricha vs. Jagannath and Others6. Taking this
Court through para 20 of the said judgment, he would contend that the action that can be brought in
against a tenant seeking eviction is permissible provided such an action is taken by all co-owners
and therefore, he would contend that plaintiffs are estopped from asserting absolute title and
therefore, he would contend that there is no locus standi to unilaterally terminate the lease. He AIR
1976 SC 2335 would conclude his arguments by contending that the subsequent developments on
the ground of expiry of lease period cannot be considered.
18. Heard learned Senior Counsel appearing for the plaintiffs and learned counsel appearing for the
defendants. Perused the pleadings as well as ocular and documentary evidence. The following points
would arise for consideration:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 8
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
1) Whether the finding of the Trial Court that lease hold rights in favour of
defendants created under the registered lease deed dated 04.03.1974 for a period of
25 years will not extinguish is palpably erroneous?
2) Whether the finding of the Trial Court that defendants have failed to prove that the
lease created under Ex.P-2 is extended in terms of declaration dated 01.09.1989
given by plaintiffs father namely V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu is palpably erroneous?
3) Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for a decree for possession on account of expiry
of lease period under Ex.P-2?
Re: Point No.1:
19. It is the specific case of the plaintiffs that their father namely V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu has
executed a registered lease deed dated 04.03.1974. The execution of registered lease deed in favour
of defendants is not in dispute. However, plaintiffs have raised a contention in the plaint that their
father had only life interest and therefore, have come up with the present suit by contending that on
account of death of their father V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu who died on 16.12.1992 would ultimately
determine the lease and the lease created under Ex.P-2 in favour of defendants stands terminated
and therefore, the plaintiffs contend that they are entitled to seek possession. To substantiate their
claim that their father had only life interest, no documents are produced. Even if Sudarsanam Naidu
had only life interest in the property in question, the death would not determine the lease in the
present case on hand as leasehold rights are created under the registered lease deed and the period
fixed under lease deed is 25 years with an option to seek extension for a further period of 5 years.
Therefore, the present plaintiffs who are claiming to be the legal heirs of V.P.Sudarsanam Naidu are
bound by the terms and recitals in the registered lease deed vide Ex.P-2. Therefore, the findings
recorded by the Trial Court while answering issue Nos.1 and 2 is in accordance with law and
therefore, would not warrant any interference at the hands of this Court. Accordingly, point No.1
formulated by this Court is answered in the negative.
Re: Point No.2:
20. The defendants are relying on Ex.D-3 which is alleged to have been written by the plaintiffs
father who has agreed to consider extension of lease period for a further period of 25 years. This
letter is dated 24.05.1989. The defendants claim that they are entitled for a further extension of 25
years and therefore, have placed reliance on the declaration alleged to have been given by the father
of the plaintiffs vide Ex.D-1 which is dated 01.09.1989. It would be useful to refer to the said
documents and the same is culled out as under:
"DECLARATION I, V.P.Sudarshana Naidu, S/o. Late Papiah Naidu aged 85 years
residing at 42, Lynton Street, Austin Town, Bangalore-560 047 do hereby solemnly
declare that, I have leased my property in No. 22-A, M.G. Road, now called Hotel
Ajanta to the Partners of Hotel Ajanta for a period of 25 years and few years of lease
period is left. I have been given to understand that the B.D.A. has ordered to credit a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 9
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
large amount as Betterment Fee for granting of permission for change of Land use for
construction of commercial building in Hotel Ajantha premises. The Partners of
Hotel Ajantha represented that the lease period left over is too short as such their
investing over the property may not be economical unless the lease period is agreed
to be extended. Hence after considering all the aspects, and in view of the fact that
the said land is not required for the use of our family, I hereby agree, promise and
declare that the present lease hold rights shall be extended after the expiry for a
further period of minimum Twenty Five Years on reasonable rent to be fixed after
mutual discussions. The Partners are requested to take up the development of the
property on this assurance if necessary by approaching the financial institutions for
loans. This option to continue the lease is not revocable.
All what is stated above is True.
Sd/-
(DECLARANT) Place: Bangalore Date: 01-09-1989"
21. It would be also useful for this Court to refer to the letter dated 24.05.1989 at Ex.D-3 written by
plaintiffs father addressed to the defendants. The same is culled out as under:
"BANGALORE, Date: 24th May, 1989 From, V.P.Sudarshana Naidu, No.42, Lynton
Street, Austin Town, Bangalore - 560047.
To, The Partner, Hotel Ajantha, No.22-A, M.G.Road, Bangalore-560001.
Dear Sir, I have seen the orders of Commissioner, B.D.A., requiring to deposit of Rs.
39,180/- as betterment fee for the grant of permission for change of land use for
construction of commercial building in Ajantha premises. I request that the amount
may be paid and conversion orders obtained. Since you say that the remaining lease
period is only for a short period and it will not be economical for you to invest, I
hereby agree that the extension of lease period will be considered on mutual
discussion at reasonable rent and we have no objection for continuance of the lease
for some more period, as may be necessary to make the project economical for a
period not less than 25 years.
Thanking you, Yours faithfully, Sd/-
(V.P.Sudarshana Naidu)"
22. Now the question that needs to be examined by this Court is whether defendants can assert
leasehold rights by placing reliance on Exs.D-1 and D-3. My answer in No. It is not in dispute that
the defendants acquired leasehold rights under Ex.P-2 which is a registered lease deed dated
04.03.1974 as per Ex.P-2. The defendants now contend that there is an extension of lease for a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 10
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
further period of 25 years on the basis of alleged declaration vide Ex.D-1. This Court is of the view
that the said declaration and letter would not in itself create any right in favour of defendants. In
order to give effect to the renewal of lease agreement, there has to be a registered document.
Therefore, I find some force in the submission made by the learned counsel for the plaintiffs. As
rightly pointed out by the learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs, a grant of renewal is a fresh
grant and therefore, the lessee cannot claim extension of lease on the basis of declaration which is
sought to be written on a plain paper. Such a declaration would not in itself create a fresh leasehold
rights nor would renew the existing leasehold rights. The judgment cited by the learned counsel for
the plaintiffs in the case of Hardesh Ores (P) Ltd. vs. Hede and Company7, the judgment rendered
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sri Ram Builders vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and Others8
as well as the judgment rendered in the case of State of U.P. and Others vs. Lalji Tandon (Dead)
Through LRs.9 are squarely applicable to the present case on hand.
23. Therefore, on meticulous examination of the covenants under the alleged declaration vide
Ex.D-1 and the letter written by plaintiff's father vide Ex.D-3, this Court is of the view that the
declaration is not an extension of lease. As (2007) 5 SCC 614 (2014) 14 SCC 102 (2004) 1 SCC 1
rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the plaintiffs, declaration vide Ex.D-1 and the letter
correspondence vide Ex.D-3 at the most can be taken as a promise to extend the lease. In law, the
said two documents vide Exs.D-1 and D-3 do not create any new lease. A new lease can be created
only by way of registered instrument. A mere declaration in no way can extend the lease for a further
period of 25 years as claimed by the defendants. Therefore, the finding recorded by the Trial Court
on issue No.5 and additional issue No.2 is in accordance with law and the said findings does not
warrant any interference at the hands of this Court. Accordingly, point No.2 is answered in the
negative.
Re: Point No.3:
24. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the defendants has set up a defence that suit for ejectment
is a premature suit and therefore, same is not maintainable as the lease under Ex.P-2 which
stipulates a period of 25 years clearly demonstrates that suit is premature and therefore, same is
liable to be dismissed. This defence is countered by learned counsel appearing for the plaintiffs. He
has placed reliance on the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Raghbinder
Singh vs. Bant Kaur and Others10. Placing reliance on the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex
Court, he would contend that in a case where question of suit being premature does not go to the
root of the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court is required to examine whether any irreparable
prejudice is caused to the defendant on account of such suit. Learned counsel for the plaintiffs has
placed reliance on para 22 of the judgment rendered in the case of Vithalbhai (P) Ltd. (supra), which
reads as under:
"22. We may now briefly sum up the correct position of law which is as follows:
A suit of a civil nature disclosing a cause of action even if filed before the date on
which the plaintiff became actually entitled to sue and claim the relief founded on
such cause of action is not to be necessarily dismissed for such reason. The question
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 11
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
of suit being premature does not go to the root of jurisdiction of the court; the court
entertaining such a suit and passing decree therein is not acting without jurisdiction
but it is in the judicial (2011) 1 SCC 106 discretion of the court to grant decree or not.
The court would examine whether any irreparable prejudice was caused to the
defendant on account of the suit having been filed a little before the date on which
the plaintiff's entitlement to relief became due and whether by granting the relief in
such suit a manifest injustice would be caused to the defendant. Taking into
consideration the explanation offered by the plaintiff for filing the suit before the date
of maturity of cause of action, the court may deny the plaintiff his costs or may make
such other order adjusting equities and satisfying the ends of justice as it may deem
fit in its discretion. The conduct of the parties and unmerited advantage to the
plaintiff or disadvantage amounting to prejudice to the defendant, if any, would be
relevant factors. A plea as to non maintainability of the suit on the ground of its being
premature should be promptly raised by the defendant and pressed for decision. It
will equally be the responsibility of the court to examine and promptly dispose of
such a plea. The plea may not be permitted to be raised at a belated stage of the suit.
However, the court shall not exercise its discretion in favour of decreeing a
premature suit in the following cases: (i) when there is a mandatory bar created by a
statute which disables the plaintiff from filing the suit on or before a particular date
or the occurrence of a particular event; (ii) when the institution of the suit before the
lapse of a particular time or occurrence of a particular event would have the effect of
defeating a public policy or public purpose; (iii) if such premature institution renders
the presentation itself patently void and the invalidity is incurable such as when it
goes to the root of the court's jurisdiction; and (iv) where the lis is not confined to
parties alone and affects and involves persons other than those arrayed as parties,
such as in an election petition which affects and involves the entire constituency. (See
Samar Singh v. Kedar Nath 13.) One more category of suits which may be added to
the above, is: where leave of the court or some authority is mandatorily required to be
obtained before the institution of the suit and was not so obtained."
25. Therefore, the principles enumerated in the above cited judgment clearly indicates that even if
suit for ejectment is filed before the date on which the plaintiffs entitlement to relief becomes due,
the Court is still vested with jurisdiction to decide the lis between the parties and grant appropriate
relief. On examination of the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, what emerges is that if
suit is premature, if it does not go to the root of the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court is vested with
judicial discretion to grant decree. However, the Court is required to examine whether any
irreparable prejudice would be caused to the defendant on account of the suit having been filed a
little before the date on which the plaintiff's entitlement to relief became due. The Court has to also
examine whether by granting the relief in such suit, the manifest injustice would be caused to the
defendant. The Court has to also examine the conduct of the parties and unmerited advantage to the
defendant if the suit were to be dismissed only on that count.
26. As contended by the defendants before this Court, the Court shall not exercise discretion in
favour of decreeing a premature suit in the following cases:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 12
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
(i) when there is a mandatory bar created by a statute which disables the plaintiff
from filing the suit on or before a particular date or the occurrence of a particular
event;
(ii) when the institution of the suit before the lapse of a particular time or occurrence
of a particular event would have the effect of defeating a public policy or public
purpose;
(iii) if such premature institution renders the presentation itself patently void and the
invalidity is incurable such as when it goes to the root of the court's jurisdiction; and
(iv) where the lis is not confined to parties alone and affects and involves persons
other than those arrayed as parties.
27. If these principles are examined, this Court would find that none of the ingredients cited supra
are found in the present case on hand. Though plaintiffs were not justified in filing a recovery suit
ignoring the recitals in Ex.P-2 which is a registered lease deed creating lease for a period of 25 years
which commences from 04.03.1974 and the lease was to expire on 01.03.1999, the quit notice on
02.02.1995 could not have determined the lease. Obviously, the suit which was filed on 09.08.1995
was a premature suit. Though the suit was found to be prematurely instituted by the landlord
seeking ejectment but from the records what emerges is defendants succeeded in squatting over the
property even after expiry of lease; the lease has expired on 01.03.1999. We are in 2022. Therefore,
the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment cited supra are squarely
applicable to the present case on hand. By instituting a premature suit, the plaintiffs have in fact
created a scenario which has virtually enabled the defendants to use the suit schedule premises for
which purpose it was leased. The defendants have continued to carry out their business even after
expiry of lease. Therefore, no prejudice is caused to the defendants. On the contrary, manifest
injustice is meted out to the plaintiffs on account of one wrong move at the instance of the plaintiffs
in filing a premature ejectment suit.
28. Therefore, at this juncture, if the plea/defence set up by defendants is accepted, it would clearly
amount to abuse of process. The lease in favour of defendants stood determined in the year 1999.
Therefore, this Court is of the view that merely because ejectment suit was a premature suit, that
does not go to the root of the jurisdiction of the Court and therefore, the Court entertaining such a
suit and passing decree therein is not acting without jurisdiction. The conduct of the parties and
unmerited advantage to the defendants has to be taken note of by this Court. Therefore, having
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is bound to exercise judicial discretion
in granting a decree for eviction in favour of the plaintiffs. If the suit was premature as on the date of
filing of the suit but, however, pending consideration of suit, if the lease period has expired, the suit
though may be termed as 'premature', yet, cannot per se be dismissed to be presented on a future
date. There is no universal rule to the above effect. The Court must weigh and balance several
competing factors that are required to be considered including the question as to whether any useful
purpose would be served by dismissing the suit as premature.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 13
S Gopal Krishna vs Hotel Ajantha Rep By Its Managing on 25 July, 2022
29. It is in this background, this Court is not inclined to accept the defence set up by the defendants.
Respect for law is one of the cardinal principle for effective operation of the constitution law. The
principle of justice is ingrained in our conscience and faith of the people in efficacy of judicial
process needs to be sustained. Therefore, to do substantial justice, it is the primary duty and highest
responsibility of the Court to advance substantial justice in favour of deserving litigants.
Accordingly, point No.3 is answered in the affirmative.
30. For the reasons stated supra, I pass the following:
ORDER
i) The appeal filed by the plaintiffs in RFA.No.262/2008 is allowed whereas the
appeal filed by the defendants in RFA.No.120/2008 is dismissed. Consequently, suit
is decreed with cost;
ii) The plaintiffs are entitled for damages from 01.03.1999 till handing over of vacant
possession.
Sd/-
JUDGE CA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124209065/ 14
