S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29
November, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.5373 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 29-11-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.5373 of 2015
And
MP Nos.1 and 2 of 2015
S.Palani .. Petitioner
vs.
1.Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation Ltd.,
Represented by its Chairman/Managing Director,
677, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002.
2.The Junior Engineer,
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board/
Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation Ltd.,
Marakkanam,
Villupuram District.
3.The Assistant Audit Officer,
Audit Party/No.3/Audit Branch,
TANGEDCO,
Villupuram Region,
Villupuram – 605 602. .. Respondents
1/16
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 1
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
(cid:12) WP No.5373 of 2015
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus,
calling for the records of the second respondent made in
Ka.No.JE/OM/Marakkanam/D-Audit/A No.166 dated 22.11.2014 and quash
the same consequently direct the respondents to restore the service
connection of the petitioner in SC No.462-016-3439.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Thirumavalavan
For Respondents : Mr.L.Jai Venkatesh,
Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO.
ORDER
The demand notice dated 22.11.2014, issued by the second respondent on audit objections, is under
challenge in the present writ petition.
2. The petitioner was asked to pay the demanded amount, within a period of 15 days from the date of
issuance of the demand notice.
3. The petitioner owned several acres of land in Kakapalayam, Marakkanam, Tindivanam Taluk,
wherein he is conducting Aquaculture. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4. The respondents are providing electricity service connection to the Farm in SC No.462-016-3439
under the Tariff Head of LN3B. The petitioner states that he has been remitting the current
consumption charges.
5. While-so, the impugned demand notice has been issued by the second respondent based on audit
objections.
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner made a submission that the petitioner has no other remedy.
Thus, the petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
7. The leaned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Mechanism constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code is
not applicable in respect of demand notice issued by the second respondent based on the audit
objections.
8. It is further referred that under the Regulations for Consumer https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Grievance Redressal on the Electricity Ombudsman, the Forum constituted cannot adjudicate the
issues relating to demand notice on audit objections. Under the said Regulation, unauthorised use of
electricity as detailed under Section 126 and offences and penalties as detailed under Sections 135 to
141 of the Electricity Act, 2003, are excluded from the purview of this Forum. Therefore, the Forum
constituted is not competent to entertain an application with reference to the grievances raised by
the petitioner in the present writ petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 2
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
9. The learned Standing Counsel, appearing on behalf of the TANGEDCO, disputed the said ground
by stating that the Forum constituted under the Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum and Electricity Ombudsman is empowered to adjudicate certain nature of disputes. In
respect of consumer grievance redressal mechanism provided under the Regulation 11 of the Tamil
Nadu Electricity Supply Code Forum is empowered to adjudicate the issues as contemplated under
the said Regulations. Therefore, the petitioner has to approach the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum provided under Regulation 18 of the Tamil https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Nadu
Electricity Supply Code.
10. This Court has to consider the scope of Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code at the first instance.
11. Regulation 2(g) defines 'Consumer' means “any person who is supplied with electricity for his
own use by a Licensee, the Government or by any other person engaged in the business of supplying
electricity to the public under the Act or any other law for the time being in force and includes any
person whose premises are for the time being connected for the purpose of receiving electricity with
the works of a Licensee, the Government or such other person, as the case may be”.
12. Regulation 2(pp) defines “ 'Person' shall include any company or body corporate or association
or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or artificial jurisdical person”.
13. Regulation 2(r) denotes “ 'Supply', in relation to electricity, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
means the sale of electricity to a Licensee or Consumer”.
14. Chapter II of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code deals with electricity charges, billing and
recovery.
15. Regulation 3 stipulates 'Categories of supply'. Regulation 4 deals with 'charges recoverable by the
Licensee'. Regulation 5 speaks about the 'miscellaneous charges'. Regulation 6 provides 'Minimum
charges'. Regulation 7 denotes 'Installation of Meter'. Regulation 8 stipulates 'Meter reading, billing
and intervals'. Regulation 9 contemplates 'Meter readings when there is changes in sanctioned
demand, etc.'. Regulation 10 deals with 'Inaccessibility of meter for reading'. Regulation 11 speaks
about 'Assessment of billing in cases where there is no meter or meter is defective'. Regulation 12
denotes 'Errors in billing'. Regulation 13 speaks about 'Servicing of bills'. Regulation 14
contemplates 'Due dates and notice periods'. Regulation 15 speaks about 'Mode of payment'.
Regulation 16 contemplates 'Option to pay charges in advance'. Regulation 17 denotes 'Agreement
with respect to supply : Issues on recovery of charges. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Regulation
18 speaks about 'Consumer Grievance Redressal'.
16. Regulation 18 contemplates “ 'Consumer Grievance Redressal'.--All grievances of the consumers,
relating to the provisions under Regulations 3 to 17 of this Code shall be referred by the consumer to
the respective Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under the Act”.
17. Therefore, in respect of Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum is constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. As per the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 3
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
above provision, all grievances of the consumers relating to the provisions under Regulations 3 to 17
of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code shall be referred by the consumer to the respective
Forum. Therefore, any consumer aggrieved from and out of the actions initiated, which all are
falling under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, more specifically, under Regulations 3 to 17
are entertainable by Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under Regulation 18 of the
Tamil Nadu Electricity https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Supply Code.
18. Providing of electricity service connection, supply of electricity meter reading, bills, defects,
non-payment recovery, all these aspects are falling under Regulations 3 to 17 of the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code.
19. In the present case, the case of the petitioner is that the demand notice falls under Regulation 11
i.e., 'Assessment of billing in cases where there is no meter or meter is defective'. In the case of the
petitioner, audit objection was raised in respect of the meter reading and the consumption charges
are determined by the Authorities under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. Therefore, the
petitioner is at liberty to approach the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under
Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
20. The contention of the petitioner that the Forum created under Regulations for Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forum and Electricity https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Ombudsman is under
different context and therefore, the Forum created under the above Regulations may not be
applicable in the case of the petitioner. In the case where the Forum is created under the above
Notification dated 08.01.2004, the kind of grievances are explained in Regulation 5. Therefore,
those Regulations referred is inapplicable with reference to the case of the petitioner, as the
petitioner's case falls under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code and more specifically, the
impugned demand notice was issued by exercising the powers under the Tamil Nadu Electricity
Supply Code. Each case is to be considered with reference to the facts and circumstances along with
the Regulations applicable.
21. The demand notice when issued based on the audit objections on the ground that the meter was
defective, the case falls under Regulation 11 and therefore, the petitioner has to approach the
Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code and not under the other Regulations.
22. Two different Regulations provide redressal mechanisms https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and
the each such Forum or mechanism constituted under the Regulation must entertain the grievances
of the consumer in respect of the powers conferred on such Forums. It is unnecessary to raise
confusion in such matters, when the subject matters of adjudication are enumerated in the
Regulation itself. In the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, the subject matters are defined and
Regulation 18 also stipulates that the grievances falling under Regulations 3 to 17 shall be
adjudicated before the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under Regulation 18 of
the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. This being the scope of the provisions, the petitioner is
bound to exhaust the alternate remedy provided under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 4
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
23. The learned counsel for the petitioner states that when the demand is prima facie illegal, the writ
petition is entertainable. In this regard, it is to be noted that the demand notice is the initiation of
action. Any demand notice or show cause notice is issued based on certain determination or based
on certain allegations. Demand notice is issued by the Competent Authorities by determining
certain issues in accordance with https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the Statute or Regulations and
communicate the decision to the person concerned, who in turn is at liberty to accept the demand or
deny the demand and prefer an appeal before the Competent Appellate Authority or the mechanism
created under the Statute. Thus the demand notices or show cause notices are issued in different
context. The difference between demand notice and show cause notice is that show cause notice is
issued based on certain allegations asking the noticee to submit his explanations in respect of the
allegations. It is an opportunity provided otherwise. Demand notice is a notice where the Competent
Authority decides certain issues or determine the charges or otherwise based on the provisions of
the Act or the Rules or based on certain facts and such determination of issues are communicated to
the persons concerned, asking his response to the demand. It is left open to the person concerned
either to comply with the demand or raise an objection by approaching the Appellate Authority or
the Competent Forum created under the Act.
24. Let us now consider whether the High Courts can adjudicate such disputed issues. This Court is
of an unambiguous opinion https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis that based on certain defective meter,
certain charges are determined. Whether the meter was defective or not, whether the reading made
by the Authorities are proper or improper, whether the petitioner has not informed the defects in
the meter to the Authorities or not and all the factors, which all are involved in these issues are to be
ascertained for the purpose of forming an opinion and the High Court cannot conduct such an
elaborate enquiry in the writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
25. The power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to scrutinise the
processes through which a decision taken by the Authorities in consonance with the provisions of
the Law, but not the decision itself. Thus, the High Courts are insisting for exhausting the alternate
remedy as the findings of the Appellate Authority or the Forum is of greater assistance for the
purpose of exercise of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in an effective
manner. In the event of venturing into the original adjudication merely based on the affidavit and
counter-affidavit filed in the writ petition, no doubt there is a possibility of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis omission, commission, error or otherwise, which would cause
prejudice to either of the parties.
26. Therefore, in all circumstances, the High Court is expected to entertain the writ petition after
exhausting the statutory remedies provided under the Act or the Rules or Regulations in order to
provide complete justice. Exhausting the statutory remedies are of paramount importance. This
exactly is the reason for multiplicity of proceedings. If the writ petitions are entertained in a routine
manner against all such show cause notices and demand notices, then thereafter a direction is
issued and further writ petition is filed and almost 3 to 4 writ petitions are filed, which is taking
years together for the litigants to get justice from the Court of Law, which really causes mental agony
to the litigants. Thus, the High Court is expected to exercise restrain in entertaining such writ
petitions, wherein the statutory remedies are provided and the very legislative intention for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 5
S.Palani vs Tamil Nadu Generation And Distribution on 29 November, 2021
providing such statutory remedies are to ensure that the parties adjudicate the issues and resolve
the disputes through such mechanisms. The purpose and object of such remedies can never be
undermined and the High Courts https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis must allow such Authorities to
exercise their powers contemplated under the provisions of the Act or the Rules or Regulations.
27. This being the principles to be followed, this Court is of an opinion that the petitioner has to
adjudicate all such disputed issues before the Competent Forum created under the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code in the manner prescribed. Accordingly, the petitioner is at liberty to
approach the Forum and in the event of approaching the Forum, the period during which the writ
petition was pending before the High Court is to be taken into consideration for the purpose of
condoning the delay if any petition to condone the delay is filed by the petitioner and the issues
raised between the parties are to be considered on merits and in accordance with law and as
expeditiously as possible.
28. With the abovesaid observations, the writ petition stands dismissed. However, there shall be no
order as to costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
29-11-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1.The Chairman/Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Ltd.,
677, Anna Salai, Chennai – 600 002.
2.The Junior Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board/ Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation Ltd., Marakkanam, Villupuram District.
3.The Assistant Audit Officer, Audit Party/No.3/Audit Branch, TANGEDCO, Villupuram Region,
Villupuram – 605 602.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 5373 of 2015 29-11-2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118221521/ 6
