S.Ranjit Singh vs Manipur Dev Society & 2 Ors on 6 December, 2023
S.Ranjit Singh vs Manipur Dev Society & 2 Ors on 6 December,
2023
Author: A.Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A.Guneshwar Sharma
46
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No.618 of 2023
S.Ranjit Singh ... Petitioner
-Versus-
Manipur Dev Society & 2 Ors ... Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.GUNESHWAR SHARMA 06.12.2023 Heard Mr.Ch.Ngongo,
learned senior counsel assisted by Ms.Ch.Reena, learned counsel for the petitioner. Mr.Albert
Keisham, learned counsel for respondent No.1 and 2 and Mr.Phungyo Zinkhai, learned Dy
Government Advocate for respondent No.3.
Mr.Ch.Ngongo, learned senior counsel submits that the petitioner, retired on 31.01.2023 on
attaining the age of superannuation and he was working as Administrative Officer in the Manipur
Development Society (respondent No.1). It is stated that the petitioner was one of the accused in a
case investigated by the CBI being case No.RC-TST-2019-011 dt 20.11.2019 against the official of the
MDS including the then Chief Minister and other officials. Vide order dated 27.01.2023 the
petitioner was put under suspension and vide order dated 19.01.2023 passed by this Court in WP(C)
No.11 of 2023 the suspension of the petitioner was quashed and directed to reinstate the petitioner
back in service forthwith in terms of Rule 10(6) and (7) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. Thereafter the
petitioner was reinstated in service and his pension was not released by the respondent No.1. The
petitioner submitted representations dated 5.7.2023 31.07.2023 for releasing his retirement
benefits. Since, no action is taken upon the representations, the petitioner approached this court by
way of the present writ petition inter alia, praying for a direction to the respondents to release the
retirement benefit including the pensionary, EPF and other benefits.
This Court issued Notice on 5.9.2023. However, the respondents have not filed counter affidavit and
the instant matter is heard on merit.
During course of hearing, Mr.Albert Keisham, learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 and 2 submits
that no counter is required and respondent Nos.1 and 2 are in the process of preparation necessary
documents for releasing provisional pension under Rule 69 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
Learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 and 2 further draws attention of this Court to the provisions
of clause (3) of the Rule 69 of the CCS (Pension) Rules stating that no gratuity will be paid to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144141560/ 1
S.Ranjit Singh vs Manipur Dev Society & 2 Ors on 6 December, 2023
petitioner until conclusion of the criminal proceedings pending against him. It is stated that the
relevant Service Record of the petitioner is in the custody of the CBI and the respondent Nos.1 and 2
are facing problem due to insufficient document.
Mr.Ch.Ngongo, learned senior counsel undertakes that he will furnish necessary documents.
Mr.Albert Keisham, learned counsel for the respondent relies on a judgment of the Kerala High
Court in the case of State of Kerala & Ors Vs Sugunan V: 2019 Legal Eagle (KER) 603:
2019 (2) KerLJ 302 wherein it is held that the entire retiral benefit cannot be granted
to the retired government servant during pendency of the criminal case in Vigilance
Court. Treating parity with the present case, the respondents proposed to grant only
provisional pension without gratuity as provided in Rule 69 (c) of the CCS (Pension)
Rules.
Mr.Ch.Ngongo, learned counsel for the petitioner points out that no criminal case is
pending against the petitioner before any Court. It is only an FIR under investigation
of the CBI. Hence, clause (3) of Rule 69 of the CCS (Pension) Rules will not be
applicable.
Mr.Phungyo Zinkhai, learned Government Advocate submits that the issue is
between the petitioner and the respondent Nos.1 and 2, the State respondent has no
role and this Court may pass appropriate order.
This Court considered the materials on record and submissions made by the parties
at the Bar. It will be proper to consider the provisions of Section 69 of the CCS
(Pension) Rules, 1972 and the same is reproduced herein below.
"69. Provisional pension where departmental or judicial proceedings may be pending
(1) (a) In respect of a Government servant referred to in sub-rule (4) of Rule 9, the
Accounts Officer shall authorize the provisional pension equal to the maximum
pension which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service up to the
date of retirement of the Government servant, or if he was under suspension on the
date of retirement up to the date immediately preceding the date on which he was
placed under suspension.
(b) the provisional pension shall be authorized by the Accounts Officer during the
period commencing from the date of retirement up to and including the date on
which after the conclusion of departmental or judicial proceedings, final orders are
passed by the Competent Authority.
© No gratuity shall be paid to the Government servant until the conclusion of the departmental or
judicial proceedings and issue of final orders thereon:"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144141560/ 2
S.Ranjit Singh vs Manipur Dev Society & 2 Ors on 6 December, 2023
On plain reading of Rule 69, it is clear that during pendency of the departmental or
judicial proceeding it is permitted to grant provisional pension to the retired
government employee. Admittedly, the departmental proceeding has been quashed
by the order of this Court and it is only a charge sheet/final report under Section 183
of the CPC has not been filed by the CBI.
It is settled proposition of law that a criminal proceeding is initiated upon taking
cognizance by a competent Court upon filing of the final report/charge sheet by the
investigation. In the present case, the matter is still under investigation and final
report/charge sheet as contemplated under Section 173 is yet to be filed. Hence, no
judicial proceeding is pending against the petitioner before any competent criminal
court. Admittedly, a criminal investigation is pending against the petitioner and this
Court is of the view that provisions of Section (c) of Rule 69 of the CCS (Pension)
Rules will not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 are directed to
release the pensionary benefit including gratuity of the petitioner upon submission of
requisite paper, if any, within two months of submission of additional documents, if
any, by the petitioner. It is also clarified that the respondent Nos.1 and 2 may request
the CBI for providing necessary documents with respect to the preparation of
Pension Payment Authority and other benefits for the petitioner. On such request,
the CBI is also directed to prepare the same within a period of one month.
With these observations, the writ petition is disposed of. No cost.
Furnish a copy of this order to learned counsel appearing for the parties.
JUDGE Priyojit RAJKUMAR Digitally signed by RAJKUMAR PRIYOJIT PRIYOJIT
SINGH Date: 2023.12.08 SINGH 10:04:11 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144141560/ 3
