S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9
December, 2021
Author: M.Sundar
Bench: M.Sundar
W.P.(MD)No.4415 of 2015
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 09.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
W.P.(MD)No.4415 of 2015
and
M.P(MD).No.1 of 2015
S.Sakthivel Raja : Petitioner
Vs.
1. The Government of Tamil Nadu,
Rep. by Chief Secretary to the Government,
Secretariat, Chennai – 600 009.
2. The Secretary to Government,
Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowment
Department,
Secretariat, Chennai – 600 009.
3. The Commissioner,
Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments,
Chennai – 600 034.
4. The President,
Madapuram Mukuntha Nadar Uravinmurai Nala Sangam,
(Registered No.158/12), Madapuram,
Thiruppuvanam Post and Taluk, Sivagangai District. : Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India for issuance of Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/14
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.4415 of 2015
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 1
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
dispose my representation dated 22.01.2015 for seeking administration
and maintenance of the Madapuram Arulmigu Adaikalam Katha Iyyanar
and Arulmigu Bathrakaliyamman Temple, Madapuram, Sivagangai
District in favour of the Madapuram Mukuntha Nadar community people
as per the customary rights in the temple within time as stipulated by this
Court.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Karthik
For Respondents : Mr.A.Baskaran,
Additional Government Pleader
for R1 to R3
Mr.S.Maruthupandian
for Mr.R.Mathiyalagan for R4
ORDER
******************** Captioned main writ petition is more than half a decade old in this Court. It is
more than six years old as it was filed on 24.03.2015 and it was admitted on 26.03.2015. The order
of admission made on 26.03.2015 reads as follows:
'Admit. Notice'
2. Today, Mr.S.Karthik, learned counsel on record for the lone writ petitioner, Mr.A.Baskaran,
learned Additional Government Pleader on behalf of respondents 1 to 3 (official respondents) and
Mr.S.Maruthupandian, learned counsel representing Mr.R.Mathiyalagan,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis learned counsel for fourth respondent (private respondent) are
before me. To be noted, the name of co-counsel for fourth respondent Mr.M.Ramesh stands deleted
as learned counsel has since been appointed as a State counsel.
3. The prayer in the captioned main writ petition is fairly simple as it seeks disposal of 'writ
petitioner's representation dated 22.01.2015' (hereinafter referred to as 'said representation' for the
sake of convenience and clarity) pertaining to a Temple which goes by the name 'Madapuram
Arulmigu Adaikalam Katha Iyyanar and Arulmigu Bathrakaliyamman Temple', situate in
Madapuram, Sivagangai District (hereinafter referred to as 'said Temple' for the sake of convenience
and clarity). In other words, captioned writ petition seeks to mandamus the respondents to dispose
of said representation.
4. The said representation is at page 62 of the typed set of papers and it runs up to page 93. In other
words, it is a 32 page representation. This verbose representation is addressed to the Chief Secretary
of the Government of Tamil Nadu and it also describes the Commissioner and Secretary of the
'Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Department' (which shall hereinafter referred to as 'TNHR&CE Dept' for the sake of convenience
and clarity) as respondents 1 and 2, respectively. The writ petitioner has described himself not only
as a petitioner but as an appellant (Bky; KiwaPl;L kDjhuh;). The first and second pages of said
representation are as follows:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 2
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
5. Therefore, what has been described as a representation i.e., said representation is inter alia an
appeal qua order of appointment of Executive Officer for said Temple under Section 45 of 'the Tamil
Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959)'
[hereinafter referred to as 'TNHR&CE Act' for the sake of convenience and clarity].
6. Learned counsel for writ petitioner, adverting to said representation in the case file submits that
said Temple is being managed by members of a particular community who have gathered
themselves to form a Sangam which goes by the name 'Madapuram Mukuntha Nadar Uravinmurai
Nala Sangam' (hereinafter referred to as 'said Sangam' for the sake of convenience and clarity) and it
is registered as a Society vide registration No.158/12. Learned counsel also submits that the writ
petitioner is one of the members of said Sangam. To be noted President of said Sangam has been
arrayed as fourth respondent in the case on hand.
7. Learned counsel submits that said Temple, has not been included in any of the lists, i.e., lists
under Section 46 of TNHR&CE Act and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis learned counsel goes on to
submit that said Temple is therefore not a public Temple. I would first deal with this aspect of the
matter before dealing with the prayer in the captioned writ petition.
8. The scheme of TNHR&CE Act is such that a 'religious institution' within the meaning of Section
6(18) includes a 'temple' within the meaning of Section 6(20) and therefore a temple per se comes
within the sweep of TNHR&CE Act, the sequitur is it becomes a public temple subject only to
exemption (if any) granted by the Government under Section 4 of TNHR&CE Act or a declaration
that it is a private temple. Absent exemption under Section 4 by the Government/declaration that it
is a private temple every temple (with the exception of jain religious institutions) becomes a public
temple. As far as the list under Section 46 is concerned, that is the list which talks about listing
temples depending on the income which a temple generates. Section 46 reads as follows:
'[46. Commissioner to publish list of certain institutions.— The Commissioner shall
publish, in the prescribed manner, a list of the religious institutions whose annual
income, as calculated for the purposes of the levy of contribution under sub-section
(1) of section 92,—
(i) is not less than ten thousand rupees but is less than two
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis lakh rupees ;
(ii) is not less than two lakh rupees but is less than ten lakh rupees ;
(iii) is not less than ten lakhs rupees, and may, from time to time, modify such list in
the prescribed manner :
Provided that the Commissioner shall not remove any institution from such list
unless its annual income calculated as aforesaid has fallen below ten thousand rupees
for three consecutive years: Provided further that if the annual income of any such
institution calculated as aforesaid has–
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 3
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
(a) exceeded the limits specified in clause (i) and (ii); or
(b) fallen below the limits specified in clause (ii) or clause (iii), for three consecutive
years, the Commissioner may alter the classification assigned to such institution in
the list and enter the same under the appropriate classification in the said list.] '
9. A perusal of plain language of Section 46 makes it clear that a temple not been included in the
lists or a non-listed temple only means that the income of the said Temple is less than INR 10,000/-
per annum. That does not mean that said temple does not come within the sweep of TNHR&CE Act
within the meaning of Sub-section (3) of Section 1 of TNHR&CE Act. In my considered view, this
position of law is very clear. To put it differently, absent exemption under Section 4 or a declaratory
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis decree that it is a private temple, said Temple is obviously a public
temple.
10. In the aforesaid backdrop, I carefully examined the representation in the context of the
submissions made by learned State counsel. Learned State counsel made two main points and those
two main points are as follows:
1. Executive Officer has been appointed qua said Temple under Section 45 of
TNHR&CE Act and Executive Officer is in administration of said Temple. That order
has not been assailed but merely a representation has been sent;
2. The fourth respondent i.e., said Sangam has not given any representation though
the writ petitioner is a member of the said Sangam. To be noted, this point is not
disputed by learned counsel for fourth respondent.
11. By way of reply, learned counsel for writ petitioner reiterated the submissions made in his
opening arguments. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
12. On a careful consideration of the rival submissions, I am not inclined to accede to the prayer in
the captioned main writ petition and the reasons are as follows:
(a) A person having interest is an expression which is defined qua TNHR&CE Act. To
be precise, it is defined under Sub-section (15) of Section 6 which reads as follows:
'(15) “person having interest” means—
(a) in the case of a math, a disciple of the math or a person of the religious persuasion
to which the math belongs;
(b) in the case of a temple, a person who is entitled to attend at or is in the habit of
attending the performance of worship or service in the temple, or who is entitled to
partake or is in the habit of partaking in the benefit of the distribution of gifts thereat;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 4
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
(c) in the case of a specific endowment, a person who is entitled to attend at or is in
the habit of attending the performance of the service or charity, or who is entitled to
partake or is in the habit of partaking in the benefit of the charity;
(d) in case of samadhi, brindhavan or any other institution established or maintained
for a religious purpose, a person who is entitled to attend at or is in the habit of
attending the performance of worship or service in such religious institution, or who
is entiled to partake or in the habit of partaking in the benefit of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis distribution of gifts thereat;' There is nothing to
demonstrate that the writ petitioner qualifies as a person having interest qua said
Temple;
(b) De hors the previous reason, an individual to seek a mandamus should have a
legal right. This principle has been well entrenched in our jurisprudence vide
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Praga Tools case law [Praga Tools
Corporation Vs. Imanual and others reported in AIR 1969 SC 1306] way back in 1969.
Absent legal right there cannot be a prayer for mandamus;
(c) The TNHR&CE Act has been repeatedly held (by this Court) to be a self-contained
code. There is a self-
contained Chapter V of TNHR&CE Act captioned inquiry, containing a mechanism for such
situations and if at all if that be so, it was well open to the writ petitioner or fourth
respondent-Sangam to invoke an appropriate provision and seek settling of a scheme. If this route is
taken, such application has to be tested on its own merits and in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
accordance with law That having not been done, a representation to the Chief Secretary to
Government of Tamil Nadu more so describing the writ petitioner as an appellant and arraying the
Commissioner and Secretary of TNHR&CE Dept as respondents 1 and 2 can hardly pass muster as
an innocuous representation which can be considered.
13. In the light of the discussion thus far, I am of the considered view that the captioned writ petition
fails and therefore the same is dismissed. Consequently, connected MP is also dismissed.
14. It is made clear that any legal avenue available to writ petitioner or fourth respondent can well
be pursued and if that be so, this order will neither impede nor serve as an impetus in such
proceedings. There shall be no order as to costs.
09.12.2021 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes / No pkn https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1. The Chief Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu, Secretariat, Chennai – 600 009.
2. The Secretary to Government, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowment Department,
Secretariat, Chennai – 600 009.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 5
S.Sakthivel Raja vs The Government Of Tamil Nadu on 9 December, 2021
3. The Commissioner, Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, Chennai – 600 034.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis M.SUNDAR., J.
pkn 09.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121409183/ 6
