Sachin Yadav@ Deva vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Sachin Yadav@ Deva vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44860
Court No. - 47
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 28413 of 2024
Applicant :- Sachin Yadav@ Deva
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Lal Bahadur Yadav
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Rejoinder affidavit filed today is taken on record.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant as well as the learned AGA for the State and perused the
material placed on record.
The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of the applicant, Sachin Yadav @ Deva with a
prayer to release him on bail in Case Crime No. 59 of 2024, under Section 307 IPC and 3/25 Arms
Act, Police Station Sikrara, District- Jaunpur, during pendency of trial.
The implication of applicant is under Section 307 I.P.C. Causing injury or not causing the same is
not relevant. Intention to cause the murder is relevant. Intention of the applicant was only to evade
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33615919/ 1
Sachin Yadav@ Deva vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
arrest by the police and they fired only to frighten the police. For implication under Section 307
I.P.C., intention forms necessary ingredient of offence in any particular case. It necessarily precedes
the act and should be discernible from the allegations on record, which is lacking in this case. The
applicant is languishing in jail since 12.3.2024. In case he is enlarged on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
Per contra learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail of the applicant by contending that the
innocence of the applicant cannot be adjudged at pre trial stage, therefore, he does not deserves any
indulgence. In case the applicant is released on bail he will again indulge in similar activities and
will misuse the liberty of bail.
Having considered the submissions of the parties noted above, finding force in the submissions
made by the learned counsel for the applicant; keeping in view uncertainty regarding conclusion of
trial; one sided investigation by police, ignoring the case of accused side; applicant being under-trial
having fundamental right to speedy; larger mandate of the Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
considering the dictum of Apex Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of Enforcement,
2024 LawSuit (SC) 677, considering 5-6 times overcrowding in jails over and above their capacity by
under trials and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, let the applicant involved
in the aforesaid crime be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in
the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the following conditions that :-
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or threaten the witnesses.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed,
either personally or as directed by the Court. In case of his absence, without sufficient
cause, the Trial Court may proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian
Penal Code.
(iv) In case the applicant misuse the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure
his presence, proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicants fail
to appear before the Court on the date fixed in such proclamation then the Trial
Court shall initiate proceedings against him in accordance with law under Section
174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(v) The applicant shall remain present in person before the Trial Court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33615919/ 2
Sachin Yadav@ Deva vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
with law.
In case, of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned before
the bonds are accepted.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Ruchi Agrahari
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33615919/ 3
