Sai Lakshmi vs The Secretary To Government on 8 December, 2021
Sai Lakshmi vs The Secretary To Government on 8 December,
2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.34770 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 08-12-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.34770 of 2015
Sai Lakshmi .. Petitioner
vs.
1.The Secretary to Government,
Home Department,
Fort St. George,
Chennai – 600 009.
2.The Commissioner of Police,
Greater Chennai,
Vepery,
Chennai.
3.The Joint Commissioner of Police,
West Zone,
Office of Commissioner of Police,
Vepery,
Chennai.
4.The Deputy Commissioner of Police,
Ambattur District,
Chennai.
1/10
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107533344/ 1
Sai Lakshmi vs The Secretary To Government on 8 December, 2021
(cid:12) WP No.34770 of 2015
5.Mr.Miller .. Respondents
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the second
respondent to initiate disciplinary/departmental action as against the fifth
respondent on petitioner's representation dated 31.08.2015.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Shrenik Raj
For Respondents-1 to 4 : Mr.C.Sathish,
Government Advocate.
For Respondent-5 : No Appearance
ORDER
The Writ of Mandamus has been instituted to direct the second respondent-The Commissioner of
Police, Vepery, to initiate disciplinary/ departmental action against the fifth respondent based on
the representation submitted by the petitioner on 31.08.2015.
2. The representation dated 31.08.2015 reveals that the husband of the petitioner one
Mr.Loganathan was threatened by the Police and a false case has been registered against the
husband of the petitioner. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3. The petitioner states that the Inspector of Police, K-4 Anna Nagar Police Station, Chennai
commenced enquiry and registered a false case against the husband of the petitioner and the
narration of facts in the complaint would reveal that there were several disputes in Real Estate
Business and based on the complaint, actions were taken against the husband of the petitioner.
4. Those facts and the allegations against the Police Officials are absolutely not in connection with
the criminal case. This Court do not find any excessiveness in the matter of enquiry or treating the
husband of the petitioner. No doubt, the Police excessiveness is actionable. However, dealing with
an accused person or conducting investigation or interrogation and the procedures followed at no
circumstances be interfered with as the Criminal Law System require such an interrogation by the
Police Authorities in a free and fair manner. Thus all actions regarding investigation and
interrogation cannot be found fault with.
5. In the event of entertaining such writ petition against the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Police
Officials, undoubtedly, the Public Servants cannot perform their duties effectively and efficiently. In
every case, the accused person will raise an allegation that the Police Officers have registered false
case and they have been treated in a different manner, while conducting investigation or
interrogation. Thus, all such allegations are to be gone into carefully, and not in a routine manner,
where the Court can form an opinion that the Police Officers have committed the act of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107533344/ 2
Sai Lakshmi vs The Secretary To Government on 8 December, 2021
excessiveness.
6. Perusal of the complaint itself reveals that there are lot of disputes in the matter of Real Estate
Business and the husband of the petitioner also had involved in a murder case and under those
circumstances, filing of the writ petition by the wife of the accused person is to be construed as
'threatening litigation' to the Public Officials from performing their duties efficiently.
7. The counter-affidavit filed by the fifth respondent also reveals many facts and the circumstances
and it is stated that the husband of the petitioner had already involved in a murder case registered
by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Inspector of Police in T-5 Thiruverkadu Police Station in
Crime No.837/2012 under Sections 341, 324 and 302 IPC. In the said case, totally 17 accused
including Thiru Sreenivasan and Tmt.Kavitha and Thiru Vimalraj (who were previously partners in
the Real Estate Business) were entered into a criminal conspiracy and planned to murder one Thiru
Govindaraj, who was also previously a partner in the Real Estate Business run by Thiru Sreenivasan,
Tmt.Kavitha and Thiru Vimalraj.
8. The case has been charged and pending trial before the Additional Sessions Court No.II,
Poonamallee, Chennai in S.C.No.76 of 2017. Apart from the murder case, the husband of the
petitioner has also involved in K-4 Anna Nagar Police Station in Crime No.551/2015 under Sections
448, 294(b) and 506(i) IPC read with Section 34 IPC on 11.07.2015. The husband of the petitioner
also involved in a robbery case in T-5 Thiruverkadu Police Station in Crime No.879/2015 under
Sections 294(b), 323, 336, 392 and 506(ii) IPC. In the said case, on 24.08.2015, the husband of the
petitioner and his associate Thiru Vimalraj were arrested and remanded to judicial custody.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
9. This Court is of the considered opinion that filing of writ petitions against the Public Officials are
in an ascending order. In the event of investigation or interrogation of the accused by the Police
Officials and based on the registration of criminal case, some of the relatives of the accused are filing
the writ petition one way or the other and giving representation to the Commissioner of Police to
initiate action against the Subordinate Police Officials. Such practices can never be encouraged by
the High Courts and in the event of encouraging such affairs in the absence of any materials to
establish the same would certainly discourage the Police Officials from performing their duties and
responsibilities in an efficient manner.
10. Merely raising an allegation against the Police Officials are insufficient and it is for the Higher
Authorities to monitor such instances. No doubt, the Higher Authorities are bound to look into the
nature of the complaint and take decision based on the facts and circumstances of each case.
However, filing the writ petition and seeking directions to initiate https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
disciplinary/departmental proceedings cannot be entertained by this Court in a routine manner.
11. The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the CCTV footage and made a submission that
the husband of the petitioner was very much in the Office on the date and time of the incident of
robbery. However, merely the CCTV footage cannot be trusted upon for the purpose of forming an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107533344/ 3
Sai Lakshmi vs The Secretary To Government on 8 December, 2021
opinion regarding the offences committed and it requires an elaborate trial with reference to the
evidences and other factors. Further such an adjudication cannot be undertaken in the writ
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12. This being the facts and circumstances, this Court is of an opinion that the writ petition filed
became unnecessary and such nature of writ petition filed with an idea to threaten the Public
Officials or the Police Officials can never be entertained nor be encouraged. In such circumstances,
the Courts are bound to impose exemplary costs. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
13. In view of the fact that the counsel for the petitioner has made a submission that he is prepared
to withdraw the writ petition, this Court is not inclined to impose costs on the petitioner.
14. Accordingly, the writ petition stands dismissed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
08-12-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1.The Secretary to Government, Home Department, Fort St. George, Chennai – 600 009.
2.The Commissioner of Police, Greater Chennai, Vepery, Chennai.
3.The Joint Commissioner of Police, West Zone, Office of Commissioner of Police, Vepery, Chennai.
4.The Deputy Commissioner of Police, Ambattur District, Chennai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 34770 of 2015 08-12-2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107533344/ 4
