Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6 October, 2023
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6
October, 2023
Author: M.V.Muralidaran
Bench: M.V.Muralidaran
ABUJAM Digitally
by ABUJAM
signed
SURJIT SURJIT SINGH Item No.25
Date: 2023.10.09
SINGH 17:26:08 +05'30' IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
Bail. Appln.No.14 of 2023
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren, aged about 48 years, S/o (L)
Saikhom Tombi, a resident of Heirok Part-2 Bazar P. O Wanging,
P.S.: Heirok, Thoubal District, Manipur-795148
...Petitioner/s
- Versus -
The Officer In Charge, Saikot Police Station, having its office at
Saikhot, P. O & P.S. Saikhot, Churachandpur District, Manipur-
795117.
...Respondent/s
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE M.V.MURALIDARAN
ORDER
06.10.2023 [1] Heard Mr. N.Jotendro, learned senior counsel for the petitioner and Mr. H. Samarjit,
learned PP for the state respondent. [2] Mr.N.Jotendro, learned senior counsel for the petitioner
represented before this Court that the petitioner who is the accused in the FIR No.02(04)2023
SKT-PS under Section 121/121 - AIPC & 20 UA (P) Act and he was arrested on 16.04.2023 and till
date, he is in judicial custody.
[3] The learned senior counsel for the petitioner further stated that after registering the FIR
No.02(04)2023 SKT-PS under Section 121/121 - AIPC & 20 UA (P) Act and the petitioner has
previously consulted an Advocate hailing from the Churachandpur District, Manipur for filing a
regular bail application for him before the learned Special Court (NIA), Churachandpur on
27.04.2023 which knowledge regarding whether the said advocate had filed bail application nor not
and the petitioner or his family members was not able to communicate with her physically and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176178293/ 1
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6 October, 2023
telephonically and as such no proper knowledge is known.
[4] Mr. N.Jotendro, learned senior counsel further stated that the petitioner's counsel tried to
communicate the staff of learned Special Court (NIA), Churachandrpur in his No. 7005319925 for
knowing if any bail application has been filed before the learned sessions Court on behalf of the him
but he could not get any reply and therefore, he directly filed the present bail application before this
Court on the ground that due to law and order situation in the State of Manipur particularly in the
district of Churchandpur, the petitioner's counsel or any other advocate could not enable to go to
Churchandpur for filing the bail application. Therefore, he has directly filed bail application before
this Court and he also unable to obtain the FIR which is mandatory for filing and annexing in the
bail application. [5] Considering the bail application, this Court has entertained the bail application
and issued notice on 06.07.2023. Accordingly, notice was issued to the prosecution.
[6] Mr. N. Jotendro, learned senior counsel for the petitioner represented that as per the brief fact of
the FIR case is that on 16.04.2023, based on reliable information received from sources that a
suspected cadre of KYKL is observed in General area of Leisan Tampak. A team of Sangaikot
Company Operating base, 36" Assam Rifles established an MVCP in the general area of Leisan
Tampak. At around 03:10 p.m, the individual was spotted by the team, the team surrounded the
individual and on spot questioning, the individual told that he is Mr. Saikhom Sanayaima @
Nongdren, aged about 48 years, S/o Late Mr. Saikhom Tombi, a resident of Part-II Bazar, Heirok,
Thoubal (who is the petitioner herein). No item was recovered from the individual. Thus, the
individual was apprehended at around 04.00 p.m and the individual was then taken to the district
Hospital, Churchandpur for medical check-up.
[7] Mr. N. Jotendro, learned senior counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the petitioner is
presently working as a Mohorri of a Brick Firm located at Charangpat and used to visit various
places in the hilly district of Manipur and on that day i.e. 16/04/2023, he was returning home after
delivery of bricks and he was arrested in connection with FIR No. 02(04)2023 SKT-PS U/s
121/121-A IPC & 20 UA(P) Act with an ulterior motive and so as to harass the petitioner only merely
on suspicion of being a member of KYKL. [8] The petitioner also submitted that the petitioner is the
sole bread winner of his family consisting of his wife, 5(five) sons and 2 (two) daughter of which one
is only 5(five) years old and unless he is released on bail, his whole family will suffer. He further
stated that right from his arrest on 16.04.2023 for the past 5(five) months, he is in judicial custody
and the petitioner is innocent and he has not committed any offences as alleged by the respondent
police. therefore, the considering the long incarceration of the petitioner Mr. N. Jotendro, learned
senior counsel for the petitioner prayed this Court to grant him bail on any condition.
[9] Mr. H. Samarjit, learned PP for the State respondents represented that he has filed an affidavit
of objection on behalf of the respondents on 04.10.2023 and the counter affidavit was filed by Add.
Superintendant of Police (IUCAW), Churachandpur, Manipur in the affidavit, the investigation is
conducted by Saikhot Police Station, Churchandpur, Manipur and the Addl. Superintendant of
Police by namely Smt. Hasby Haokip, MPS is competent and authorized to swear this affidavit on
behalf of the respondents. Mr. H. Samarjit, learned PP for the State respondents submitted that
based on reliable information received from sources that a suspected cadre of KYKL is observed in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176178293/ 2
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6 October, 2023
General area of Leisan Tampak. A team of Sangaikot Company Operating Base, 36" Assam Rifles
established an MVCP in the general area of Leisan Tampak at around 1510 hrs, the individual was
spotted by the team, the team surrounded the individual and on spot questioning to the individual,
he revealed that he is a cadre of KYKL. On further questioning, the individual told that he is Mr.
Saikhom Sanayaima alias Nongdren (48), s/o Late Mr. Saikhom Tombi a resident of Part - 2 Bazaar,
Heirok, Thoubal. No item is recovered from the individual. Thus, the individual was apprehended at
around 1600 hrs and the individual was then taken to the district Hospital, Churachandpur for
medical check-up. Hence the case has been registered in FIR No.02(04)2023 SKT-PS under Section
121/121 - AIPC & 20 UA (P) Act.
[10] The learned PP also further submitted that the formalities like taking of photograph, recording
of finger prints, interrogation at Special cell and recording of the accused statements at JIC/Imphal
have been conducted for smooth investigation of the case and kept the copy in the case record for
reference. Further, the arrested accused person was brought before the Medical Officer and
conducted medical check-up. During his police custody remand, he was thoroughly interrogated and
recorded his statements in a separate sheet and its recorded statement is placed in the case record
for reference.
[11] Mr. H.Samarjit, learned PP further submitted that as per the investigation conducted by
prosecution and the prosecution comes to the finding that the petitioner was a accused person and
revealed that he voluntarily joined the KYKL outfit from the month of march 2003 through one
recruiter by namely Mr. Ningthoujam Nanaobi Singh and took him to Chalong for basic military
training Centre at Chandel Distirct, Manipur. Mr. H.Samarjit, learned PP further state that from the
first week of March, 2003, the 16" Batch Basic Military Training of the Outfit was commenced at
Chalong Training Centre, Chandel district. Altogether around 300 above new recruits, including 20
females and the accused person took part in the Basic Military Training (BMT). The party allotted
him Army No. 208, before his completion of BMT. During the BMT training, while he was attending
the training in the month of April, 2003. He fired one live round of 303, Rifles near the Training
Centre located at Chalong, Chandel district without the permission from his seniors officers In this
connection, the Higher Authority of the KYKL outfit terminated him from the Party; he did his BMT
only for about 2 ½ two and half months. Thereafter, he left the Outfit from the training Centre and
remained at home with his parents at Heirok,Part- 2,Bazar,Thoubal. After he left the KYKL Outfit,
he remained at home with his family engaging in cultivation of food crops and other domestic
activities. On 16.04.2023, he went to Leisan Tampak, Sangaikot to meet one of his friend namely
Mr. James Singh (24), R/o Leisan Tampak. When he reached Leisan Tampak, Sangaikot, a team of
36" Assam Rifles arrested him for being an ex-cadre of KYKL Outfit. No incriminating
items/documents was recovered from his possession. However, details about his activities is
uncertain and couldn't be confirmed from the investigation carried out so far. Further investigation
can only ascertain if the accused have actually still link with the KYKL Outfit or he have been
reintroduced into the society by UG groups to carry out subversive activities. Investigation is still
going on to find out concrete details about the accused person. [12] By narrating above the facts, Mr.
H.Samarjit, learned PP represented before this Court that the investigation is still pending and the
prosecution not at all investigates further in this matter and the same is going on to find out the
concrete details about the accused person and at this stage, if the accused person is released on bail,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176178293/ 3
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6 October, 2023
the accused/petitioner may tamper the witnesses and interfere with the investigation. Therefore, H.
Samarjit, learned PP for the State respondents has strongly opposed for granting bail on the ground
that because of the petitioner has long incarceration is not the ground for releasing the petitioner. In
the circumstances, he prayed this Court to dismiss the application.
[13] Considering the argument advanced by both the counsels for the parties, this Court considered
that in para 5 of the counter affidavit dated 04.10.2023, the respondents prosecution himself has
admitted that the petitioner has left KYKL outfit and remained at home with his family engaging in
cultivation of food crops and other domestic activities and the prosecution also says that details
about his activities is uncertain and could not be confirmed from the investigation carried out so far.
[14] Apart from this, the petitioner is in jail from 16.04.2023. Till then, almost 5 months he is in
judicial custody and the investigation is still going on . If this Court is considered the bail application
in favour of the petitioner on condition, no prejudice will be caused to the respondent Police.
[15] Therefore, I am inclined to pass the following order,
(a) Bail Application No.14 of 2023 is allowed and the petitioner is ordered to be enlarged on bail in
connection with FIR No.02(04)2023 SKT-PS under Section 121/121 - AIPC & 20 UA (P) Act on the
file of Saikhot Police Station, Churachandpur District subject to the petitioner furnishing a personal
bond in the sum of Rs.100,000/-(Rupees one lakh) with two local sureties each of the like sum to
the satisfaction of the learned Special Judge (NIA), Thoubal, Manipur, with the following
conditions:
(i) The petitioner shall not leave the place of his residence without permission of the
Court and shall ordinarily reside at a place of his residence and the complete address
of such place shall be furnished to the learned Special Judge (NIA), Thoubal at the
time of release.
(ii) The petitioner shall appear before the special Court (NIA), Thoubal at 10.30 a.m.
until further orders.
(iii) If the petitioner has passport, he shall also surrender the same before the learned
Special Judge (NIA), Thoubal, Manipur.
(iv) The petitioner shall not contact nor visit nor threaten nor offer any inducement
to any of the prosecution witnesses.
(v) The petitioner shall not tamper with evidence nor otherwise indulge in any act or
omission that would prejudice the proceedings in the matter.
(vi) The petitioner is directed to co-operate the investigation and as and when
required by the investigating officer, he shall appear before him.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176178293/ 4
Saikhom Sanayaima@ Nongdren vs The Officer In Charge on 6 October, 2023
(vii) The petitioner shall not commit similar offence.
(viii) It is clarified that if the petitioner misuses the liberty or violate any of the
conditions imposed upon him, the prosecution shall be free to move this Court for
cancellation of the bail.
(ix) Any observations made hereinabove shall not be construed to be a reflection on
the merits of the case and shall remain confined to the disposal of the present bail
application.
(x) The respondent police is directed to expedite the investigation and take necessary
further steps in accordance with law.
Ab.Surjit ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
[[
\
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176178293/ 5
