Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
KHOIROM Digitally signed by
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
KHOIROM
BIPINCHAN BIPINCHANDRA SINGH
Date: 2024.02.08
DRA SINGH 17:03:39 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
BAIL APPLICATION NO. 32 OF 2023
Salauddin, aged about 40 years, S/o Shri Jalaudin,
resident of Village-Madar Nagar, The-baheri, P.O-
Baheri, P.S- Baheri, District-Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh-
243201.
.... Petitioner
- Versus -
The Union of India, represented by the Narcotics
Control Bureau (NCB), through its Intelligence Officer,
Narcotics Control Bureau, Imphal, CPWD Quarters,
Changangei, Kongba Uchekon, 795008, Imphal West,
Manipur.
.... Respondent
BEFORE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU For the petitioner : Mr. S.
Worthing, Advocate For the respondent : Mr. W. Darakishore, Senior PCCG Date of hearing :
19.01.2024 Date of order : 08.02.2024 JUDGEMENT & ORDER (CAV) [1] Heard Mr. S. Worthing,
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. W. Darakishore, learned senior PCCG
appearing for the respondent at length.
[2] The present Bail Application has been filed under section 439 CrPC, r/w Section 167(2) CrPC &
Section 37 ND&PS, Act with a prayer inter-alia for releasing the accused/petitioner on bail.
The prayer of the application reads as follows:
"(i) consider this bail application and call for record/reports from the court below;
No. 8/NCB/IMPL/2022.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 1
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
(ii) enlarge the accused/petitioner on bail with conditions.
(iii) pass any other appropriate order(s) as the Hon'ble Court deems fit and proper
for the ends of justice."
[3] Briefs of the case:
The accused/petitioner was arrested along with other co-
accused by a team of Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) on 02.06.2022 on the strength of a complaint
information dated 01.02.2022 with an allegation of transporting banned contraband (ganja).
The accused/petitioner is a professional driver who is engaged in transporting items such rice,
carton scraps, plastic scraps etc. And with his meager earnings, the accused/petitioner runs a family
consisting of 6(six) minor children and a wife who is a mere housewife. Since, his arrest on
02.06.2022 till the filling of this instant, petition, the accused/petitioner has been languishing in
jail. On 27.02.2023, an application under Section 439 CrPC r/w Section 167(2) was filed before the
Hon'ble Court of the Special Judge, ND&PS, Court, Senapati being Cril. Misc. (B) Case No. 26 of
2023 with a prayer to enlarge the accused/petitioner on bail. However, the same was rejected by the
Court of Special Judge (ND&PS), Senapati vide its order dated 17.04.2023.
During the pendency of the Bail Application filed by the accused/petitioner, the Special Public
Prosecutor, Narcotics Control Bureau filed an application dated 25.03.2023, praying for extension
of time so as to enable the investigation of the newly arrested accused namely Shri M. Jayanta Singh
and Shri Livingstone Ngakang and the same was allowed by the Court of the Special Judge
(ND&PS), Senapati vide order dated 27.03.2023, thereby vitiating the bail application dated
27.02.2023 filed by the accused/petitioner and rejected the same vide order dated 17.04.2023.
Hence, the present petition is filed praying for enlarging the accused/petitioner on bail with
conditions as the court may deem fit and proper.
[4] In favour of his case, the petitioner filed the following documents:
1. True copy of the Complaint information dated 01.06.2022. (Annexure - A/1).
2. True copy of the Bail Application dated 27.02.2023.
(Annexure - A/2).
3. True copy of the order dated 17.04.2023 passed by the Special Judge (ND & PS), Senapati,
Manipur. (Annexure - A/3).
4. True copy of the application dated 25.03.2023 filed by the Union of India for extension of time for
investigation (Annexure - A/4).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 2
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
5. True copy of the order dated 27.03.2023 passed by the Special Judge (ND & PS), Senapati,
Manipur allowing extension of time for investigation. (Annexure - A/5).
[5] The learned senior PCCG appearing for the respondent has filed objection to the present
application as thus:
"1. That, at the very outset, the Respondent herein vehemently oppose and deny all
the averments and contentions in the instant application made by the petitioner. Save
and except those which are specifically admitted herein. Anything that has not been
specifically admitted is hereby denied. Nothing shall be deemed to be admitted for
want of specific traverse. The Respondents reserve their right to file a detailed reply
and submissions at a subsequent stage.
2. That before submitting a para-wise comment, the answering respondent would like
to highlight the factual matrix of the case in brief for better appreciation of the case;
I. That, acting on specific information received from a reliable source NCB team
proceeded towards Tadubi village of Senapati District on 01.06.2022 at about 1830
hrs. Upon reaching there the team of NCB Imphal in assistance of B Coy 33 Bn.
Assam Rifles intercepted a Tata truck bearing registration number UK05CB5915. The
driver was the only occupant of the vehicle. Thereafter the said truck was searched at
the camp of B Coy of 33 Bn. in presence of two independent witnesses. The truck was
loaded with scrap plastic water bottles and scrap cartons card board. Thereafter all
the scrap was removed from the truck. While removing the scrap from the truck 19
nos. of nylon sacs were recovered concealed in the middle of the scrap plastic bottles
and carton papers. Upon opening all the white color nylon sacs one by one found
inside greenish black dried flowering like substance believed to be Ganja. A small
amount of the substance was taken out from all the 19 sacs/packets and tested with
the Drug Detection Kit available with the NCB team which tested positive for Ganja
in all the instances. All the sacs of Ganja were seized subsequently. During search of
the truck one broken mobile phone, documents related to the truck as mentioned
above were also recovered and seized.
II. That, thereafter, the sacs/packets containing suspected Ganja were marked as P-1
to P-19.
Thereafter the weight of all the packets was measure with the digital weighing
machine brought by NCB team. The gross weight of all the packets with packing
material found to be 1191.2 kg. ON reasonable believe that an offence has been
committed u/s 8(c) to be read with section 20(b)(ii)(C) and 25 of the NDPS Act, 1985
(as amended), the recovered 19 packets of contrabands believed to be Ganja were
seized u/s 42 of the NDPS Act, 1985 (as amended). ON spot interrogation Salauddin
revealed that one another person namely Khan chacha was also accompanying with
him and he had all the knowledge of transportation of Ganja who had procured the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 3
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
recovered drugs from Ukhrul. He further revealed that he had loaded 7.1 ton of
plastic scrap and 7015 ton of carton paper scrap from M/s Dilip Kr. Waste
Management, Churachandpur, Manipur on 30.05.2022 and in the middle of the
scrap he concealed the 19 sacs of Ganja.
III. That, the search cum seizure procedure was completed on 02.06.2022 without
causing any damage to any person or perperty in presence of the two independent
witnesses. A search cum seizure list was prepared obtaining signatures of the owner
of the seized goods, seizing officer and the two independent witnesses of Assam Rifles
staff. Thereafter the accused Salauddin was issued notices u/s 67 of NDPS Act, 1985
on the spot to appear before the NCB Officer for recording his voluntary statement at
NCB Imphal office in connection with the seizure of 1191.2 kg of Ganja from the truck
bearing registration no. UK05CB5915. Accordingly, Salauddin appeared before NCB
officer on 02.06.2022 and tendered his voluntary statement u/s 67 of NDPS Act,
1985 on 02.06.2022 wherein he confessed his involvement in the trafficking of the
seized Ganja.
IV. That on the basis of the recovery of contraband, his confessional statements and
on reasonable belief that an offence had been committed in violation of provisions of
Section 8(c), which attracts penal provisions u/s 20(b)(ii)(C) and 25 of NDPS Act,
1985; Salauddin was arrested on 02.06.2022 & produced before the Ld. Court of
Duty Magistrate, Kangpokpi on 02.06.2022.
V. That, during the investigation, Khan chacha and Arun Singha, the middleman who
were found to be involved in the present case were arrested and Final Complaint was
filed against them also on 28.11.2022 while keeping investigation open for other
suspects. In due course, the supplier of the seized Ganja namely M. Jayanta Singh,
resident of Imphal and Livingstone Nkagang of Ukhrul, Manipur were also arrested
and produced before the Court of Special Judge (ND&PS), Senapati, Manipur on
14.03.2023 and 17.03.2023 respectively.
3. That with regards to the averment made in para no. 1 to 2 of the bail application,
the answering respondent has no comments as it is a matter of record.
4. That with regards to the averment made in para no. 3 of the bail application, the
answering respondent has no comment which are born out of record and that onus
lies on the Petitioner, the rest of the averment made in the paragraph has to be
established at the time of trial.
5. That with regards to the averment made in para no. 4 of the bail application, it is
humbly submitted that, Letter of intimation of the arrest was sent to the
Officer-in-Charge Police Station - Baheri, District Bareily, Uttar Pradesh regarding
the accused Salauddin with request to furnish any criminal antecedent available on
record. A subsequent reminder was also sent on 02.11.2022 to Officer-in-Charge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 4
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
Police Station Baheri. However, reply is not yet received from Officer-in- Charge
Police Station. The same will be submitted before the Ld. Judge as and when it is
received.
6. That, with regards to the averment made in para no.5 to 7 of the bail application,
the answering respondent has no comment which are born out of record, the rest of
the submission are made in the forgoing para.
7. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 8 of the bail application, the
answering respondent vehemently denies to the averment made therein, it is
submitted before the Hon'ble High Court that, the petitioner/accused has
unequivocally stated in his voluntary statement recorded under section 67 of NDPS
Act that a Ganja will be load in his truck, out of which he will be paid a good amount
for consignment and the accused has allowed to conceal the contraband substance
after an assurance was given to him not to worry as the co-accused would be moving
ahead of his truck to clear the road as on when required. Therefore, the question of
unconscious possession is completely out of question.
8. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 9 to 11 of the bail application,
the answering respondent has no comment to be made as it is a matter of record.
Except to the averment made therein that the petitioner is not aware of the presence
of contraband substance in his truck, the same submission is made in the aforesaid
para. Imperatively, the engagement of accused in trafficking the contraband
substance was also affirmed by the co-accused Yasin Khan @ Khan Chacha wherein
Yasin confessed in his voluntary statement stating that, he concealed the contraband
substance after informing the petitioner not to worry as he would be moving ahead of
his truck to clear the road as on when required and in return the Petitioner will get a
good amount. He also informed that he and the Petitioner Salauddin were working
for one person namely Arun Singha resident of Hojai, Assam. Hence, the submission
made there are not a good/sufficient grounds in the eyes of law for granting the relief
sought for in the Bail Application and as such the Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
reject the same.
9. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 12 of the bail application, it is
submitted before the Hon'ble High Court that, from the bare perusal of the factual
matrix of the case. It is manifestly clear that the accused was caught in possession of
1191.2 Kgs of contraband Ganja packed in 19 sacks which was bought in his Tata
Truck. Moreover, the process of investigation is still underway in order to trace the
whereabout and chain of operation of all the accomplies of the accused including
those associates who have been instrumental in trafficking of contraband substance,
and as such, the petitioner being the kingpin, releasing him on bail can temper the
evidence and witness, which will frustrate the whole process of investigation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 5
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
10. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 13 of the bail application, the
answering respondent has no comments as it is a matter of record.
11. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 14 of the bail application, the
answering respondent humbly submits that, the accused was caught red-handed for a
possession of 1191.2 Kgs of contraband Ganja packed in 19 sacks which was bought in
his Tata Truck, the same allegation is affirmed by the 2 (independent witness)
namely Sh. Heman Rishanta Singh Rfn/GD and Sh. Sougrakpam Chandra Kumar
Meitei Rfn/GD of 'B' Coy Tadubi of 33rd Assam Rifle, and during investigation it was
discovered that the accused is a main member of the syndicate in illicit trafficking
and further investigation is still going. Therefore, examining the prima facie evidence
available on record and considering that the amount of quantity recovered from the
accused is of commercial nature bared the accused from acquiring bail under Section
37 of the NDPS Act. Therefore, the Ld. Special Judge (ND&PS) Manipur has rightly
rejected the bail application of the accused.
12. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 15 of the bail application it is
humbly submitted that, the I.O submitted the Final Report/Charge-Sheet on
28.11.2022 and the Petitioner filed the bail application on 27.02.2023 only after the
charge-sheet has been filed, which extinguished the right of default bail. More so, the
order dated 27.03.2023 passed by the Hon'ble Court of Special Judge (ND&PS),
Senapati had rightly accepted the application filed by the Respondent, as the Special
Judge has unfettered rights under the provision of Section 36-A (4) of NDPS Act,
which give the power to grant extension for a period upto 1(one) year.
13. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 16 of the bail application, it is
humbly submitted that, the accused was caught in possession of commercial quantity
of contraband substance, this prima facie case or the root of the case is undisputed,
and the investigation is still underway to further trace the accused associate. It is
imperative to mentioned that, during investigation, besides the availability of
complicity of all the accused in voluntary statement, the connivance of all the accused
was revealed in analyzing the CDRs of all the numbers, it has been established that
there was in regular contact with each other. There are several calls made among
them. Certified copies of the CDRs have been applied from the concerned service
providers and the same is yet to be received, the answering respondent crave the
leave of this Hon'ble Court to refer the final complaint for detail of the CDRs report
as it is not reproduced herein for the sake of brevity. Therefore, interference of this
court on weighing the evidence of going deep into the probative value of evidence at
this juncture is highly premature and hence, uncalled. All this prima facie evidence
available on record cannot be out rightly thrown out and grant bail at this stage.
14. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 17 of the bail application, it is
humbly submitted that, the further investigation of the case is still going on to trace
the criminal antecedent of the accused and more so, the release of an accused in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 6
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
NDPS Act cases on bail will send a negative signal to the society. It will be
detrimental to the interest of society. The bail cannot be granted merely on the
ground that there was no past criminal history at this stage. Pertinently, the letter of
intimation of his arrest was sent to the Officer-in-Charge Police Station-Baheri,
District Bareily, Uttar Pradesh in regards to the accused Salauddin with a request to
furnish on any available antecedent criminal record. On 02.11.2022 reminder was
also sent to Officer-in-Charge Police Station-Baheri. Reply is not yet received from
Officer-in-Charge Police Station. The same will be submitted before your Honour as
on when receipt.
15. That, with regards to the averment made in para no. 18 to 20 of the bail
application, it is humbly submitted that, from the bare perusal of the material
available on record, it is evidently clear that, the accused being a part of drug cartel
having its operation in different part of India, who have been involved in trafficking
of contraband substance, releasing the accused on bail without bearing in mind the
gravity of the offence, and without considering the fact that, the Respondent is trying
hard to further trace the network of all his associates will frustrate the whole process
of pending investigation and adversely affect the entire society and the objective of
making a stringent provision for control of illicit traffic in ND&PS Act will ultimately
be defeated.
It is pertinent to mentioned herein that, the Petitioner was found in possession of
commercial quantity, his case is hit by bar under section 37 of the NDPS Act which
sets a stringent condition on grant of bail to accused found with commercial quantity
of drugs, hence, bearing in mind the seriousness of the offences merely one is poor or
sole breadwinner of the family cannot be the factor to grant bail. Interest of society
must be the prime consideration in the case of offence committed under NDPS Act.
Quantity of the substance with which accused was charged shall also be a relevant
factor to consider while granting bail.
[6] Perused the application with the affidavit-in-opposition filed by the respondent
with documents filed by both the parties also perused the order passed by the Ld.
Special Judge (ND & PS), Senapati, Manipur.
[7] During the course of the hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioner fervently
submitted that the charge sheet was filed without the expert report of the seizure
contraband Ganja. As such, Charge sheet is deemed to be incomplete, because of this
the accused is liable to be released on bail.
[8] The learned counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that the Final
Report/Charge-Sheet on 28.11.2022 and the Petitioner filed the bail application on
27.02.2023 only after the charge- sheet has been filed, which extinguished the right
of default bail. More so, the order dated 27.03.2023 passed by the Hon'ble Court of
Special Judge (ND&PS), Senapati had rightly accepted the application filed by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 7
Salauddin vs The Union Of India on 8 February, 2024
Respondent, as the Special Judge has unfettered rights under the provision of Section
36-A (4) of NDPS Act, which give the power to grant extension for a period upto
1(one) year [9] The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the Bail
Application of the present petitioner was filed before the Ld. Special Judge (ND &
PS), Senapati, Manipur after charge sheet/final report was filed in connection with
the case. On perusal of the record, the submission made by the learned counsel found
positive. The learned counsel, further, submitted that bunch of the matter relating to
ND & PS case which was filed without the expert report of the seizure contraband and
the same is still pending before the Hon'ble Apex Court for disposal.
[10] In support of his case, the learned counsel for the respondent handed down the
following cases:
1. Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Diary No.(s).
43791/2023 - Pabitra Narayan Pradhan Vs. The State (NCT) of Delhi, Supreme Court of India.
2. Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 8164 - 8166/2021-Mohd. Arbaz & Ors. Vs.
State of NCT of Delhi, Supreme Court of India.
Perused both the order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
[11] On perusal of the order of the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS), Senapati, Manipur, it is evident that
the Ld. Special Judge passed the order after hearing both sides with application of mind and also
after going through the relevant sections of ND & PS with the series of cases rendered by the Apex
Court and rightly rejected the Bail Application filed by the present petitioner.
[12] In view of the facts and circumstances, I find no ground for allowing the petition in the
foregoing and hence, the present Bail Application filed by the petitioner is rejected.
[13] Accordingly, the present Bail Application No. 32 of 2023 is dismissed and disposed of.
However, the petitioner is given liberty to file fresh bail application on fresh grounds.
[14] Send an extract copy of this order to the Court of Special Judge (ND & PS), Senapati, Manipur.
JUDGE FR/NFR Lucy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67622995/ 8
