Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1 April, 2025
Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1
April, 2025
Author: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
Bench: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44599-DB
Court No. - 42
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 13189 of 2024
Petitioner :- Samay Saini And 2 Others
Respondent :- State Of Up And 2 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mohd. Afzal Ansari
Counsel for Respondent :- Ajay Kumar Pandey, G.A.
Hon'ble Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J.
Hon'ble Prashant Kumar,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioners, learned counsel for the informant, Mr. G.P. Singh,
learned A.G.A.-I for the State-respondents and perused the material brought on the record.
2. A Division Bench of this Court while entertaining the instant petition on 2.8.2024, has proceeded
to accord interim relief in favour of the petitioners and referred the matter before the Mediation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153088348/ 1
Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1 April, 2025
Centre of this Court precisely taking into note to the facts that the dispute between the parties is a
genuine matrimonial dispute. For ease of reference, the aforesaid order 2.8.2024 is reproduced
hereinunder:-
"1. Heard Sri Mohd. Afzal Ansari, learned counsel for the petitioners; learned A.G.A.
for the State and Sri Ajay Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the opposite party no.3.
2. This writ petition has been filed with the prayer to quash the First Information
Report dated 21.06.2024, registered as Case Crime No.286 of 2024, under Sections-
498-A, 323, 506 IPC & Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station-
Dhoomanganj, District- Prayagraj.
3. It is stated that petitioners have been falsely implicated in the First Information
Report and there is a genuine matrimonial issue in respect of which mediation ought
to be tried first before proceeding with criminal investigation as it has the potential of
disturbing the marital life for all times to come. Submission is that the matter be
referred to Mediation Centre of this Court.
4. In the facts of the present case, we are of the view that an attempt be made to
resolve the differences between the parties by way of mediation. It is, therefore,
directed that petitioners shall deposit a sum of Rs. 10,000/- within two weeks from
today with the Mediation Centre out of which Rs. 5,000/- shall be paid to the
respondent no.4 for appearance before the Mediation Centre. The remaining amount
shall go to mediation centre towards the expenses of mediation.
5. The matter is remitted to the Mediation Centre with the direction that same may
be resolved after giving notices to both the parties.
6. It is directed that Mediation Centre shall make all endeavours to resolve the
dispute amicably, expeditiously, preferably within a period of three months.
7. List after three months.
8. Till the next date of listing, no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioners
pursuant to the aforesaid First Information Report."
3. In deference to the aforesaid order passed by the Division Bench of this Court on 2.8.2024, the
parties have appeared before the Allahabad High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre and
eventually, the settlement/agreement took place between them on 17.10.2024. The relevant para 7 of
the aforesaid Settlement/Agreement dated 17.10.2024 is reproduced hereinunder:-
"7. In view of the Interim Settlement Agreement dated 17.10.2024, the following
settlement has been arrived at between the Parties hereto:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153088348/ 2
Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1 April, 2025
a) That the parties entered into an interim settlement agreement dated 17.10.2024
and decided to live together as husband and wife forgetting all previous disputes and
differences. In continuation of the aforesaid interim settlement, the parties appeared
and stated that they are fully satisfied with this reunion and further they want to
continue it for the rest of their lives.
b) That the husband and wife undertake that they shall not take any such action
which may hurt either of the party mentally or physically and shall try to satisfy each
other by their activities.
c) That the parties undertake not to commit any kind of cruelty against each other in
any manner whatsoever.
d) That it has been agreed between the parties that they will behave properly living in
peaceful and cordial atmosphere.
e) That the husband undertakes to take care of his wife and son and fulfill all
essential requirements and amenities to them in future.
f) That the parents or family member of both the parties will not interfere in the
married life of husband and wife.
g) That it has also been agreed between the parties that all the cases filed by them
against each other or their family members regarding present matrimonial dispute
shall be withdrawn by the parties concerned by taking appropriate steps before the
Court/authority concerned.
h) That this Settlement Agreement has been read over and explained to the parties in
Hindi in presence of their respective counsels and thereafter they have signed this
Settlement Agreement.
i) That it has been agreed between the parties that they shall not violate the terms
and conditions of this settlement otherwise the aggrieved party will be free to take
legal recourse."
4. Learned counsel for the petitioners makes a statement that till date, no charge sheet has been
submitted in the matter and in terms of the aforesaid agreement dated 17.10.2024, the parties have
decided to live together as husband and wife forgetting their all previous dispute and differences and
parties are fully satisfied with this reunion and further they want to continue it for the rest of their
lives. Further, the husband and wife undertake that they shall not take any such action which may
hurt either of the party mentally or physically and shall try to satisfy each other by their activities.
Learned counsel for the petitioners in this backdrop underscores that under the aforesaid changed
circumstances, the impugned First Information Report is liable to be quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153088348/ 3
Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1 April, 2025
5. Learned counsel for the informant as well as learned A.G.A.-I for the State-respondents have
given a nod to the said submissions advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners.
6. It is jointly submitted that this being an offshoot of a matrimonial dispute, same has come to be
amicably resolved under the settlement/agreement dated 17.10.2024, duly verified by the parties
and their counsels before the Mediation Centre, pending proceedings would serve no purpose and
the same are liable to be quashed in the light of the judgements of the Apex Court in the case of B.S.
Joshi v. State of Haryana and others, 2003(4) SCC 675, and Gian Singh v. State of Punjab, 2012(10)
SCC 303.
7. The Apex Court in the case of B.S Joshi (Supra) has held that in case the matrimonial dispute has
come to an end, under a compromise/settlement, between the parties, then notwithstanding
anything contained under Section 320 IPC there is no legal impediment for this court to quash the
proceedings of Section 498-A I.P.C etc, which has matrimonial flavour under its inherent powers in
view of the recorded settlement between the parties. The Apex Court in the case of Gian Singh
(supra) has held in para-61 that;
"the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences Under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil favour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153088348/ 4
Samay Saini And 2 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 1 April, 2025
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."
8. The present dispute was between the husband and wife. Neither it is involving any moral
turpitude nor is heinous in nature.
9. The writ petition is allowed and the proceedings of impugned First Information Report dated
21.06.2024 registered as Case Crime No.286 of 2024, under Sections 498-A, 323, 506 I.P.C. &
Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station- Dhoomanganj, District- Prayagraj are hereby
quashed.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Sachin (Prashant Kumar,J.) (Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153088348/ 5
