Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13
January, 2021
Author: S. Pujahari
Bench: S.Pujahari
CORAM : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.PUJAHARI
CRLMC No.148 of 2019
Sanatan Mahakud ... Petitioner
- versus -
State & others ... Opp. Parties
ORDER
20. 13.01.2021 This petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by the petitioner to quash the
FIR lodged against him in Bamibari P.S. Case No.161 dated 16.12.2018 corresponding to G.R. Case
No.714 of 2018 pending on the file of learned J.M.F.C., Barbil as well as the entire proceeding
initiated in the said case.
2. The impugned F.I.R. has been lodged by one Balabhadra Patra in writing with the allegation as
follows :-
One ESSAR Steel India Limited is operating mining in Badakalimati Panchayat area
and transporting iron ore from the locality. The villagers have donated their lands to
the company. The petitioner, who is the M.L.A of Champua representing himself as
the representative of the villagers and on behalf of the village committee, made an
agreement with the ESSAR Steel India Limited exerting force on the same company
with a threat that unless the company entered into the contract they will block their
mining activities. The company agreed to pay crores of rupees to the village
committee for welfare of the villagers. The said act of the petitioner was neither
sanctioned by the law nor by the Government. The petitioner along with his
henchmen started extorting crores of rupees. They terrorized the company to pay
money to the private mafia as a "Private CSR Fund" in the name of welfare of the
local people and pocketed the same for themselves.
The petitioner also used the said money for his personal gain and distributed the
money in the shape of cash, seeds, blankets, bhatta etc. among his supporters and
projected himself as a "Robin hood" of the locality by floating an organization in his
name as "Sana Sena". For such activities of the petitioner, the villagers have been
suffering. When the villagers demand the money provided by the company, they are
being harassed and threatened by the henchmen of the petitioner as named in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 1
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
report. The petitioner takes money not only from the ESSAR Steel India Ltd. but also
from many other companies operating in the area, and if any company refuses to do
so, the petitioner harasses them by resorting to protest, dharana, blocking etc. in
their mining area. In this way, he is engaged in extortion of money from different
companies so also coercing the companies to engage his own people and pay them
salary without any duty.
3. Police in Bamebari P.S. on receipt of the said allegation registered the same as FIR vide the
aforesaid P.S. case, inasmuch as according to the police, the allegations so brought disclose
commission of cognizable offence under Sections 467/ 468/ 471/ 420/ 506/ 385/ 386/ 120-B of IPC
against the petitioner and others named in the FIR.
4. The petitioner has approached this Court seeking invocation of its inherent jurisdiction under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the F.I.R. and the consequential proceeding, with the averments that
such allegations have been made by the political opponents of the petitioner and manufactured at
the behest of the District Police Administration and that the FIR allegations make out no criminal
offence much less the offences for which the same has been registered i.e. under Sections 467/ 468/
471/ 420/506/385/386/120-B of IPC. It has also been averred that the person said to be the
informant being not the victim of the act alleged, no case ought to have been registered by the police
at his instance and investigated without recording its satisfaction as to whether the allegations
reveal any cognizable offence. But, on false, baseless, politically motivated and concocted allegations
made at the behest of the political opponents of the petitioner, the case has been registered and
investigated causing undue harassment to him. Hence, the F.I.R. and the consequential proceeding
are liable to be quashed in view of the law laid down by the apex Court in the case of State of
Haryana and others vrs. Ch. Bhajan Lal and others, reported in 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335.
5. No detailed counter affidavit has been filed in this case by the police to the aforesaid petition, but
an affidavit has been filed by the I.I.C., Bamebari Police Station indicating that after registration of
the FIR, the investigation being in progress and several documents being yet to be collected, it
cannot be said at the stage that no offence is made out.
6. During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the
FIR and the consequential investigation is liable to be quashed inasmuch as the FIR allegation is
baseless and frivolous one and does not disclose commission of any cognizable offence. According to
him, in the absence of allegation disclosing any cognizable offence, police could not have treated the
report as an FIR and registered the same, that too, without conducting any preliminary investigation
about the veracity of such version. Elaborating the submission, he has pointed oout that the
allegations made in the FIR by the so called informant are too broad and vague without disclosure of
the date, time and manner in which such extortion of money was made from companies named and
unnamed, and how fraud and forgery was committed, and who was cheated and to whom the
petitioner extended threat or with whom he entered into any criminal conspiracy. In such premises,
the said information should not have been given the status of FIR under Section 154 Cr.P.C. and
registered for alleging commission of the offences under the IPC as mentioned in the formal FIR
drawn pursuant to such report. Otherwise also, the informant being not aggrieved by the alleged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 2
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
action of the petitioner and not being a victim of the overt act allegedly committed by the petitioner,
in any manner, a vague allegation made by such a person should not have been entertained as a
report under section 154 of Cr.P.C. Furthermore, a submission has also been advanced that even if
the FIR was registered the police should not have hurriedly commenced the investigation and
harassed, the petitioner by freezing his accounts and the accounts of others without recording a
satisfaction that on the allegations made in the FIR a case for investigation was made out. In this
case since the investigation is conducted without any legal basis and the petitioner is being harassed
thereby, the FIR as well as the consequential investigation against the petitioner is liable to be
quashed in view of the law laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra) is also the submission of the
learned counsel for the petitioner. According to the learned counsel, in order to suppress the voice of
dissension of the petitioner who was the MLA of Champua then and opposed to the present political
dispensation ruling the State, at their behest, the District Police Administration manufactured the
F.I.R. which was hurriedly registered and undue harassment is caused to the petitioner by freezing
his different Bank accounts extending threat of arrest etc. The aforesaid action demonstrates that
the police is working at the behest of the ruling political dispensation of the State without any basis,
but only to harass the petitioner and suppress his voice. The learned counsel for the petitioner
submits that the FIR is liable to be quashed in exercise of the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. in
view of the law laid down in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra).
7. Per contra, learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State has submitted that the contention
raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is without any substance. There being no
requirement of law to conduct any preliminary inquiry before registration of an FIR, to verify its
veracity, even if the same is lodged by a third person disclosing commission of cognizable offence,
the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner challenging the registration of the
FIR and seeking quashment of the same is without any substance. With regard to locus standi, it is
submitted that the same is not a requirement when information lodged discloses commission of any
cognizable offence. So also it is submitted that at this stage the court should not go to the detailed
appreciation of the FIR allegation to examine as to whether or not the same make out the
ingredients of the offences alleged, but to see whether the same prima facie discloses commission of
any cognizable offence. If the same prima facie discloses commission of any cognizable offence, it
becomes incumbent on the part of the police to register the FIR. Registration of the FIR, therefore,
cannot be challenged advancing the submission that all the ingredients of the alleged offences are
not made out. Furthermore, it is submitted that allegation of political vendetta is without any basis
and substance and the same has also no bearing when the report lodged discloses the commission of
cognizable offence. On receipt of the report disclosing commission or suspected commission of
cognizable offence, police has to register the FIR, is the mandate of Section 154 Cr.P.C., and it being
only during investigation the veracity / truthfulness of the allegation is to be tested through
prima-facie materials, if any, collected against the person made accused, the petitioner at this stage
cannot say that the FIR is liable to be quashed for the reasons contended. Hence, the contention of
the learned counsel for the petitioner being without any substance, this Court should be loathed in
throttling the investigation at the threshold by quashing the F.I.R., more so when the police has
substantially proceeded in the matter, collected incriminating materials and the case of the
petitioner is not covered by any of the categories of cases laid by the apex Court in the case of Bhajan
Lal (supra) to quash the F.I.R. / prosecution, is the submission of the learned counsel for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 3
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
opposite party-State.
8. As it transpires from the averments made in the petition and the contentions advanced by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, the grounds in precision on which the registration of the F.I.R.
and continuance of the investigation is assailed, are as follows :-
(i) The informant has no locus standi to lodge the prosecution.
(ii) The report has been registered as F.I.R.
without testing the veracity of the allegations through any preliminary enquiry.
(iii) The allegations made in the report do not disclose any cognizable offence much
less the offences for which the case has been registered by police.
(iv) Continuance of the investigation with the allegations not satisfying the
precondition of disclosure of commission of cognizable offence is bad in law.
(v) Allegations raised being actuated with malice owing to political animosity of the
petitioner with the ruling political dispensation of the State.
9. Before addressing the contention of the parties, it would be apposite to mention here that the law
with regard to quashment of the FIR and consequential investigation in exercise of the power under
Section 482 Cr.P.C has since been well settled. Inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C for
quashment of the FIR and the consequential investigation can be made when the FIR itself
registered does not prima facie disclose commission or suspected commission of any cognizable
offence but still the same has been registered and the investigation has been carried on. However, if
the FIR discloses commission of a cognizable offence, normally, the Court will not interfere with the
investigation into the offence alleged and will allow the same to be completed for the purpose of
collecting materials for proving the offence. Reliance in this regard can be placed on a decision of
the Apex Court in the case of State of West Bengal vrs. Swapan Kumar Guha, reported in (1982) 1
SCC 561, wherein the Apex Court have held as follows:-
"...... the legal position is well settled. The legal position appears to be that if an
offence is disclosed, the court will not normally interfere with an investigation into
the case and will permit investigation into the offence alleged to be completed; if,
however, the materials do not disclose an offence, no investigation should normally
be permitted .... Once an offence is disclosed, an investigation into the offence must
necessarily follow in the interests of justice. If, however, no offence is disclosed, an
investigation cannot be permitted, as any investigation, in the absence of any offence
being disclosed, will result in unnecessary harassment to a party, whose liberty and
property may be put to jeopardy for nothing. The liberty and property of any
individual are sacred and sacrosanct and the court zealously guards them and
protects them. An investigation is carried on for the purpose of gathering necessary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 4
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
materials for establishing and proving an offence which is disclosed. When an offence
is disclosed, a proper investigation in the interests of justice becomes necessary to
collect materials for establishing the offence, and for bringing the offender to book.
In the absence of a proper investigation in a case where an offence is disclosed, the
offender may succeed in escaping from the consequences and the offender may go
unpunished to the detriment of the cause of justice and the society at large. Justice
requires that a person who commits an offence has to be brought to book and must
be punished for the same. If the court interferes with the proper investigation in a
case where an offence has been disclosed, the offence will go unpunished to the
serious detriment of the welfare of the society and the cause of the justice suffers. It is
on the basis of this principle that the court normally does not interfere with the
investigation of a case where an offence has been disclosed ..... Whether an offence
has been disclosed or not must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of
each particular case .... If on a consideration of the relevant materials, the court is
satisfied that an offence is disclosed, the court will normally not interfere with the
investigation into the offence and will generally allow the investigation into the
offence to be completed for collecting materials for proving the offence."
10. The Apex Court in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra) placing reliance in the case of Swapan Kumar
Guha (supra) and many other decisions, have categorized the cases in which the FIR/prosecution
can be quashed in exercise of the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. Those cases are as follows :
"(a) where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint,
even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused;
(b) where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code;
(c) where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused;
(d) where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-
cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate
as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code;
(e) where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 5
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
(f) where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party;
(g) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."
11. Keeping in mind the settled position of law quoted above, the contentions advanced by the
learned counsel for the parties vis-à-vis the materials on record need to be addressed.
12. The first contention, that is raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the
Informant is in no way aggrieved and not a victim of the crime on his vague allegation, the police
could not have registered the case and continued with the investigation. However, such a contention
appears to this Court to be without any substance, inasmuch as a third party, even if he is not
aggrieved, but aware of commission of cognizable offence, can very well lodge a report with police
indicating commission of the said offence to set the criminal law into motion. Unless statutorily
provided, locus standi is not a sine-qua-non for lodging a report indicating the commission of a
cognizable offence to set the criminal law into motion, is the settled position of law. In this regard,
reliance can be placed on a decision of the Constitution Bench of Apex Court rendered in the case of
A.R. Antulay v. Ramdas Sriniwas Nayak & another, reported in (1984) 2 SCC 500, wherein the Apex
Court, while examining the concept of locus standi under the criminal jurisprudence, made it clear
that locus is immaterial and irrelevant unless statute indicates to the contrary. The Apex Court held
as follows :
"It is well recognized principle of criminal jurisprudence that anyone can set or put
the criminal law into motion except where the statute enacting or creating an offence
indicates to the contrary. The scheme of the Code of Criminal Procedure envisages
two parallel and independent agencies for taking criminal offences to court. Even for
the most serious offence of murder, it was not disputed that a private complaint can,
not only be filed but can be entertained and proceeded with according to law. Locus
standi of the complainant is a concept foreign to criminal jurisprudence save and
except that where the statue creating an offence provides for the eligibility of the
complainant, by necessary implication the general principle gets excluded by such
statutory provision. Numerous statutory provisions, can be referred to in support of
this legal position such as (i) Section 187-A of Sea Customs Act, 1878, (ii) Section 97
of Gold Control Act, 1968,
(iii) Section 6 of Import and Export Control Act, 1947, (iv) Section 271 and Section
279 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, (v) Section 61 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act, 1973, (vi) Section 621 of the Companies Act, 1956 and (vii) Section 77 of the
Electricity Supply Act. This list is only illustrative and not exhaustive. While Section
190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure permits anyone to approach the Magistrate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 6
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
with a complaint, it does not prescribe any qualification the complainant is required
to fulfil to be eligible to file a complaint. But where an eligibility criterion for a
complainant is contemplated specific provisions have been made such as to be found
in Sections 195 to 199 of the Cr.P.C. These specific provisions clearly indicate that in
the absence of any such statutory provision, a locus standi of a complainant is a
concept foreign to criminal jurisprudence. In other words, the principle that anyone
can set or put the criminal law in motion remains intact unless contra-indicated by a
statutory provision.
This general principle of nearly universal application is founded on a policy that an offence i.e. an
act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force is not merely an offence
committed in relation to the person who suffers harm but is also an offence against society. The
society for its orderly and peaceful development is interested in the punishment of the offender.
Therefore, prosecution for serious offences is undertaken in the name of the State representing the
people which would exclude any element of private vendetta or vengeance. If such is the public
policy underlying penal statues, who brings an act or omission made punishable by law to the notice
of the authority competent to deal with it, is immaterial and irreverent unless the statute indicates
to the contrary. Punishment of the offender in the interest of the society being one of the objects
behind penal statues enacted for larger good of the society, right to initiate proceedings cannot be
whittled down, circumscribed or fettered by putting it into a strait-jacket formula of locus standi
unknown to criminal jurisprudence, save and except specific statutory exception."
13. The second, third and fourth grounds of challenge are co-related inter-se, inasmuch as the core
contention of the petitioner is that the purported FIR does not qualify to be treated as such or
registered under Section 154 of Cr.P.C. and that without resorting to any preliminary enquiry to test
the veracity of the allegations embodied therein and in absence of any satisfaction being recorded
regarding disclosure of any cognizable offence, no investigation could have been commenced. In the
petition the penal provisions have been quoted in verbatim with the pleading that the FIR
allegations do not disclose the ingredients of the cognizable offences as alleged. Drawing the notice
of this Court to the same and also to the allegations made in the F.I.R. which admittedly do not
disclose the time, date, manner of commission of the crime in specific, it is strenuously urged by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that the same could not have been registered as FIR without
conducting a preliminary inquiry to test the veracity of such allegation. This contention has been
controverted by the learned counsel for the State as being without any substance.
It goes without saying that when an information lodged prima facie discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, the same stands qualified to be an information to be registered as an FIR under
Section 154 Cr.P.C. and in such circumstances police cannot refuse to register the same. There is no
mandate of law that before registration of the case police on receipt of the same must verify the
veracity or truthfulness of such allegation. The aforesaid position of law has since been well settled
in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra), wherein the apex Court in paragraphs-31, 32 and 33 have held as
follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 7
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
"31. At the stage of registration of a crime or a case on the basis of the information
disclosing a cognizable offence in compliance with the mandate of Section 154(1) of
the Code, the concerned police officer cannot embark upon an enquiry as to whether
the information, laid by the informant is reliable and genuine or otherwise and refuse
to register a case on the ground that the information is not reliable or credible. On
the other hand, the officer in charge of a police station is statutorily obliged to
register a case and then to proceed with the investigation if he has reason to suspect
the commission of an offence which he is empowerd under Section 156 of the Code to
investigate, subject to the proviso to Section 157. (As we have proposed to make a
detailed discussion about the power of a police officer in the field of investigation of a
cognizable offence within the ambit of Sections 156 and 157 of the Code in the
ensuing part of this judgment, we do not propose to deal with those sections in
extensor in the present context.). In case, an officer in charge of a police station
refuses to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him and to register a case on the
information of a cognizable offence reported and thereby violates the statutory duty
cast upon him, the person aggrieved by such refusal can send the substance of the
information in writing and by post to the Superintendent of Police concerned who if
satisfied that the information forwarded to him discloses a cognizable offence, should
either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police
officer subordinate to him in the manner provided by sub-section (3) of section 154 of
the Code.
32. Be it noted that in Section 154(1) of the Code, the legislature in its collective
wisdom has carefully and cautiously used the expression "information" without
qualifying the same as in Section 41(1)(a) or (g) of the Code wherein the expressions,
"reasonable complaint"
and "credible information" are used. Evidently, the non- qualification of the word "information" in
Section 154(1) unlike in Section 41(1)(a) and (g) of the Code may be for the reason that the police
officer should not refuse to record an information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence
and to register a case thereon on the ground that he is not satisfied with the reasonableness or
credibility of the information. In other words, 'reasonableness' or 'credibility' of the said information
is not a condition precedent for registration of a case. A comparison of the present Section 154 with
those of the earlier Codes will indicate that the legislature had purposely thought it fit to employ
only the word "information" without qualifying the said word. Section 139 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure of 1861 (Act 25 of 1861) passed by the Legislative Council of India read that 'every
complaint or information' preferred to an officer in charge of a police station should be reduced into
writing which provision was subsequently modified by Section 112 of the Code of 1872 (Act 10 of
1872) which thereafter read that 'every complaint' preferred to an officer in charge of a police shall
be reduced in writing. The word 'complaint' which occurred in previous two Codes of 1861 and 1872
was deleted and in that place the word 'information' was used in the Codes of 1882 and 1898 which
word is now used in Sections 154, 155, 157 and 190(c) of the present Code of 1973 (Act 2 of 1974). An
overall reading of all the Codes makes it clear that the condition which is sine qua non for recording
a first information report is that there must be an information and that information must disclose a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 8
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
cognizable offence.
33. It is, therefore, manifestly clear that if any information disclosing a cognizable offence is laid
before an officer in charge of a police station satisfying the requirements of Section 154(1) of the
Code, the said police officer has no other option except to enter the substance thereof in the
prescribed form, that is to say, to register a case on the basis of such information."
14. So also, subsequently, a Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Lalita Kumari v.
Government of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in (2014) 2 SCC 1, have also held that
registration of the FIR is mandatory under Section 154 of the Criminal Procedure Code, if the
information discloses commission of a cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry is permissible
in such a situation. The aforesaid rule must be strictly complied with. However, where information
received does not disclose a cognizable offence, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted to ascertain
whether or not cognizable offence is disclosed, so also in matrimonial dispute/family dispute,
commercial offences, medical negligence cases, corruption cases or cases where there is abnormal
delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution there may arise the necessity of preliminary inquiry.
Even if a preliminary inquiry in those limited cases is permissible, the same is not to verify the
veracity or otherwise of the information received, but only to ascertain whether the information
received reveals commission of any cognizable offence.
15. Now coming to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that since the F.I.R.
allegation, as stated above, does not disclose commission of any offence, inasmuch as there is no
mention of the date and time of commission of the offence or the manner in which the crime is
committed, the police should not have treated the same as an F.I.R.. In this regard, he has also
drawn notice of this Court to the ingredients of different offences and the F.I.R. allegations.
In the light of the aforesaid when the allegation made in the FIR registered, is examined, it appears
to this Court that prima facie it discloses certain cognizable offences regarding extortion of money
by the petitioner and his associates from different companies, extending threat to companies and
giving threat to different persons who raised grievance regarding mis- utilization of funds collected
in the name of welfare of the people in the locality etc.. In the information, it is not a requirement
that the same must be very specific, pinpointed and must disclose the time and manner of
commission of the offence. So also, it is not necessary that ingredients of all the penal provisions
that is stated to be disclosed in the report, while registering the same as F.I.R., must be available in
the allegations made to qualify and sustain as F.I.R. The FIR is meant to set the criminal law into
motion to investigate into the information of commission of a cognizable offence. The same is not
the be all and all of a case, so also not an encyclopedia. However, broadly the same must disclose the
commission or suspected commission of a cognizable offence. Therefore, if the same prima-facie
discloses the commission of any cognizable offence, that would suffice and justify its registration.
That being the requirement of law, the contention that is advanced assailing the registration of the
FIR on the aforesaid ground by the learned counsel for the petitioner is held to be bereft of
substance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 9
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
16. It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that even if the FIR discloses
commission of cognizable offence the police could not have plunged to action without recording a
satisfaction on the veracity of the same and the fact that the case is one of such nature which
warrants investigation. According to him, in this case since the police has hurriedly acted upon the
FIR though the same does not disclose commission of any offence and harassed the petitioner in
different manner, the Court should, in view of the law in this regard laid down in the case of Bhajan
Lal (supra), interfere with the investigation.
Needless to say that in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra) the apex Court have held that the
commencement of the investigation by police officer is subject to two conditions, firstly, the police
officer should have reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence as required by Section
157(1) and secondly, the police officer should subjectively satisfy himself as to whether there is
sufficient ground for entering into the investigation even before he starts an investigation into the
facts and circumstances of the case as contemplated under clause (b) of proviso to Section 157(1) of
the Code. The expression "reason to suspect" as occurring in section 157(1) is not qualified as in
section 41 (a) and (g) of the Code wherein the expression reasonable suspicion is used. As the words
"reason to suspect" are apparently clear, plain and unambiguous, considering the context and the
objects of the procedural provision in question, only the plain meaning rule is to be adopted so as to
avoid hardship or absurdity resulting therefrom and the words used are also to be understood only
in common parlance. So read the expression "reason to suspect" the commission of an offence would
mean the sagacity of rationally inferring the commission of a cognizable offence based on the
specific articulate facts mentioned in the first information report as well in the Annexures, if any,
enclosed and any attending circumstances which may not amount to proof. Therefore, the existence
of the reason to suspect the commission of a cognizable offence has to be, prima facie disclosed by
the allegation made in the first information placed before the police officer under Section 154(1).
The meaning of expression "reason to suspect" has to be governed and dictated by the facts and
circumstance of each case and at the stage the question of adequate proof of facts alleged in the first
information report does not arise. As clause (b) of proviso to section 157 of Cr.P.C. permits the police
officer to satisfy himself about the sufficiency of the grounds even before entering on an
investigation, it postulates that the police officer has to draw his satisfaction only on the materials
which are placed before him at that stage, namely, the first information together with the
documents, if any, enclosed. In other words, the police officer has to satisfy himself only on the
allegation mentioned in the first information before he enters on an investigation as to whether
those allegations do constitute a cognizable offence warranting an investigation.
In view of the aforesaid authoritative pronouncement in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra) and since in
this case the FIR lodged discloses the commission of cognizable offence, the decision of the police
officer to investigate the case which is based on subjective satisfaction of the officer concerned with
regard to the fact suspecting the commission of a cognizable offence, cannot be said to be bad and
impermissible in the absence of any material to support the credibility or veracity of such allegation
satisfying him to commence the investigation.
17. The last and final contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the aforesaid
allegation has been made against the petitioner owing to political vendetta, inasmuch as he was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 10
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
opposed to the present ruling political dispensation of the State which can be visualized from the
fact that on a vague and frivolous allegation without any specific detail, the F.I.R. was registered,
investigation was carried on and his Bank accounts were freezed and he is harassed. In this regard,
the Apex Court in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra), in paragraphs-108, 109 and 110 have held as
follows:-
"108. No doubt, there was no love lost between Shri Bhajan Lal and Dharam Pal.
Based on this strained relationship, it has been then emphatically urged by Mr. K.
Parasaran that the entire allegations made in the complaint due to political vendetta
are not only scurrilous and scandalous but also tainted with mala fides, vitiating the
entire proceedings. As it has been repeatedly pointed out earlier the entire matter is
only at a premature stage and the investigation is not yet proceeded with except some
preliminary effort taken on the date of the registration of the case, that is on
November 21, 1987. The evidence has to be gathered after a thorough investigation
and placed before the court on the basis of which alone the court can come to a
conclusion one way or the other on the plea of mala fides. If the allegations are bereft
of truth and made maliciously, we are sure, the investigation will say so. At this stage,
when there are only allegations and recriminations but no evidence, this court cannot
anticipate the result of the investigation and render a finding on the question of mala
fides on the materials at present available. Therefore, we are unable to see any force
in the contention that the complaint should be thrown overboard on the mere
unsubstantiated plea of mala fides. Even assuming that Dharam Pal has laid the
complaint only on account of his personal animosity, that, by itself, will not be a
ground to discard the complaint containing serious allegations which have to be
tested and weighed after the evidence is collected. In this connection, the following
view expressed by Bhagwati, C.J. in Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar, may be
referred to: (SCC p.318, para 16) "It is a well established proposition of law that a
criminal prosecution, if otherwise justifiable and based upon adequate evidence does
not become vitiated on account of mala fides or political vendetta of the first
informant or the complaint."
Beyond the above, we do not wish to add anything more.
109. It was again contended that mala fides are writ large on the extraordinary interest evinced by
the police officers and the hasty direction given by the SP. Needless to say that the question of mala
fide exercise of power will assume significance only if an authority acts for unauthorized purpose.
The proper test to be applied in such a case is as to what is the dominant purpose for which the
power is exercised. The principle of dominant purpose is explained in the following decisions:
(1) King v. Minister of Health; (2) Rex v. Brigton Corporation ex-parte Shoosmity; (3)
Earl Fitzwilliam's Wentworth Estate Co. Ltd. v. Minister of Town and Country
Planning and (4) P.V. Jagannath Rao v. State of Orissa.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 11
Sanatan Mahakud vs State & Others ... Opp. Parties on 13 January, 2021
110. Applying the test laid down in the above decisions to the present case, we are of the opinion that
the dominant purpose of registration of the case and the intended follow up action are only to
investigate the allegations and present a case before the court, if sufficient evidence in support of
those allegations are collected but not to make a character assassination of Shri Bhajan Lal and their
relatives. Therefore, we are not able to see any substance in this submission."
18. So also, the Apex Court in the case of State of Maharashtra & Ors vs Ishwar Piraji Kalpatri,
reported in 1996 SCC (Criminal) 150, have observed that if the ingredients which establish the
commission of the offence or misconduct exist, then the prosecution cannot fail merely because
there was an animus of the complainant or the prosecution against the accused. Allegations of
malafides may be relevant while judging the correctness of the allegations or while examining the
evidence. But the mere fact that the complainant is guilty of malafides, would be no ground for
quashing the prosecution.
19. In view of the aforesaid, since the contention of the petitioner has no support of law and
particularly the case of the petitioner is not covered by the parameters laid down in the case of
Bhajan Lal (supra) for quashment of the F.I.R. and the consequential investigation in exercise of
power, this CRLMC filed invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to
quash the F.I.R. is devoid of merit and, as such, liable to be dismissed.
20. Hence, on consideration of the facts and the submissions made, I am not inclined to entertain
the prayer made. Accordingly, this Criminal Misc. Case stands dismissed. However, the petitioner
shall be at liberty to seek quashment of the proceeding after completion of investigation if proceeded
with, even if no material is brought out disclosing commission of any offence.
The parties may utilize the copy of this order as per the High Court's Notice No.4587 dated
25.03.2020.
.....................
S. Pujahari, J.
PKS/MRS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196449692/ 12
