Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
1 Writ Petition No.2086/2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH,
Writ Petition No.2086/2019
(Sanjay Singh Rajput Vs. High Court of M.P. & Another)
Jabalpur, Dated : 24.04.2019
Shri Jasmeet Singh Hora, Advocate for the petitioner.
Smt. Smita Verma, Advocate for the respondents.
Heard on the question of admission.
2. By the instant petition, the petitioner is seeking quashment of the orders dated 26.05.2016 and
04.12.2018 (Annexures-P/6 & P/8 respectively).
3. The petitioner was appointed on the post of Peon on 04.04.2016 temporarily for a period of 89
days. The petitioner, at the time of his appointment, submitted an affidavit on 22.04.2016 stating
therein that a case is pending before the JMFC, Ashok Nagar, under Sections 130, 133 of the
Representative of the Peoples Act. Although, vide order dated 21.04.2016, he has been acquitted in
the said criminal case and he also supplied the copy of that judgment to the District and Sessions
Judge, Ashok Nagar.
4. The respondent No.2 issued a memorandum/order dated 26.05.2016 (Annexure-P/6) stating that
the petitioner, while submitting his online application in response to an advertisement, in the
column of giving information regarding criminal cases has mentioned "NO" whereas, at the time of
submitting the said application, a criminal case was pending against him. Accordingly, the
selection/candidature of the petitioner was canceled by the District and Sessions Judge, Ashok
Nagar. An appeal was preferred by the petitioner before the respondent No.1 but the said appeal was
also dismissed vide order dated 04.12.2018 (Annexure-P/8), affirming the order passed by the
District and Sessions Judge, Ashok Nagar on 26.05.2016.
5. The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the order of termination of petitioner's
service is in flagrant violence of principles of natural justice as no notice or opportunity was given to
him before passing such order. He also submitted that in an affidavit submitted by him on
22.04.2016, he has disclosed the details about the said criminal case and further vide order dated
21.04.2016, he has been acquitted in the said criminal case, therefore, in such a circumstance, his
termination cannot be said to be proper and legal. To support his contention, he relied upon a
judgment reported in (2018) 1 SCC 268 [Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India & Others].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36666355/ 1
Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
6. Arguments heard. Record perused.
7. Admittedly, the petitioner, in response to an advertisement published on 02.04.2016, submitted
an online application in which he has not disclosed the details about the pending criminal case in a
column specifically asking information regarding criminal cases whether pending or decided.
Thereafter, an appointment order was issued on 04.04.2016 (Annexure-P/2). The petitioner
submitted an affidavit on 22.04.2016 (Annexure-P/3) disclosing the fact regarding pending criminal
case bearing no.298/2004. Although, the same was decided by the Court vide order dated
21.04.2016 in which the petitioner has been acquitted from the charges leveled against him. There is
no dispute in respect of the fact that the petitioner has deliberately suppressed the material
information regarding pending criminal case against him on the date of submitting his online
application for appointment on the post of Peon.
8. Looking to the nature of appointment made in favour of the petitioner and conditions
enumerated therein, it was purely a temporary appointment for a period of 89 days. After getting
appointment and submitting joining on the said post, the petitioner filed an affidavit disclosing the
fact regarding criminal case but the District and Sessions Judge, Ashok Nagar passed an order on
26.05.2016 canceling the selection of the petitioner on the post of Peon.
9. If the order of the District and Sessions Judge, Ashok Nagar, is seen then it is clear that the
candidature of the petitioner was canceled for the reason that he has suppressed material
information regarding pending criminal case, hence he was not eligible to be appointed. The
petitioner was a temporary employee and, therefore, there was no occasion for giving him
opportunity of hearing as he himself has admitted that he has suppressed the material information
in his online application regarding pendency of the criminal case. The Appellate Authority has also
found that the selection of the petitioner was rightly canceled because he had suppressed such
material information. It is not a case in which the services of the petitioner have been terminated
but it is a case in which his selection was canceled as he had violated the condition of advertisement.
Considering the law laid down by Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Avtar Singh (supra), the
larger Bench has observed as under :-
"3. In Avtar Singh V. Union of India, reported in (2016) 8 SCC 471, this Court has
considered in detail as to the circumstances under which the stringent action could
be taken and to what extent the employer can exercise its discretion. Relevant portion
reads as follows:-
"38.1 Information given to the employer by a candidate as to conviction, acquittal or
arrest, or pendency of a criminal case, whether before or after entering into service
must be true and there should be no suppression or false mention of required
information.
38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of candidature for
giving false information, the employer may take notice of special circumstances of the
case, if any, while giving such information.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36666355/ 2
Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
38.3. The employer shall take into consideration the government
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of taking the
decision.
38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a criminal
case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the
application/verification form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
any of the following recourses appropriate to the case may be adopted.
38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, such as
shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion,
ignore such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse. 38.4.2
Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in nature, employer
may cancel candidature or terminate services of the employee.
38.4.3 If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the employer may consider
all relevant facts available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
the continuance of the employee.
38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate.
38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character verification form
regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial nature, employer, in facts and
circumstances of the case, in its discretion may appoint the candidate subject to
decision of such case. 38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to
multiple pending cases such false information by itself will assume significance and
an employer may pass appropriate order cancelling candidature or terminating
services as appointment of a person against whom multiple criminal cases were
pending may not be proper.
38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the time of
filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing authority would
take decision after considering the seriousness of the crime.
38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding departmental enquiry
would be necessary before passing order of termination/removal or dismissal on the
ground of suppression or submitting false information in verification form.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36666355/ 3
Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
38.10. For determining suppression or false information attestation/verification form
has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which was required to be
specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant
comes to knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective
manner while addressing the question of fitness. However, in such cases action
cannot be taken on basis of suppression or submitting false information as to a fact
which was not even asked for.
38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, knowledge of
the fact must be attributable to him."
(emphasis in original) Thus, it is a complete discretion of the employer to consider the candidature
of the candidate whether he is fit to be appointed or not. In the present case also, had such
information regarding pendency of criminal case been disclosed, the candidature of the petitioner
would have not been accepted.
10. The Supreme Court in the case of Devendra Kumar Vs. State of Uttaranchal and Others; reported
in (2013) 9 SCC 363 has very elaborately considered the very situation as involved in the present
case and has observed as under :-
"The issue of obtaining the appointment by misrepresentation is no more res integra.
The question is not whether the applicant is suitable for the post. The pendency of a
criminal case/proceeding is different from suppressing the information of such
pendency. The case pending against a person might not involve moral turpitude but
suppressing of this information itself amounts to moral turpitude. In fact, the
information sought by the employer if not disclosed as required, would definitely
amount to suppression of material information. In that eventuality, the service
becomes liable to be terminated, even if there had been no further trial or the person
concerned stood acquitted/discharged."
This view has been followed by the Division Bench of our High Court in the case of Vinod Kumar
Tomar Vs. Union of India & Others; reported in 2015 (4) MPLJ 648.
11. This Court, recently in the case of Sandeep Raikwar Vs. High Court of Madhya Pradesh (W.P. No.
3828/2019), decided on 26.03.2019 has observed that suppression of information regarding
pendency of criminal case entails termination of services and that termination, in any manner,
cannot be said to illegal. The petitioner, although, relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court
reported in the case of Avtar Singh (supra) but the said case is not applicable in view of the facts of
the present case as in the present case the respondents have canceled the selection of the petitioner
for the reasons that he has violated the condition contained in the advertisement. From perusal of
Annexure-P/1 it is clear that there is a specific column given in the application for disclosing the
information regarding pending/decided criminal cases, if any. The petitioner has not followed this
requirement and not given information, otherwise his candidature might have been rejected by the
authority. The case in which the petitioner is placing reliance, nothing reflects that there was such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36666355/ 4
Sanjay Singh Rajput vs High Court Of M.P. on 24 April, 2019
requirement available in the application itself but he has not given details of criminal cases in
column-12 of the Character Verification Form. Even though, the observation made by the larger
Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Avtar Singh (supra), condition 38.7 gives complete discretion
to the employer to cancel the candidature or terminate the services of a person who has not
disclosed the information regarding pending criminal case. However, in the present case, since the
petitioner is a temporary employee and the order of the Appellate Authority was passed on
04.12.2018 much after the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Avtar Singh (supra), we do not
find any substance in the contention raised by the petitioner specially under the circumstances when
this Court has already dealt with the similar situation and even found termination of a regular
employee valid for the same cause on the basis of which the candidature of the present petitioner
has been canceled.
12. The petition, therefore, being without any substance, is hereby dismissed.
Certified copy as per rules.
(R.S. Jha) (Sanjay Dwivedi)
Judge Judge
Priya.P
Priyanka
DN: c=IN, o=High Court of Madhya
Pradesh, ou=ALL, postalCode=482002,
st=MADHYA PRADESH,
Pithawe
serialNumber=74e4e39d1c040fc71204b
21f23bfef429fde37d003f974c3a62be69
9711217be, cn=Priyanka Pithawe
Date: 2019.05.04 16:42:49 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36666355/ 5
