Sanjay Kumar Singh Alias Sonu vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Sanjay Kumar Singh Alias Sonu vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Deepak Verma
Bench: Deepak Verma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44471
Court No. - 67
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3849 of 2025
Applicant :- Sanjay Kumar Singh Alias Sonu
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Amar Jeet Upadhyay,Vinod Kumar Pandey
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Deepak Verma,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
2. The instant bail application has been filed with a prayer to release the applicant on bail in Case
Crime No. 674 of 2023, registered under Sections 379, 411, 413 IPC, Police Station- Handia, District-
Prayagraj, during pendency of the trial.
3. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. No incriminating article has been recovered
from the possession of the applicant. Alleged recovery is false and planted and not supported by any
public witness. Criminal history of the applicant has been explained in the bail application.
Applicant is languishing in jail since 15.12.2023. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146849869/ 1
Sanjay Kumar Singh Alias Sonu vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
misuse the liberty of bail and co-operate in trial.
4. Learned A.G.A. has opposed the bail prayer of the applicant.
5. Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case, submissions of learned counsel for the
parties and keeping in view the nature of offence, evidence, complicity of accused and without
expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has
made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
6. Let the applicant- Sanjay Kumar Singh Alias Sonu, who is involved in the aforesaid case crime, be
released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the
release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence by intimidating/
pressurizing the witnesses, during the investigation or trial.
(ii) The applicant shall cooperate in the trial sincerely without seeking any
adjournment.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity or commission of any
crime after being released on bail.
7. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Aditya
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146849869/ 2
