Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Sr. No. 30
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Heard on: 13.04.2023.
Pronounced on: 19.04.2023.
SWP No. 1415/2006
IA No. 1/2017
Santosh Kumar ....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through :- Mrs. Surinder Kour, Senior Advocate with
Ms. Manpreet Kour, Advocate.
V/s
UOI ....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Suneel Malhotra, CGSC.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner has challenged his dismissal from the service through the medium of this writ
petition.
2. The petitioner's case is that the petitioner was appointed on 26th April 1995 as Constable in BSF
and allotted No. 95106486. The petitioner has undergone training at STC BSF Bangalore.
Thereafter, the petitioner was posted in 145 Bn and remained posted at Tripura, Trimora
(Karnataka), wherefrom the petitioner was shifted to 99 Bn and remained posted in Assam, and
from that place, he was shifted to 171 Bn and remained posted in Kashmir, Punjab, Singhpura
(Kashmir). In March 2006, the petitioner was deputed along with Unit to election duty at Shiv Sagar
Assam. In April 2006, after completion of the election duty in Assam, the Unit was sent to West
Bengal for election duty and when the Train in which the Unit was traveling reached at Newbagh
goam Assam, the petitioner deboarded the train to take water, and meanwhile the train left, but the
petitioner in next train itself reached Anand Marg District Purulia (West Bengal) and caught his
Unit on same day i.e. 14th April 2006. It is averred in the petition that the attendance of the
petitioner was noted in the Mess where the petitioner along with other Unit people had taken meals
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 1
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
but Authority concerned did not record the attendance of the petitioner on 14th April 2006. The
petitioner thereafter went to Company Headquarters in Siddiqui School West Bengal District
Purulia and his attendance was duly marked by the respondents.
It is further averred in the petition that the respondents on 25th July 2006 framed charge against
the petitioner under section 19(a) of the BSF Act 1968. Charges framed against the petitioner are
that on 13th April 2006 at about 0800 hours he absented himself for a period of three days enroute
while travelling with Unit for Election duty from Barpet to Purulia till 16th April 2006 at about 1030
hours.
The allegations under Section 26 leveled was that on 21st April 2006 at about 1930 hours while on
polling duty he was found intoxicated at Kamarpur Primary School Polling Station. It is further
alleged that he remained absent for eight days from 16th may 2006 at about 0020 hours till 24th
May 2006. The respondents dismissed the petitioner from service on the ground that he pleaded
guilty to the charges and accordingly, the charges were held to be proved in consequence to which
order was dismissal was passed.
3. The said order of dismissal is challenged by the petitioner, inter alia, on the following grounds:
a. That the authority has not recorded the attendance of the petitioner on 14th April
2006 when the petitioner reached along with Unit by another Train and it is not the
fault of the petitioner. b. The respondents have not given any opportunity of being
heard to the petitioner and imposed punishment without any reasonable cause.
c. That the order is illegal and an error apparent on the face of record on the ground
that that command has not heard the petitioner and has not complied with the
provisions of Rule 45 and neither offence report was given to the petitioner as
required under rule 43. d. The order is illegal as the respondents have not conducted
any Court of Inquiry as required under the provisions of Rule 177 of BSF Act and
Rules.
e. The act of the respondents is illegal on the ground that the respondents have
leveled allegation under Section 26 of the BSF Act for intoxication. The respondents
have not got conducted the medical examination of the petitioner and neither the
statement of the doctor was recorded nor the petitioner was given an opportunity to
defend the case properly.
f. The order of dismissal is also challenged on the ground that the respondents have
not followed the procedure and passed the order in a mechanical manner and it is
settled law that the employee has a right to defend himself in an inquiry and it is
independent right of the employee and if the right has not been given to the
delinquent, the aggrieved employee can challenge the order if it is bad in law and in
the present case the respondents have not followed any provisions of BSF Act and
Rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 2
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
4. Objections or counter affidavit has been filed by the respondents and have contested the claims
and pleas raised by the petitioner in his support and reliefs claimed in the writ petition. The
respondents in their counter have taken the following pleas:
"Amongst other pleas taken by the respondents in their objections, the respondents
have concluded that the petitioner is a habitual offender and an undisciplined soldier.
Apart from the nine incidents mentioned at page 2 of the objections where
punishments and warnings were issued against him, the petitioner again absented
himself on 18.04.2006 from Barpeta, Assam while the unit was on Assembly election
duty. The petitioner reported back after three days absence without leave. He was
also found in a state of intoxication while deployed at polling station Kamarpur on
21.04.2006. The petitioner again on 16.05.2006 absented himself from Shaharanpur
from the train enroute while the unit was coming back after completion of election
duty in Assam/West Bengal on 16.05.2006. The petitioner reported back on
24.05.2006 (AN) after absenting himself for eight days.
The preliminary hearing of the petitioner was done by Commandant under Rule 45 of
BSF Rules 1969 on 12.06.2006. Record of Evidence under Rule 45(iii) of BSF Rules
1969 was ordered by Commandant after hearing the petitioner under Rule 45.
Summary Security Force Court was ordered by the Commandant after going through
the Record of Evidence. The petitioner was tried by the SSFC on 28.07.2006; he
pleaded 'guilty' unequivocally. After the plea of 'guilty', the petitioner was explained
the nature of charges and procedure to be followed as required vide Rule 142 (2) of
BSF Rules 1969. The petitioner was awarded sentence 'to be dismissed from service'.
The finding and sentence of the court was promulgated to the petitioner on
28.07.2006 and was struck from the strength of BSF with effect from 28.07.2006.
The punishment awarded to the petitioner by the SSFC was strictly in accordance
with the statutory provisions of BSF Act & Rules."
5. In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon the judgments
of the Supreme Court in the case of D. G. Railway Protection Force and others v. K. Raghuram Babu,
AIR 2008 SC 1958; and in the case of Union of India and others v. Narain Singh, AIR 2002 SC 2102.
6. The precise ground on the basis of which the legality of the act of dismissal of the petitioner by the
respondents is to be checked is whether the plea of the respondents that the petitioner pleaded
guilty could be believed and is legally sustainable, and as to whether simply recording the plea of
guilt without recording any satisfaction or obtaining his signatures of the accused are sufficient.
7. Learned counsel for the respondents submits that Rule 142 of the Border Security Force Rules,
1968 does not provide obtaining of signatures in support of the plea of guilt. He submits that at the
time when the plea of guilt was recorded and order of dismissal was imposed upon the petitioner
there was not such requirement under law for recording the satisfaction or obtaining the signatures
of the officer who has been charged i.e. the petitioner. He has referred to provisions of Rule 142 of
the Border Security Force Rules, 1968 as it existed at the time when the proceedings were taken in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 3
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
this case and the plea of guilt was referred. The said Rule reproduces thus:
142. General plea of "Guilty" or "Not Guilty".- (1) The accused person's plea of
"Guilty" or "Not Guilty" (or if he refuses to plead or does not plead intelligibly either
one or the other), a plea of "Not Guilty" shall be recorded on each charge.
(2) If an accused person pleads "Guilty", that plea shall be recorded as the finding of the Court' but
before it is recorded, the Court shall ascertain that the accused understands the nature of the charge
to which he has pleaded guilty and shall inform him of the general effect of that plea, and in
particular of the meaning of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty, and of the difference in
procedure which will be made by the plea of guilty and shall advise him to withdraw that plea if it
appears from the record or abstract of evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought to plead
not guilty.
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty to the first two or more charges laid in the alternative, the
Court may after sub-rule (2) has been complied with and before the accused is arraigned on the
alternative charge or charges, withdraw such alternative charge or charges as follow the charge to
which the accused has pleaded guilty without requiring the accused to plead thereto, and a record to
that effect shall be made in the proceedings of the Court."
8. It is further submitted that the requirement of putting his signatures on the certificate and
recording satisfaction was after the provisions of Rule 142 of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969
was amended in 2011, with following incorporation to Rule 142:
142. General plea of "Guilty" or "Not Guilty".-
(1) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (2)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.
[Provided that after recording plea of guilty, signature of the accused and friend of the accused shall
be obtained.] Ins. by S.O.2628(E), dated 25.11.2011.
(3) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx"
9. Learned counsel for the respondents thus submits that as there was no requirement of obtaining
signatures or to record the certificate of satisfaction, the plea of guilt recorded by the officer was
sufficient, so the order of dismissal does not suffer from any illegality.
10. Heard learned counsel for the parties.
11. Similar issue was raised before this Court in an Appeal bearing LPA No. 13/2020 in a case titled
Sunil Kumar v. Union of India and others. In the said case also, the writ petitioner was claimed to
have pleaded guilty. This court in the aforesaid case while dealing with the issue held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 4
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
"20. Form a reading of Rule 142 of the Rules, it is abundantly clear that the procedure
that is required to be followed and the manner in which the "plea of guilty" or "not
guilty" is to be recorded is mandatory in nature lest in the event of breach the trial
would be vitiated on account of principles of natural justice. The Rule lays down
following steps to be followed:-
(i) Plea of "guilty" or "not guilty" shall be recorded on each charge. If the accused
refuses to plead or does not plead intelligibly "guilty" or "not guilty", a plea of "not
guilty" shall be recorded on each charge.
(ii) If an accused person pleads "Guilty" the plea shall be recorded by the Court as the
finding of the Court.
(iii) Before recording such plea of "guilty" the Court shall ascertain that the accused
understands the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty.
(iv) The accused shall also be informed by the Court of the general effects of making
plea of "guilty". He should be made aware of the meaning of the charge to which he
has pleaded "guilty" and of the difference in procedure which will be followed
consequent upon such plea.
(v) The Court shall also advise the accused making plea of "guilty" to withdraw such
plea where the Court is of the opinion based upon the record or abstract of evidence,
if any, or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty.
(vi) That after recording plea of "guilty", signatures of the accused and the friend of
the accused shall be obtained. (This was, however, added by way of an amendment
made in Rule 142 of the Rules by S.O.2628(E) dated 25.11.2011.
21. In light of the procedure provided in Rule 142 of the Rules, when we examine the original record
produced by Mr. Vishal Sharma, learned DSGI, we find that the „plea of guilty(cid:129) recorded by the
SSFC is not in consonance with law and has occasioned serious miscarriage of justice. The writ
petitioner has been inflicted a major penalty of "dismissal from service" without holding proper
trial. The writ petitioner, as is evident from the original record, appears to have appeared before the
Court along with his friend appointed by the respondents, namely, Sh. D.S.Samyal, Deputy
Commandant. The charge-sheet was read over and explained to the writ petitioner and he was put
four questions. Question No.1 was in respect of charge No.1 to which the writ petitioner answered
"guilty". Similarly, to the question No.2, which was in respect of charge No.2, the writ petitioner
answered "guilty". It seems that without first explaining the writ petitioner the meaning of the
charges to which he allegedly pleaded guilty and without making him aware of the general effects of
that plea and difference in the procedure that will be followed consequent upon such plea, the Court
recorded in proceedings the "plea of guilty"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 5
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
allegedly made by the writ petitioner. Neither the writ petitioner nor his friend
appointed by the respondents has acknowledged the plea and put their signatures in
lieu thereof.
22. It is true that as per Rule 142 of the Rules, as it stood on 01.05.2001, signatures of the accused
were not required on the "plea of guilty" but having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case, more particularly, when the writ petitioner has all along maintained that he was not guilty of
the charges and remained absent from duty due to the reasons beyond his control, the Court should
have been more careful while recording the "plea of guilty" and should have done well to obtain
signatures of the writ petitioner as also friend of the writ petitioner appointed by the respondents to
defend him. In the offence report the writ petitioner has clearly denied the charges, which ultimately
became subject matter of trial before the SSFC. In his statutory appeal made to the Director General
of Police, Border Security Force the writ petitioner has clearly stated that he had not made any „plea
of guilty(cid:129) before the SSFC. We also cannot lose sight of the fact that the writ petitioner had made
serious allegations of harassment against his Commandant, who ultimately convened and presided
over the SSFC. It is the said Commandant, who ultimately sentenced the writ petitioner by inflicting
the punishment of "dismissal from service". Otherwise also, in view of the clear stand of the writ
petitioner taken while recording his statement during preparation of "Record of Evidence" by Sh.
Bhanwar Singh appointed by the Commandant, it was incumbent upon the Court to advise the writ
petitioner to withdraw his plea and try him as per the procedure laid down in the Rules. This part of
the provisions contained in Sub Rule 2 of Rule 142 of the Rules also does not appear to have been
complied with by the SSFC.
23. Moreover plea of "guilty" has been recorded on a cyclostyle/type sheet with blanks which have
been filled up later during recording of the plea. The questions asked to the writ petitioner
Constable are in English language without making it clear whether the questions were also
translated in the manner the charge sheet is said to have been translated and read over to the writ
petitioner. After recording the plea of guilty, the Commandant presiding over the Court has made a
note by borrowing the language contained in Rule 142 of the Rules, as is evident from Sheet-B of the
proceedings of the Court, which for facility of reference is reproduced herein below:-
"............The accused having pleaded guilty to both the charges the Court explains to
the accused the meaning of charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertains
that the accused understands the nature of the charge(s) to .............which he has
pleaded guilty. The Court also inform the accused the general effect of that plea and
the difference in procedure which will be followed consequent to the said plea. The
Court having satisfied itself that the accused understands the charge(s) and the effect
of his plea of guilty, accepts and records the same. The provisions of Rule 142(2) are
complied with.
Sd/-
(P.C.Sharma, Commandant)"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 6
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
24. From a reading of the extracted portion of the proceedings, it is crystal clear that is a pre-typed
page where the particulars of the writ petitioner have been filled in with questions as to whether you
plead "guilty" or "not guilty" to the charges. Below the questions, there are answer using singular
word "guilty" and in the last paragraph, compliance to Rule 142 of the Rules is indicated by
borrowing the language used in Rule 142 itself. As already noted, the plea of "guilty" is neither
signed by the writ petitioner nor by Dy. Commandant D.S.Samyal, who acted as friend of the writ
petitioner in the trial.
25. The manner in which the plea is recorded and the other attending circumstances bring the „plea
of guilty(cid:129) recorded by the SSFC in the realm of reasonable suspicion that the writ petitioner ever
pleaded "guilty" before the SSFC. Merely saying or noting in the proceedings that the Rule 142 has
been complied with is not the compliance. Before the plea of guilty is recorded, it is incumbent upon
the Court to explain to the accused the nature and manner of the charge and forewarn him about the
consequences and effect of the plea of guilty. The accused must be made aware that different
procedure will be followed, if he pleads "guilty" and that one or more of the punishments laid down
under the Act could be inflicted. It is only, if after understanding the charge and effects of recording
plea of "guilty" as also being aware that a different procedure shall follow consequent upon
recording of such plea, the accused voluntarily pleads "guilty" to the charges, such plea should be
recorded. Warning to the accused of the general effects of the plea and the difference in procedure
which will be followed consequent upon recording of such plea is sine qua non for recording „plea of
guilty(cid:129).
26. In the instant case, the respondents have put the cart before the horse. The plea of "guilty" is
recorded first and then the writ petitioner has been stated to have been informed about what is laid
down in Rule 142 of the Rules. Even in the absence of their being specific provision in Rule 142 in
the year 2001, it was prudent for the SSFC to obtain signatures of the writ petitioners or his friend
appointed to defend him in acknowledgement of such plea of "guilty" made by the writ petitioner to
the charges for which he was put on trial by the SSFC.
27. Having regard to the facts and circumstances attending the instant case and the manner in
which the alleged "plea of guilty" of the writ petitioner has been recorded, leaves us with no option
but to come to a conclusion that the writ petitioner has either not pleaded "guilty" to any of the
charge as is recorded by the Court or same was not voluntarily in nature. We are, therefore, of
considered view that the right of the writ petitioner to have a fair trial before the SSFC has been
violated and the writ petitioner has been condemned unheard.
28. For the foregoing reasons, we find that the Summary Security Force Court proceedings including
the award of sentence of "dismissal from service" are entirely vitiated. The Writ Court has not
adverted to this aspect in right perspective and has without indicating much reasons concluded that
the dismissal of the writ petitioner from service was in consonance with Rule 22 and, therefore, does
not call for any interference. Whether or not the "plea of guilty" attributed to the writ petitioner was
rightly recorded or not has not been dealt with by the Writ Court at all."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 7
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
12. In 2003 (3) JKJ 381 [HC] case titled Chanchal Singh v. Union of India and Ors. also, same
question was in issue at this court while dealing with the scope of Rule 142 of the Border Security
Force Rules observed as under:
"16. Provisions of Rule 142 of BSF Rules are mandatory in nature and thus the
procedure prescribed therein is to be strictly adhered to while recording the plea of
guilt of the accused. This view was taken by a Division Bench of this Court in Union
of India and Ors. v. Ex Havaldar Prithpal Singh and Ors., 1991 KLJ 513 which reads -
"At the time of recording the 'plea of guilt' of the accused in a Summary Trail as well
the accused should be necessarily informed of the nature of the charges leveled
against him ands the Court should ascertain that the accused has understood the
nature of the charge to which he pleads guilty and shall inform him of the general
effect of the plea and in particular of the meaning of the charge to which he pleads
guilty. The Court should further require to advise the accused to withdraw that plea if
it appears from summary of evidence or otherwise that the accused ought to plead
not guilty- Non fulfillment of such a procedure violates and said rule and vitiates the
trial as the rule is mandatory in nature. Signature of the accused in token of the plea
of guilt should be obtained which will show that the accused has willingly 'pleaded
guilty'. The Court should also certify this compliance of the rule in the minutes of the
proceedings of the trial."
17. Since Rule 142 of BSF Rules is pari-materia with Rule 125 of Army Act, the ratio of above
judgment has full application to this case.
18. As noticed above, there is absolutely no record that inspires confidence of the Court recording
the plea of guilty of the accused/petitioner before the summary security Force Court. Therefore, in
absence of any record in this respect the contention of the respondents that the accused/petitioner
pleaded guilty before the Summary Security Force Court, which was recorded under Rule 142 of the
BSF Rules, 1969 cannot be accepted. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that the accused did
not plead guilty before the Summary Security Force Court as there is no such record, hence the
sentence awarded to the petitioner for desertion under Section 18(1) of the BSF Act vide the
impugned order dated 18,11.1999 is quashed."
13. Perusal of the record of this file would also show that the petitioner's "plea of guilt" recorded in
this case is not in consonance with the law and has thus occasioned in causing great miscarriage of
justice. The petitioner has been on the basis of such plea dismissed from the service without holding
a proper trial and thus, in violation of the principles of natural justice. The record does not show
that before recording the plea of guilt of the petitioner, he was explained the meaning of charges and
also if he pleads guilty what would be the consequences. Even otherwise, the plea of guilt as is
evident from the record has been recorded on the cyclostyle type sheets with blanks which have been
filled up later during recording of the plea. The questions put to the petitioner are in English
language, and it is nowhere stated that the questions, which have been recorded in English, were
ever been explained to him and was made to understand the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 8
Santosh Kumar vs Uoi on 19 April, 2023
14. Having regard to what has been stated hereinabove, after taking into consideration the facts and
circumstances of the case, record produced by the respondents and the judgments referred above
and law laid down therein, the petitioner's writ petition is required to be allowed and accordingly
the same is allowed and by writ of certiorari, Order impugned No.Estt/Disc/171/Bn/06/9935-
10000 dated 28.07.2006 is quashed. The writ petitioner shall be deemed to have been reinstated in
service with effect from the date he was dismissed from service with all consequential benefits. It
shall, however, remain open to the respondents to proceed with and conclude the trial by Summary
Security Force Court de novo within two months. The disbursement of consequential benefits shall
be dependent upon the outcome of de novo trial by SSFC.
15. Record be returned back.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE Jammu:
19.04.2023 Raj Kumar Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No. Whether the order is
reportable? Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36012058/ 9
