Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20
September, 2021
Author: Vishal Mishra
Bench: Vishal Mishra
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
Jabalpur, Dated : 20.09.2021
W.P.No. 13633/2017
(Siddhmani Mishra and others Vs. State of M.P. and others)
Dr. Anuvad Shrivastava, learned counsel for the petitioners.
Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
W.P.No. 13708/2017 (Kailash Narayan and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala,
learned counsel for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the
respondents/State.
W.P.No. 14120/2017 (Sukhlal and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Dr. Anuvad Shrivastava,
learned counsel for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the
respondents/State.
W.P.No. 14461/2017 (Narendra Jaiswal and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh,
learned counsel for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the
respondents/State. Shri Pramod Kumar Sahu, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Badri Prasad Sahu and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Dalbeer Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Pramod Kumar
Sahu, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Smt. Kiran Raghuvanshi and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Abhijeet
Bhowmik, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 1
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
(Dhaniram Patel and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Dr. Anuvad Shrivastava, learned counsel
for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Pushpendra Singh Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh, learned counsel for the
petitioner. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Pramod Kumar
Sahu, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Mahendra Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Jagdish Prasad Pawar and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Abhijeet
Bhowmik, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Mukhtar Mohd. Khan and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Pancham Lal Raikwar and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Abhijeet
Bhowmik, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Shiv Shankar Tripathi and anr. Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Pramod
Kumar Sahu, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
(Krishn Pratap Singh and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri V.D.S. Chouhan, learned counsel
for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Ashok Kumar Verma and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Rahul Choubey, learned counsel
for the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Anish Kumar Shukla and anr. Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Sanjay Singh, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Natwar Choubey and anr. Vs. State of M.P. and others) Dr. Anuvad Shrivastava, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Leeladhar Choubey and Anr. Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Suryakant Dubey Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri V.D.S. Chouhan, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State. Shri Pramod Kumar
Sahu, learned counsel for respondent no. 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 2
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
(Laxmi Narayan Yadav and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Jafar Khan, learned counsel for
the petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
(Santosh Raghuwanshi and Anr. Vs. State of M.P. and others) Shri Anil Lala, learned counsel for the
petitioners. Shri Ankit Agrawal, learned Govt. Adv. for the respondents/State.
As the common question of compulsory retirement is involved in all these petitions, therefore, they
are taken up for analogous hearing.
For the sake of convenience the facts and taken from W.P. No. 22251/2013.
The present petition has been seeking the following reliefs :-
(a) to quash the circular dated 19.8.2010 issued by the respondent no. 1.
(b) to direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for regularization
in services.
(c) to quash the order dated 20.9.2012.
(d) to direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for regularization
in services.
(e) to direct the respondents not to discontinue the services of petitioners.
(f) to direct the respondents to pay salary in the pay scale of Rs.4440- 7440 pm to the
petitioners.
(g) Any other relief which the Hon'ble court deem fit and proper looking to the facts
and circumstances of the case in favour of the petitioner.
It is pointed out that the aforesaid controversy came up before this court Bench at Indore in W.P.
No. 3975/2018, (Hanuman Joshi and others Vs. State of M.P. and others) and in analogous hearing,
the controversy was put to rest, vide order dated 17th of October 2019 and the petition was allowed
and the order of compulsory retirement was quashed. The court has held as under:-
11. The petitioners were waiting for their absorption order, but to their utter surprise
the respondent no.2 vide its order dated 13/09/2017 has directed the respondent
no.4 as well as the liquidators of All the District Co-operative Agriculture and Rural
Development Bank, (ARDB's) of the State to compulsorily retire the petitioners only
on the ground that they have not been absorbed till date and the respondent no.4 is
not in a position to pay regular salary to its employees. Being aggrieved by the said
order, the petitioners have filed the present petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 3
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
12. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that although the petitioners have
found eligible for absorption, the respondent has not passed any order regarding
absorption of the petitioners in accordance with the scheme of absorption floated by
the respondent. It is further submitted that the process of absorption is not yet
completed, therefore, the petitioners cannot be compulsorily retired. It has been
further stated that the petitioners have not paid their regular salary since August,
2011. He further submitted that other similarly situated employees of the ARDB's
have also been absorbed in the services of District Central Co-operative Bank,
(DCCB's) and have been paid their dues, but the petitioners are proposed for
compulsory retirement. It is further submitted that as many as 53 vacant posts are
available in Rajgarh District, but the said posts are being filled up by direct
recruitment. When the petitioners have be found eligible for in DCCB's and the
vacant posts available then the said posts ought to have been filled up by the
respondent by absorption of the petitioners on such vacant posts. In such
circumstances, he submits that both the petitions deserves to be allowed.
13. The respondents have filed their reply and in the said reply, the respondents have
stated that after the impugned communication dated 13/09/2017, the respondent
no.2 has issued a Circular dated 17/05/2018 on the subject absorption. It is
submitted that in pursuance of aforesaid communication and subsequent Policy, the
process of absorption of employees of respondent no.5 including the petitioners is in
progress. It has further been stated that initially the Policy for absorption was for one
year only. However, the same was subsequently extended upto 30/06/2017. The final
decision in respect of absorption of employees of respondent 5 was pending and in
pursuance of letter dated 4/03/2017, extended period was expired on 30/06/2017.
14. In view of the reply submitted by the respondents that as the matter of absorption
is pending before the respondent(s), therefore, instead of deciding the case on merit,
I deem it proper to dispose of both these writ petitions by issuing following directions
:-
(i) That, the impugned order dated 13/09/2017 is hereby set aside. It is directed that
the respondents shall complete the process of absorption of the petitioners in DCCBs
within a period of six months from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order.
(ii) So far as payment of salary to the petitioners is concerned, the respondent no.5
Bank is in liquidation, therefore, as per Section 71 of the M.P. Co-operative Societies
Act, 1960, the liquidator is having power to determine the claim of the petitioners. In
view of the aforesaid, the petitioners are free to make their claim before the liquidator
regarding the payment of salary, within a period of one month from the date of
certified copy of the order and on receipt of such claim, the liquidator shall decide the
same in accordance with law, preferably within a period of three months.
A copy of this order be retained in the record of
W.P.No.18107/2017.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 4
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
The grounds which are required to be considered by the Authorities while
compulsory retiring a Government Servant was considered in the case of Madhya
Pradesh State Cooperative Dairy Federation Limited And Anothher Vs. Rajnesh
Kumar Jamindar and Others, reported in (2009) 15 SCC 221, wherein the Division
Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court and has held as under :-
"The law relating to compulsory retirement in public interest is no longer res integra.
The provisions had been made principally for weeding out dead wood. An order of
compulsory retirement being not penal in nature can be subject to judicial review
inter alia :
(I) when it is based on no material;
(ii) When it is arbitrary;
(iii) when it is without application of mind; and
(iv) when there is no evidence in support of the case."
In the present case, no such conditions are available to the respondents to compulsory retire the
petitioner. The only reason which has been shown by the respondents while compulsory retiring the
person is the financial constraints to be faced by the employer which is not the criteria for
consideration for compulsory retiring a employee. Compulsory retirement by way of an economic
measure is in the interest of the employer Such a power does not even exist in the Regulations nor
had any such ground been taken in the counter-affidavit before the High Court. Furthermore, it is
well settled that while a power is exercised by an authority, ordinarily the reasons contained in the
order should be supported by the materials on record. The grounds which are required to be taken
for compulsory retirement is when the employee is declared as a deadwood for the institution.
It is submitted that in all these writ petitions, the petitioners have been compulsorily retired by a
common order in pursuance to the directions given by the senior authorities therefore the judgment
is fully applicable to the case of the petitioners. In the first session, when the matter was taken up
the State counsel was directed to seek instructions in the matter with respect to the fact that whether
the judgment passed in the case of Hanuman Joshi and others, (supra) covers the issue and after
going through the judgment and the pleadings and the writ petition, counsel appearing for the State
fairly submits in the second round that as far as the quashment of order of compulsory retirement is
concerned, the issue is covered but the petitioners were found fit for absorption. The aforesaid fact
was specifically pleaded that the petitioners were found eligible for absorption. But in the present
case, the petitioners cases are to be scrutinized to find out whether they are fit for absorption.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 5
Santosh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 September, 2021
At this stage, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that identically placed
employees like petitioners have already been considered and granted absorption and on this ground
alone several petitioners have filed applications for withdrawal of the petitions because their
services have already been absorbed and the only grievance, which remains to be considered by the
authorities regarding their payments and emoluments. Therefore, they have preferred to withdraw
their writ petitions and raise their grievances before the department itself.
As large number of identically placed employees have already been considered and absorbed in the
services, therefore, the prayer is made to dispose of these petitions in the light of the case of
Hanuman Joshi and others, (supra) and the authorities may be granted liberty to examine the cases
of the petitioners and if they are found identically situated, then the benefit as extended to others be
also extended to the petitioners.
Learned counsel appearing for the State has no objection to the innocuous prayer made by learned
counsel for the petitioners, but submits that the liberty may be granted to the State to verify this
aspect whether the petitioners are identically situated to others and whether they are eligible for
absorption of their services in the respondent- department.
The prayer of respondents appears to be reasonable. In these circumstances, all these writ petitions
are disposed of with the direction to the petitioners to file detailed separate individual
comprehensive fresh representation to the respondent(s), who has passed the order of compulsory
retirement within a period of fifteen days from today and in case such representations are filed, the
authorities are directed to dwell upon the same and pass self contained speaking order and
communicate the outcome of the same to the petitioners within a period of three months from the
date of receipt of certified copy of this order alongwith separate and individual representation. It is
made clear that the respondents - authorities will be at liberty to examine the cases of the
petitioners/employees and will see whether they are entitled for absorption. They are further
required to see that whether they are similarly situated to the identically placed employees, who
hare already been considered and granted the benefit of absorption. If the petitioners are found
entitled for the benefit as claimed by them, the same may be extended to them within the aforesaid
period or else a self contained speaking order be passed by the authorities and outcome be
communicated to them. The orders of compulsory retirement, (in all these writ petitions) are
quashed.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
No orders as to costs.
(VISHAL MISHRA) JUDGE bks BASANT KUMAR SHRIVAS 2021.09.24 10:56:25 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143493930/ 6
