Saravanan @ Sai Saravanan vs State Represented By Inspector Of ... on 11 March, 2020
Saravanan @ Sai Saravanan vs State Represented By Inspector
Of ... on 11 March, 2020
Author: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan
Bench: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan
CRL.O.P.No.6480 of 2016
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 11.03.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN
CRL.O.P.No.6480 of 2016
and Crl.MP.No.3368 of 2016
Saravanan @ Sai Saravanan ... Petitioner
Vs.
1. State Represented by Inspector of Police,
E-1, Ponneri Police Station,
Tiruvallur District
2. M.Mari ... Respondents
PRAYER: Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
praying to call for the records relating to FIR in Crime No.176 of 2015 on the
file of the respondent police and quash the same.
For Petitioner : Mr.V.Murugesan
For Respondents
For R1 : Mr.M.Mohamed Riyaz
Additional Public Prosecutor.
For R2 : No Appearance
ORDER
This petition has been filed to quash the F.I.R. in Crime No.176 of 2015 registered by the first
respondent police for offences under Sections 341, 294(b) and 506(i) IPC, as against the petitioner.
2. The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit http://www.judis.nic.in that the
petitioner is an innocent person and he has not committed any offence as alleged by the
prosecution. Without any base, the first respondent police registered a case in Crime No.176 of 2015
for offences under Sections 341, 294(b) and 506(i) IPC, as against the petitioner. Hence he prayed to
quash the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152044421/ 1
Saravanan @ Sai Saravanan vs State Represented By Inspector Of ... on 11 March, 2020
3. The learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that the investigation is almost completed
and the respondent police have only to file final report.
4. Heard Mr.V.Murugesan, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr.M.Mohamed Riyaz,
learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the first respondent.
5. It is seen from the First Information Report that there are specific allegations as against the
petitioner to attract the offences, which have to be investigated in depth. Further the FIR is not an
encyclopedia and it need not contain all facts and it cannot be quashed in the threshold. This Court
finds that the FIR discloses prima facie commission of cognizable offence and as
http://www.judis.nic.in such this Court cannot interfere with the investigation. The investigating
machinery has to step in to investigate, grab and unearth the crime in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in the Code.
6. It is relevant to rely upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India passed in
Crl.A.No.255 of 2019 dated 12.02.2019 in the case of Sau. Kamal Shivaji Pokarnekar vs. the State of
Maharashtra & ors., as follows:-
"4. The only point that arises for our consideration in this case is whether the High
Court was right in setting aside the order by which process was issued. It is settled
law that the Magistrate, at the stage of taking cognizance and summoning, is required
to apply his judicial mind only with a view to taking cognizance of the offence, or in
other words, to find out whether a prima facie case has been made out for
summoning the accused persons. The learned Magistrate is not required to evaluate
the merits of the material or evidence in support of the complaint, because the
Magistrate must not undertake the exercise to find out whether the materials would
lead to a conviction or not.
http://www.judis.nic.in
5. Quashing the criminal proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint
does not disclose any offence, or is frivolous, vexatious, or oppressive. If the
allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance
has been taken by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same. It is
not necessary that a meticulous analysis of the case should be done before the Trial to
find out whether the case would end in conviction or acquittal. If it appears on a
reading of the complaint and consideration of the allegations therein, in the light of
the statement made on oath that the ingredients of the offence are disclosed, there
would be no justification for the High Court to interfere.
......................
9. Having heard the learned Senior Counsel and examined the material on record, we
are of the considered view that the High Court ought not to have set aside the order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152044421/ 2
Saravanan @ Sai Saravanan vs State Represented By Inspector Of ... on 11 March, 2020
passed by the Trial Court issuing summons to the Respondents. A perusal of the
complaint discloses that prima facie, offences that are alleged against the
Respondents. The correctness or otherwise of the said allegations has to be decided
only in the http://www.judis.nic.in Trial. At the initial stage of issuance of process it
is not open to the Courts to stifle the proceedings by entering into the merits of the
contentions made on behalf of the accused. Criminal complaints cannot be quashed
only on the ground that the allegations made therein appear to be of a civil nature. If
the ingredients of the offence alleged against the accused are prima facie made out in
the complaint, the criminal proceeding shall not be interdicted."
7. In view of the above discussion, this Court is not inclined to quash the First Information Report.
Accordingly, this Criminal Original Petition stands dismissed. However, considering the crime is of
the year 2015, the first respondent is directed to complete the investigation in Crime No.176 of 2015
and file a final report within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this Order,
before the jurisdiction Magistrate, if not already filed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petition is closed.
11.03.2020 Internet : Yes / No Index : Yes / No Speaking / Non Speaking order lok
http://www.judis.nic.in G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN, J.
lok To
1. The Inspector of Police, E-1, Ponneri Police Station, Tiruvallur District
2. The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
11.03.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152044421/ 3
