Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16
April, 2025
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K. Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLMC No.3657 of 2024
Sasmita Pradhan ..... Petitioner
Represented By Adv. -
Prateik Parija
-versus-
State Of Odisha (vig.) ..... Opposite Parties
Represented By Adv. -
Mr.N.Maharana, A.S.C. for
Vig. Department
CORAM:
JUSTICE A.K. MOHAPATRA
_____________________________________________________
Date of Hearing : 05.10.2024 | Date of Judgment: 16.04.2025
_____________________________________________________
A.K. Mohapatra, J. :
1. The present CRLMC application has been filed by the Petitioner with a prayer to quash the
criminal proceeding bearing Vigilance PS Case No.20/2004, corresponding to T.R .No. 83/2007,
pending in the Court of Ld. Special Judge (Vigilance), Bhubaneswar, so far as the same relates to the
present Petitioner.
FACTUAL MATRIX OF THE CASE
2. A concise summary of the essential facts of the present case is reproduced herewith; Initially,
allegations of acquiring disproportionate assets were made against the Petitioner(cid:128) husband, one Sri.
Chittaranjan Senapati, Jr. M.V.I. Following such allegations, his residential government quarters,
the residential house of his father-in-law and other places were searched on 10.06.2004, on the
strength of a search warrant issued by the Spl. C.J.M, Vigilance, Bhubaneswar. During enquiry into
the matter it was found that the principal accused had accumulated assets to the tune of
Rs.29,65,272/- which is disproportionate to all of his known sources of income. Hence, the Vigilance
P.S. case No. 20/2004 was registered against such principal accused for commission of the offences
under section 13(2) read with section 13(1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (herein
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 1
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
referred to as "the Act"). The check period during which such disproportionate assets were
accumulated has been fixed as the period from 01.01.1996 to 14.10.2004.
3. After completion of the investigation, the IO in the matter submitted a Charge Sheet under
section 173 of the Cr.P.C, wherein the present Petitioner, who happens to be the wife of the principal
accused Sri. Chittaranjan Senapati, has been arrayed as an abettor by implicating her under section
109 of the I.P.C. In the meanwhile, even though the cognizance of the offence has been taken against
both the present Petitioner and her husband, the principal accused, no charge has yet been framed
and no trial has yet commenced. After more than almost two decades These are the established facts
of the case that are undisputed by both the parties.
4. Heard Mr. Prateik Parija, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Mr.Niranjan Moharana, learned
Additional Standing Counsel for the Opposite Party-Vigilance Department. CONTENTION of THE
PETITIONERS
5. The Learned Counsel for the Petitioner, at the outset, has disputed the stance of the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department and claims that the Opposite Party-Vigilance Department have illegally
implicated the Petitioner - her being the wife of the principal accused in the D.A case - as an abettor
under section 109 of the IPC. In fact, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has also
contended that the learned Trial Court has mechanically taken cognizance of aforesaid offences
without application of mind. Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner also argued that several
legitimate sources of income have either not been accounted for or deleted by the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department. Moreover, had such incomes been properly taken note of and deleted,
then no prima facie case would be made out against the Petitioner.
6. To substantiate his stance, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, at the outset, has
contended that the present Petitioner has been running the Cold Storage and other business since
the 1995 till the date of search and she is continuing to run the same till date. He further contended
that the Petitioner has been paying, and continues to pay, the regular taxes pertaining to the income
accrued from such business run by her. Additionally, the documents regarding the established
business units run by the Petitioner and the income tax returns for the income from such businesses
were recovered during the search that was conducted initially and they are part of the prosecution
records.
7. In the above noted context, Mr.Parija, further referring to Annexure-3 series, contended that the
requisite intimation has been made and necessary permissions have been taken from the authority
by the principal accused. However, the income from such businesses, which amounts to
Rs.12,32,270/- as per IT returns from the year 1996 to 2004 (i.e. the check period) has not been
deliberately considered by the Investigating Officer. Furthermore, the Learned Counsel appearing
for the Petitioner has also argued that it is not the case of the Opposite Party- Vigilance Department
that the Petitioner has not filed the IT returns properly. Learned Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner further contended that the said documents were seized during the search that was
initially conducted by the Opposite Party- Vigilance Department, and the same are part of public
record as well as the Prosecution record, the Opposite Party-Vigilance Department have taken the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 2
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
ground that appropriate permission/intimation has not been taken/made by the husband from/to
his authority.
8. In a similar vein, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner stated that there are three
immovable properties included in the chargesheet. Referring to the charge sheet, specifically the
immovable property mentioned in Sl No.1 of the charge sheet, Learned Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner contended that the said property had been disposed of during the check period and is no
more the property of the Petitioner. To further substantiate his claims, the Learned Counsel
appearing for the Petitioner referred to the RSD, which is a Public document and which has been
attached to the present writ petition as Annexure-3 series. The sale consideration with respect to
such property amounts to Rs.2,59,000/- and the same has not been included in the income column
of the principal accused on the ground that appropriate permission/intimation has not been
taken/made by the husband from/to his authority.
9. The Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has rebuked the aforesaid conduct of the
Opposite Party-Vigilance Department, especially in light of the fact that the I.O had collected the
relevant documents relating to the aforesaid property, and the sale thereof, from the office of the
District Sub-Registrar and the fact that the said documents are not only public, but also form a part
of the prosecution record. Despite such records being available with the Opposite Party-Vigilance
Department, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department have erroneously not accounted for the sale-consideration received on
account of the sale of the aforesaid land resulting in an inflated, erroneous, disproportionate asset of
the Petitioner.
10. Next, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that the residential house at
Baramunda, Bhubaneswar, i.e. assets vide Sl No.2 under the charge sheet, has been constructed by
the Husband of the Petitioner by taking loans from GPF and other sources. Learned Counsel
appearing for the Petitioner, further referring to the documents attached as Annexure-3 series,
contended that the loan amount to the tune of Rs.8,00,000/-, has not been accounted for while
tallying up the income of the Petitioner. Ergo, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that a
total income of Rs.22,91,270/- (Rs.12,32,270/- + Rs.2,59,000/- + Rs.8,00,000/-) should have been
included in the income side of the Petitioner.
11. Additionally, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has also contended that the
properties vide Sl No.3 in the charge sheet, i.e. Flat No.508, Kashari Palace, Bhubaneswar, stand in
the name of outsider and not in the name of the Petitioner or her husband-the principal accused.
Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, referring to the RSD documents under Annexure-4
series, contended that the aforesaid properties are valued at Rs.5,58,500/- and the said valuation
has been included in the charge sheet towards the asset acquired by the Petitioner, on the contrary,
it should have been deleted instead.
12. To further establish the innocence of the present Petitioner, the Learned Counsel appearing for
the Petitioner contended that except one vehicle - a scooter vide Sl No.4 - no other immovable asset
or any noticeable movable asset stand in the name of the petitioner. In fact, Learned Counsel
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 3
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
appearing for the Petitioner has stated that the whatever little assets are there, they have been
acquired by the husband of the Petitioner and the present Petitioner has nothing to do with the
same. Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has further contended that the present
Petitioner has no role to play in the alleged accumulation of disproportionate assets except being the
wife of the principal accused and that no ingredients of the Section 109 of the IPC are satisfied in the
case of the present Petitioner.
13. To add further weight to his contentions and reinforce his stance, the Learned Counsel appearing
for the Petitioner has placed reliance on certain case laws. Referring to the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble
Supreme Court in Smt. E.Swarnalata @P.Swarnalata v. State of Odisha (Vigilance), reported in 2024
(I) ILR-CUT-1465, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that in a similar
matter, a coordinate bench of this High Court had quashed the criminal proceeding under section
109 of the IPC against the wife of the accused in a DA case. Next, the Learned Counsel appearing for
the Petitioner has placed reliance on the principle enumerated by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in
Krishnanand vs. State of MP, reported in (1977) 1 SCC 816.
14. By referring to the judgements noted above, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
contended that the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has laid down that when the total quantum of
assets/disproportionate assets is less than 10% of the total income, it is not right to hold that the
assets found in the possession of the person are disproportionate to his known sources of income.
He further stated that the aforesaid principle was reiterated by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in
B.C.Chaturvedi vs/ Union of India, reported in (1995) 6 SCC 749, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme
Court observed that the 10% principle was evolved by the court to give a benefit of doubt to the
inflationary trend in the appreciation of the value of the assets. The benefit thereof is deemed to be
the maximum benefit that can be accorded. Consequently, the Learned Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner contended that as is evident from the judgement in B.C.Chaturvedi's case, the principle of
10% has been upheld by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in a catena of decisions, and, as such, given that
the alleged quantum of the disproportionate asset would have been much lower had the I.O properly
taken into account the entirety of the income of the Petitioner and her husband, the Learned
Counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that the present criminal proceeding is liable to be
quashed qua the present Petitioner.
15. Lastly, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has contended that the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department and the IO have deliberately and erroneously not taken into account
several documents that would have clearly established the innocence of the present Petitioner in the
impugned criminal proceeding. Moreover, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner has
highlighted that the present case has been pending for well over a decade and not only has the
charge not been framed yet but also the trial has not yet begun. Additionally, there are 73 witnesses
that are yet to examined in the present case.
16. Finally, the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner stated that owing to the tardiness and
the illegal conduct of the Opposite Parties, the fundamental rights of the Petitioner under Article 21
of the Constitution of India are violated and the Petitioner has been harassed for nearly two decades
at this point even though no case against the Petitioner is clearly made out in the present case under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 4
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
section 109 of the IPC. As such, Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that any
further continuance of the present criminal proceeding would be a futile exercise and an abuse of
the process of law, therefore the criminal proceeding bearing Vigilance PS Case No.20/2004,
corresponding to T.R .No. 83/2007, pending in the Court of Ld. Special Judge (Vigilance),
Bhubaneswar be quashed so far as the present Petitioner is concerned.
CONTENTIONS RAISED BY THE VIGILANCE DEPT.
17. The Learned Counsel for the Opposite Party-Vigilance Department, at the outset, has stated that
a case is well made out against the husband of the Petitioner for acquiring assets disproportionate to
his known sources of income to the tune of Rs.29,65,272/- and, as such, a case under sections 13(2)
and 13(1)(e) of the PC Act has been made out against the principal accused and the wife of the
principal accused, i.e. the present Petitioner, who has been arrayed as an abettor with the aid of
section 109 of the IPC. However, despite the aforesaid evolution, the Learned Counsel for the
Opposite Parties has admitted that the charge is yet to be framed in the present case and the trial
has not begun either.
18. To controvert the claims of the learned counsel for the Petitioner that various public documents
in support of the Petitioner(cid:128)s claim were already available with the prosecution, the Learned
Counsel for the Opposite Parties contended that despite the Petitioner(cid:128)s claims, the aforesaid
documents have not been considered by the IO in the present case because the principal accused, i.e.
the husband of the Petitioner, has neither taken permission from nor given intimation to his
competent authority to that effect as is required under the law. Furthermore, the Learned Counsel
for the Opposite Parties contended that the documents referred to by the Learned Counsel
appearing for the Petitioner were not actually recovered during the search of the residential
properties conducted earlier by the IO which is why the aforesaid incomes claimed by the Petitioner
have not been treated as „incomes from known sources(cid:128). Additionally, it is also the case of the
Learned Counsel for the Opposite Parties that even if the aforesaid incomes claimed by the
Petitioner were treated as "income from known sources" and included in his income, considering
the cost of the assets mentioned by the Learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, a case for
accumulation of disproportionate assets would still be made out against the principal
accused-husband of the Petitioner and by extension, a case under section 109 of the IPC would still
be made out against the present Petitioner.
19. Moreover, the Learned Counsel for the Opposite Parties also contended that the Petitioner, being
the wife of the principal accused, most of the assets acquired by the principal accused-husband of
the Petitioner have been so acquired in the name of the present Petitioner. Therefore, it can be very
well ascertained that the Petitioner has indeed abated her husband in acquiring disproportionate
assets, as such, a case against the present Petitioner is well made out under section 109 of IPC.
Lastly, the Learned Counsel for the Opposite Parties stated that all the claims of the Petitioner
regarding her innocence are to be addressed during the stage of trial by leading evidence from both
the sides. Therefore, it was contended that no interference by this Court, at this stage, is necessary in
the present criminal proceeding, and as such, the present CRLMC application is liable to be
dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 5
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
ANALYSIS BY THE COURT
20. Heard the Learned counsels appearing for the Petitioner and the Opposite Parties-Vigilance
Department. Upon a thorough examination and analysis of the background of the present case, it
appears that the following are the undisputed facts in the present case. Firstly, that the present
criminal proceeding has been filed against the husband of the Petitioner for accumulation of
disproportionate assets. Secondly, the Petitioner has been arrayed in the present proceeding as an
abettor under section 109 of IPC. Thirdly, the criminal case was initiated in the year 2004 and
although a charge sheet has been filed, the proceeding has been pending for more than two decades
without any trial being commenced and any charge being framed therein. It is in this factual
background that this Court is required to adjudicate the matter at hand.
21. At the outset, this court observes that the law with regard to quashing of criminal proceeding by
High Courts while exercising their inherent powers under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure
Code, 1973, has been well established by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court by a catena of decisions,
primarily via the decision of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in State Of Haryana And Ors Vs. Ch.
Bhajan Lal And Ors., reported in 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has
laid down the following scenarios where such power under section 482 can be exercised either to
prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice;
"1. Where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint,
even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not
prima-facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the F.l.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(
1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
155(2) of the Code.
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
4. Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-
cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate
as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.
5. Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 6
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
7. Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."
22. It is also pertinent to mention here that time and again The Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has
emphasized the need for speedy investigations and trial as both are mandated by the letter and spirit
of the provisions of the CrPC (particularly, sections 197, 173, 309, 437 (6) and 468 etc.) and the
constitutional protection enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In Maneka Gandhi Vs.
Union of India & Anr reported in (1978) 1 SCC 248 and Hussainara Khatoon & Ors. Vs. Home
Secretary, State of Bihar, reported in (1980) 1 SCC 81, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has observed that
Article 21 confers a fundamental right on every person not to be deprived of his life or liberty except
according to procedure established by law; that such procedure is not some semblance of a
procedure but the procedure should be 'reasonable, fair and just'; and therefrom flows, without
doubt, the right to speedy trial. It was also observed that no procedure which does not ensure a
reasonably quick trial can be regarded as 'reasonable, fair or just' and it would fall foul of Article 21.
23. The aforesaid position was again considered by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in Abdul Rehman
Antulay & Ors. Vs. R.S. Nayak & Anr., reported in (1992) 1 SCC 225, wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme
Court, referring to a catena of decisions, formulated as many as eleven propositions, which are not
exhaustive in nature, to the effect that fair, just and reasonable procedure implicit in Article 21 of the
Constitution of India creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily and that in a scenario where
there has been a violation of the aforesaid valuable right and the court concludes that the right to
speedy trial of an accused has been infringed, then the charges or the conviction, as the case may be,
shall be quashed. That said, this is not the only course open and having regard to the nature of
offence and other attending circumstances when the court feels that quashing of proceedings cannot
be in the interest of justice, it is open to the court to make appropriate orders. Later, in P.
Ramachandra Rao Vs. State of Karnataka, reported in (2002) 4 SCC 578, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court
has reaffirmed the law laid down in A.R.Antulay's case.
24. Consequently, in Pankaj Kumar vs. State Of Maharashtra & Ors., reported in (2008) 16 SCC 117,
the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has taken note of a catena of judicial decisions governing the field and has
observed that it is well settled that the right to speedy trial in all criminal persecutions is an
inalienable right under Article 21 of the Constitution and such a right is applicable not only to the
actual proceedings in court but also includes within its sweep the preceding police investigations as
well. The Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has further observed that the right to speedy trial extends equally to
all criminal persecutions and is not confined to any particular category of cases. In every case, where
the right to speedy trial is alleged to have been infringed, the court has to perform the balancing act
upon taking into consideration all the attendant circumstances, and determine in each case as to
whether the right to speedy trial has been denied in the said case. In the event the court arrives at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 7
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
the conclusion that the right to speedy trial of an accused has been infringed, the charges or the
conviction, as the case may be, may be quashed unless the court feels that having regard to the
nature of offence and other relevant circumstances, quashing of proceedings may not be in the
interest of justice. In such a scenario, the court may pass any appropriate order as it may deem just
and equitable including fixation of time for conclusion of trial.
25. Additionally, an issue similar to the one involved in the present matter has been dealt with by a
coordinate bench of this Hon(cid:128)ble Court in Smt.E.Swarnalata @P.Swarnalata v. State of Odisha
(Vigilance), reported in 2024 (I) ILR-CUT-1465, vide judgment dated 06.03.2024, wherein the
petitioner was the wife of the principal accused, who was being prosecuted in a Disproportionate
Assets (DA) case. The primary allegation against the petitioner in that case was that certain assets
were found in her name, which led to her being implicated under Section 109 IPC for allegedly
abetting the main accused in accumulating disproportionate assets. Here, while dealing with the
issues as to whether the petitioner, being the wife of the principal accused, can be held guilty of
abetment merely because some assets were registered in her name and whether mere ownership of
assets by a dependent spouse is sufficient to attract liability under Sections 107 and 109 IPC, the
coordinate bench of this Court took into consideration a series of decisions of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme
Court and this court, including the judgement in Smt. Kumudini Padhy vrs. State of Odisha (Vig.)
reported in AIR ONLINE 2019 ORL153 & (2019) 2 OLR 732, held that mere ownership of assets by a
dependent spouse does not automatically amount to abetment under Section 109 IPC and
accordingly, the criminal proceeding in that case was quashed against the Petitioner. The aforesaid
judgement, as it appears, has also been relied on by the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner to further
advance her case. On an analysis of the judgement in the aforesaid case against the background facts
of the present case, this court is of the considered view that the ratio of the aforesaid judgment
applies squarely to the present case.
26. Keeping in view the spirit of the judgement of the learned co-ordinate bench in Smt. E.
Swarnalata's case (supra), this court would like to further add that mere recording of assets in the
name of the dependants of the principal accused, without there being any other material on record
to prove that direct involvement in the crime i.e. by participating in the crime actively to accumulate
such assets, such dependants, particularly the housewives, should not be arrayed as an accused even
by taking resort to or with the aid of section 109 of the IPC. As such implication would not be safe
and in furtherance of criminal justice system.
27. Furthermore, it appears that the backbone of the arguments forwarded on behalf of the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department is that the incomes claimed by the Petitioner have not been taken
account of by the I.O because the principal accused, the husband of the Petitioner, has neither taken
permission from nor given intimation to his competent authorities to that effect. The Petitioner has
naturally controverted such claims of the Opposite Party-Vigilance Department by referring to
certain documents attached to the present CRLMC application (under Annexure-3 series) to state
that the necessary intimations/permissions have been made/taken by the husband of the Petitioner.
Nevertheless, with regard to the aforesaid contentious position, this Court is of the observation that
the said disputed position is to be ironed out at the stage of trial and not at this stage, since it is not
open to the Court to conduct a mini-trial while exercising its powers under section 482 of the Cr.P.C
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 8
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
(reference may be had to paragraph 10 of CBI vs Aryan Singh, reported in 2021 SCC OnLine SC
379).
28. Consequently, taking into consideration the aforesaid analysis, and the undisputed fact that the
present case, although initiated in the year 2004, has been continuing till today without any trial
being commenced or any charge being framed therein, and considering the fact that there are 73
witnesses in the matter that are yet to be examined, this court has no hesitation in arriving at a
conclusion that the inalienable right of the accused to avail a speedy trial as enshrined in Article 21
of the Constitution has undeniably been violated in the present matter insofar as the criminal
proceeding in question was initiated more than two decades ago and the same has not yet been
proceeded with for reasons best known to the prosecution. Therefore, this court is of the considered
view that the present case is an apt scenario to exercise the inherent powers of this court under
section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
29. Having said that, it must also be mentioned that this Court is aware of the confines within which
the powers under section 482 of the Cr.P.C are to be exercised. Time and again, through various
decisions, the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court have cautioned against reckless exercise of the power of
quashing of proceedings under section 482 of the Cr.P.C. Although the powers possessed by this
Court under the aforesaid provision are very wide, these powers should be exercised in appropriate
cases, ex debito justitiae, to do real and substantial justice. The inherent powers under Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. do not grant this Court an unfettered or arbitrary jurisdiction to act at its discretion.
These powers must be exercised with restraint and only in the rarest of rare cases, where the court,
upon examining the material on record, is satisfied that allowing the proceedings to continue would
result in an abuse of the judicial process or that quashing the proceedings is necessary to serve the
ends of justice. The aforesaid considerations are to be especially borne in mind when dealing with
matters involving economic offences, as is the case presently.
CONCLUSION
30. In conclusion, taking into consideration the factual background of the present case, on perusal
of the record and the documents filed in the present CRLMC application, and taking into
consideration the aforesaid analysis and the decisions of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court and this Court
as discussed hereinabove, this Court is of the considered view that the valuable right of the
Petitioner for a speedy trial has indeed been hampered in the present criminal proceeding owing to
the inordinate delay of more than two decades in commencement of trial. Moreover, the Opposite
Party-Vigilance Department has also not put forth any reasonable or exceptional circumstances so
as to satisfactorily explain the prolonged and inordinate delay in commencement of the trial.
31. It would also not be out of context to do a reality check on the vigilance cases. More often than
not, the Vigilance Department mechanically adds spouses or dependants, who are mere name
lenders, to acquire the property. Most of the times it is because of the relationship, trust, or love &
affection without there being any mens rea to participate in the crime. It has become a regular
practice to add such dependants without even conducting a preliminary enquiry with regard to their
conduct and role in the alleged crime. Furthermore, to ascertain the mens rea of the accused neither
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 9
Sasmita Pradhan vs State Of Odisha (Vig.) ..... Opposite ... on 16 April, 2025
any enquiry is made nor any prima facie materials are brought on record to establish the
involvement of such dependants. On the contrary, such assets recorded in their name can very well
be attached and confiscated on establishment of the fact that such assets have been acquired from
the ill-gotten money. In such view of the matter, this court is also of the considered view that
arraying the spouse, who is a housewife, in the absence of any specific material with regard to her
involvement in the crime would be an abuse of the process of law.
32. As such, keeping in view the larger interests of justice and to prevent further abuse of the
processes of the Court, this Courts has no hesitation in quashing the criminal proceeding bearing
Vigilance PS Case No.20/2004, corresponding to T.R .No. 83/2007, pending in the Court of Ld.
Special Judge (Vigilance), Bhubaneswar, so far as the present Petitioner is concerned. Accordingly,
the impugned proceeding stands quashed with respect to the Petitioner. However, it is further
directed that every endeavor should be made to conclude the trial in respect of the other accused as
expeditiously as possible.
33. Accordingly, the CRLMC application stands allowed. However, there shall be no order as to
costs.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 16th April, 2025/ Rubi/ Jr. Steno
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152310431/ 10
