Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3
Others on 3 March, 2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:30993
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 44519 of 2024
Applicant :- Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Jeetendra Kumar Sharma,Laxmi Dubey
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
1. Heard Mr. Jeetendra Kumar, the learned counsel for applicant,the learned A.G.A. for
State-opposite party-1 and Mr. Shrawan Mishra, Advocate holding brief of Mr. Sunil Dubey, the
learned counsel representing first informant/opposite party-2.
2. Perused the record.
3. Applicant- Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu, who is a charge sheeted accused and facing trial
before court below has approached this Court by means of present application under Section 482
Cr.P.C. with the following prayer:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60575016/ 1
Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
"It is therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be
pleased to allow this application and quash the entire proceedings of Special Session
Trial No.69 of 2018 (State Vs. Satendra @ Shivendra @ Ashu) arsing out of Case
Crime No.63 of 2017, under Sections 363, 366, 376 IPC & 3/4 Protection of Children
Act, Police Station Shivli, District Kanpur Dehat pending in the Court of Additional
District Judge, Court No.13, Kanpur Dehat and Charge Sheet dated 02.05.2018 and
cognizance order as well summoning order dated 24.05.2018 passed by Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Court No.7, Kanpur Dehat.
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to stay the
further proceedings in Special Session Trial No.69 of 2018 (State Vs. Satendra @
Shivendra @ Ashu) arsing out of Case Crime No.63 of 2017, under Sections 363, 366,
376 IPC & 3/4 Protection of Children Act, Police Station Shivli, District Kanpur Dehat
pending in the Court of Additional District Judge, Court No.13, Kanpur Dehat during
pendency of the present criminaal application before this Hon'ble Court or to pass
such any other and further order which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper
under the facts and circumstances of the case, otherwise the applicants will suffer
irreparable loss and injury."
4. At the very outset, the learned AGA submits that notice of this application under Section 482
Cr.P.C. has been served upon first informant-opposite party-2 on 01.01.2025. However, in spite of
service of notice neither any counter affidavit has been filed by first informant-opposite party-2 in
opposition to this application nor any one has put in appearance on his behalf to oppose this
application even in revised call.
5. Learned counsel for applicant submits that though applicant is a named and charge sheeted
accused and facing trial before court below in aforementioned case, however, in view of the peculiar
facts and circumstances as have now emerged on record, the criminal prosecution of the applicant
cannot be sustained. As such, the present application is liable to be allowed by this Court. In
furtherance of aforesaid submission the learned counsel for applicant submits that criminal
prosecution of applicant commenced with the lodging of FIR dated 22.01.2017 by the first
informant-/opposite party-2, Shiv Nath Pal (father of prosecutrix) which was registered as Case
Crime No.0063 of 2017 under Sections 363, 366 IPC, Police Station Shivli, District Kanpur Nagar.
In the aforesaid FIR, applicant Ashu has been nominated as solitary named accused. According to
the learned counsel for applicant prior to the aforesaid FIR dated 22.01.2017, the applicant had
solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix on 16.01.2017. Consequently, the prosecutrix became
legally wedded wife of applicant. In view of above, the parties are, therefore, now residing together
as husband and wife. From the aforesaid wedlock/cohabitation of applicant and prosecurix, two
children namely Vaishnavi (daughter) and Ayush (Son) were born. Their Birth Certificates have
been brought on record and photo copies of the same are annexed at pages 48 and 50 of the paper
book. As per the aforesaid documents, the applicant is shown as the father, whereas, the prosecutrix
is shown as the mother. It is, further, submitted by learned counsel for applicant that the bona fide
of accused applicant is further explicit from the fact that the prosecutrix has also filed a short
counter affidavit, wherein, she has not opposed the present application. As such, the prosecutrix has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60575016/ 2
Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
joined the applicant in present application. It is thus contended by the learned counsel for applicant
that in view of the development prior to the FIR as well as subsequent developments that have taken
place the criminality if any, committed by applicant now stands washed off. He, therefore contends
that in case, the impugned criminal proceedings are allowed to continue, then a happy family shall
stand broken. As such, no useful purpose shall be served in prolonging the criminal prosecution of
applicant. On the above conspectus, the learned counsel for applicant then submits that present
application is liable to be allowed.
6. Per contra, the learned A.G.A. for State-opposite party-1 vehemently opposed the present
application. Learned AGA submits that since the prosecutrix was a child within the meaning of term
child as defined in the POCSO Act on the date of occurrence, therefore, the criminality, if nay,
committed by applicant shall not stand washed off on account of previous and subsequent
developments as suggested by learned counsel for applicant. However, the learned AGA could not
dislodge the factual and legal submissions urged by learned counsel for applicant with reference to
the record.
7. On the other hand, Mr. Shrawan Mishra, Advocate holding brief of Mr. Suneel Dubey, the learned
counsel representing the prosecutrix-opposite party-5 submits that he has received instructions not
to oppose the present application. He, further contends that it is now an admitted fact that applicant
has solemnized marriage with prosecutrix and from the aforesaid wedlock two children have been
born. He, therefore, contends that he cannot have any objection, in case, the present application is
decided by this Court taking into consideration the aforesaid facts.
8. Be that as it may, having heard the learned counsel for applicant and the learned AGA for State
opposite party-1, the learned counsel representing the prosecutrix opposite party-5 and upon
perusal of record, this Court finds that it is an admitted fact that prior to the FIR dated 22.01.2017
giving rise to the present criminal proceedings, the applicant had solemnized marriage with the
prosecutrix on 16.01.2017. Consequently, the prosecutrix became legally wedded wife of applicant.
On account of above, the parties are, therefore, now residing together as husband and wife. From
the aforesaid wedlock/cohabitation of applicant and prosecurix, two children namely Vaishnavi
(daughter) and Ayush (Son) were born. Their Birth Certificates have been brought on record. As per
the said documents, the applicant is shown as the father, whereas, the prosecutrix is shown as the
mother. In view of the aforementioned previous and subsequent developments that have been taken
place, the criminality if any, committed by applicant now stands washed off. As such, no useful
purpose shall be served in prolonging the criminal prosecution of applicant. A happy family shall
now stand broken, in case, the impugned proceedings are allowed to continue. At this juncture,
reference be made to the judgments of the Supreme Court in K. Dhandapani Vs. State by the
Inspector of Police 2022 SCC Online SC 1056 and Mafat Lal and Another Vs. State of Rajasthan
2022 SCC Online SC 433. Wherein the Apex Court quashed the proceedings against the applicant on
the ground that he has solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix. The judgment rendered by the
Apex Court in the case of K. Dhandapnai (supra) is a short one therefore, the same is reproduced in
it's entirety.
""1. Leave granted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60575016/ 3
Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
2. The appellant who is the maternal uncle of the prosecutrix belongs to Valayar
community, which is a most backward community in the State of Tamilnadu. He
worksas a woodcutter on daily wages in a private factory. FIR was registered against
him forcommitting rape under Sections 5(j)(ii) read with Section 6, 5(I) read with
Section 6 and 5(n) read with Section 6 of Protection of Child from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) Act, 2012. He was convicted after trial for committing the said offences and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years by the Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruppur on 31.10.2018. The High Court, by an
order dated 13.02.2019, upheld the conviction and sentence. Aggrieved thereby, the
appellant has filed this appeal.
3. Mr. M.P. Parthiban, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that
allegation against him was that he had physical relations with the prosecutrix on the
promise of marrying her. He stated that, in fact, he married the prosecutrix and they
have two children. 4. The appellant submitted that this Court should exercise its
power under Article 142 of the Constitution and ought to do complete justice and it
could not be in the interest of justice to disturb the family life of the appellant and the
prosecutrix.
5. After hearing the matter for some time on 08th March, 2022, we directed the
District Judge to record the statement of the prosecutrix about her present status.
The statement of the prosecutrix has been placed on record in which she has
categorically stated that she has two children and they are being taken care of by the
appellant and she is leading a happy married life.
6. Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., learned counsel appearing for the State, opposed the grant
of any relief to the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was aged 14 years on
the date of the offence and gave birth to the first child when she was 15 years and
second child was born when she was 17 years. He argued that the marriage between
the appellant and the prosecutrix is not legal. He expressed his apprehension that the
said marriage might be only for the purpose of escaping punishment and there is no
guarantee that the appellant will take care of the prosecutrix and the children after
this Court grants relief to him.
7. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the considered view
that the conviction and sentence of the appellant who is maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix deserves to be set aside in view of the subsequent events that have been
brought to the notice of this Court. This Court cannot shut its eyes to the ground
reality and disturb the happy family life of the appellant and the prosecutrix. We have
been informed about the custom in Tamilnadu of the marriage of a girl with maternal
uncle.
8. For the aforesaid mentioned reasons, the conviction and sentence of the appellant
is set aside in the peculiar facts of the case and shall not be treated as a precedent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60575016/ 4
Satendra Alias Shivendra Alias Ashu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
The appeal is accordingly, disposed of. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
9. In case, the appellant does not take proper care of the prosecutrix, she or the State
on behalf of the prosecutrix can move this Court for modification of this Order."
9. When the present case is examined in the light of ratio laid down by the Apex Court in
aforementioned judgments, this Court finds that in the present case also the applicant has
solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix and from the said wedlock two children have been born.
As such, in case, the criminal prosecution of applicant is allowed to continue, a happy family shall
now stand broken.
10. In view of the discussion made above, the present application succeeds and is liable to be
allowed.
11. It is, accordingly, allowed.
12. The entire proceedings in Special Session Trial No.69 of 2018 (State Vs. Satendra @ Shivendra
@ Ashu) arsing out of Case Crime No.63 of 2017, under Sections 363, 366, 376 IPC & 3/4 Protection
of Children Act, Police Station Shivli, District Kanpur Dehat pending in the Court of Additional
District Judge, Court No.13, Kanpur Dehat, are, hereby, quashed.
13. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties shall bear their own costs.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 S.A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60575016/ 5
