Satish Kumar Sharma & Ors vs Neha Sharma & Anr on 25 May, 2023
Satish Kumar Sharma & Ors vs Neha Sharma & Anr on 25 May,
2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No.349/2023
CrlM No. 640/2023
Reserved on: 22.05.2023.
Pronounced on: 25.05.2023.
Satish Kumar Sharma & Ors. ....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through :- Mr. Navneet Dubey, Advocate.
V/s
Neha Sharma & Anr. ....Respondent(s)
Through :- Ms. Supriya Chouhan, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MA CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
ORDER
1. The present petition has been filed under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure seeking
quashment of application filed by the respondent no.1 herein U/Ss 12 & 23 of the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act (for short 'DV Act'), wherein the Court of Learned Judicial
Magistrate (Sub Registrar), Jammu (hereinafter referred as 'Trial Court'), vide order dated
06.02.2023 ordered the petitioner no.1 herein to pay Rs. 5000/- per month to complainant
(respondent no.1 herein) and (cid:128)2,000/- to son of complainant (respondent no.2 herein) as interim
maintenance which is impugned in the present petition.
2. Aggrieved of this order, the petitioners herein filed the instant petition. The impugned order has
been challenged on various grounds including the main plea that the impugned application is not
maintainable as the Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain it, as provided in Section 27 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act.
3. Despite notice to respondents, objections have not been filed. However, learned counsel for the
respondents argued at bar that the alternative remedy was available to the petitioners for filing
appeal before Session Court but they have not chosen to it, as such, this petition is not maintainable
and prayed for its dismissal.
4. Heard and considered.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129010170/ 1
Satish Kumar Sharma & Ors vs Neha Sharma & Anr on 25 May, 2023
5. Instead of going into the merits of the case, a preliminary point raised by learned counsel for the
respondent is required to be determined as to whether the instant petition is maintainable when
alternate remedy of challenging the impugned order was available to the petitioners. The impugned
order has been passed under the provisions of Jammu & Kashmir Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act.
6. Section 29 of the Act reads as under:-
"Appeal- There shall be an appeal to the court of Sessions within thirty days from the
date on which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or
the respondents, as the case may be, whichever is later."
So, it can be discernible that as per Section 29 of the Act, all the orders passed under any of the
provisions of the Act, are appealable.
7. This Court under Section 482 Cr.PC has inherent powers to exercise. It has been a consistent view
of the Constitutional courts that when alternate efficacious remedy is available, the inherent
jurisdiction of the court cannot be invoked. The Hon'ble Apex Court in a case titled Waryam Singh &
Anr. Vs. Amarnath & Anr., reported as 1954 AIR 215, was pleased to hold that the power vested with
the High Court in terms of Article 227 of the Constitution of India is to be exercised most sparingly
and only in appropriate cases in order to keep the subordinate courts within bounds of their
authority and not for correcting mere errors. The Hon'ble Apex Court again in a case titled Shalini
Shyam Shetty & Anr. Vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil, (2010) 8 SCC 329 and Lasmikant Revchand
Bhojwani & Anr. Vs. Pratapsingh Mohansingh Pardeshi reported as (1995) 6 SCC 576, reminded the
High Courts that the inherent power cannot be assumed in terms of Article 227 as an unlimited
prerogative to correct all species of hardships of wrong decision. Its exercise must be restricted to
grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of fundamental principle of law and justice.
8. This Court in an identical case titled Charanjeet Kour & Ors. Vs. Taranjeet Kour & Ors., reported
as 2018 KLJ 312, has taken similar view with regard to the inherent power under Section 561-A J&K
Cr.PC. This Court in a case titled Jatinder Nath Bakshi Vs. State of J&K & Ors., reported as 2009 (3)
JKJ 679 (HC), had held that the power under Section 561-A J&K Cr.PC has to be exercised sparingly
and in the rarest of rare cases. This inherent power cannot be exercised on mere drop of hat or
merely to correct any illegality committed by the subordinate court.
9. Impugned order by its nature is interim and ex parte order. Notice under section 12(4) is served
to petitioners and impugned order is subject to objections from the petitioners herein. In the
considered opinion of this Court, the petitioners herein instead of filing appeal under Section 29 of
the Jammu & Kashmir Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2010 before the Sessions
court, rushed to this Court invoking its inherent power, which otherwise has to be used cautiously
and sparingly. The petitioners have the alternate efficacious remedy available under the statute, and
to invoke the inherent power of this Court is an abuse of process.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129010170/ 2
Satish Kumar Sharma & Ors vs Neha Sharma & Anr on 25 May, 2023
10. The impugned order has been passed by the Learned Trial Court in an application under Section
23 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2010 moved alongside with main
complaint under Section 12(1) of the Act and this interim order has been passed in-ex-parte, issuing
notice to the respondents for appearance and meanwhile Ankush Sharma the respondent therein
was directed to pay a sum of (cid:128)5000/- to the complainant-Neha Sharma and (cid:128)2,000/- to her son
Palvit Sharma as interim maintenance, the order was subject to objections from other side. The
petitioners had thus an opportunity of appearing before the learned Trial Court and to raise all the
plea raised in this petition by filing a reply before the Court below and also had a right to file the
application for dropping the proceedings against them.
11. In this background of the aforesaid discussion and without going into the merits of the rival
contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, it is provided that the petitioners may file
their reply to the petition under Section 12 of D. V. Act raising all the available pleas and they may
also file an application before the Trial Court for dropping the proceedings against them in case, the
same is done by the petitioners the Ld. Magistrate, shall after hearing the parties, pass appropriate
orders in accordance with law, expeditiously preferably within a period of 30 days from the date
such application is made by the petitioner before the Ld. Magistrate.
12. Having regard to the discussion in preceding paras, this petition in terms of inherent jurisdiction
is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed for the afore-stated reasons, without going into its
merits. Petition, is, accordingly dismissed as not maintainable. Interim direction(s), if any, shall
stand also vacated.
13. Copy of this order shall be sent down to the concerned learned Magistrate, for information and
compliance.
) (MA CHOWDHARY)
Jammu: JUDGE
25.05.2023.
Raj Kumar
Whether the order is reportable?: Yes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129010170/ 3
