Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
Author: Sheel Nagu
Bench: Sheel Nagu
1
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh
W.P. 770/2021
(Seema Pasi Vs. State of M.P. And others)
Jabalpur dated : 03/03/2021
Shri Vikas Mishra, Advocate for the petitioner.
Shri Ajay Pratap Singh, Dy. Advocate General and Shri Gourav
Tiwari, P.L. for the respondents/State.
Shri Sankalp Kochar, Advocate for the respondent No.5.
Writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is invoked to assail the
legality and validity of the order dated 31.12.2020 contained in Annexure-P/1 issued by the
respondent No.2 shifting/transferring of the petitioner (District Manager-Evaluation and
Monitoring) from District Jabalpur to District Anuppur and the reason shown in the impugned
order is administrative exigency and for effecting rationalization.
2. Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised three folds submission in support of challenge to the
impugned order which are as follows:-
(i) the services of the petitioner which are contractual in nature pursuant to the order
passed in 2018 are non-
transferable;
(ii) the petitioner's mother-in-law is old, ailing and disabled;
(iii) that in matter involving similar issue i.e. W.P. No.8931/2020 (vide Annexure-P/5), Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court has quashed the order of transfer vide order dated 06.08.2020.
3. As regards the first round of contractual services of the petitioner being non-transferable is
concerned, the same may not detain this Court for long in view of recent decision of the Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court in the case of Rabikant Tiwari Vs. State of M.P. and others, which was decided
by common judgment dated 27.02.2021 along with bunch of similar cases where while considering
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175915125/ 1
Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
the issue of transferability of persons occupying the same post as held by the petitioner herein this
Court came to the following conclusion:-
"Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and on the perusal of the record, it
is noticed that though the appointment of the petitioner is on contract basis but the
appointment order dated 01.09.2015 itself contains the following conditions:
15 vkidh inLFkkiuk iz'kklfud vk/kkj ij fe'ku ds ftyksa esa ifjofrZr @LFkkukarfjr djus
dk vf/kdkj jkT; vkthfodk Qksje @ ,uvkj,y,e dks gksxkA The policy circular dated
24.02.2020 has been placed on record and the said circular contained provision in
respect of the transfer:
9.1 lafonk veys dh fu;qfDr LFkku fo'ks"k ,oa dk;Z fo'ks"k ds fy;s gksus ds dkj.k
LFkkukarj.k dk izko/kku ugha gSA izk'kklfud O;oLFkkvksa dks ns[krs gq, fo'ks"k
ifjfLFkfr;ksa esa LFkkukarj.k fd;k tk ldsxkA lafonk vuqca/k lekIr dj LFkku ifjorZu
djrs gq, leku dk;Z o ifjofrZr LFkku gsrq uohu vuqca/k fd;s tkus dh Lohd`fr nh tk ldrh
gSA uohu vuqca/k dh vof/k dk;Z ij mifLFkfr fnukad ls ml foRrh; o"kZ dh 31 ekpZ rd
dh gksxhA The above clause has been considered by the Co-ordinate Bench of this
Court in WP No.1027/2021 vide order dated05.02.2021 in the case of Shabana
Begum vs. State of M.P. and others and it has been held that the said clause permits
transfer. The view taken by the Co-ordinate Bench in the matter of Shabana
Begum(supra) after noting clause 9.1 of the policy reads as under:
The impugned order has been issued under Clause 9.1 of the circular. From plain
reading of Clause 3.3 of the circular, it is clear that in case of change of place, a fresh
agreement shall be executed at the changed place.
Clause 9.1 is in two parts. The first part of this Clause provides that the contractual employee shall
be appointed for a particular place and for discharging particular duties and there is no provision for
transfer. However, the second part of this clause provides that in view of administrative exigencies,
under special circumstances a contractual employee can be transferred and in that situation after
changing the place of posting, permission for execution of new agreement at the changed place can
be granted and the tenure of the contractual employee at the changed place would be from the date
of his posting till 31st March of the financial year. Thus, it is clear that there is no absolute bar to the
effect that a contractual employee appointed for a particular place cannot be shifted/transferred
under any W.P. No.15911/2020 & connected cases circumstances. The only requirement is that since
the agreement is always executed for aparticular place, then in case of shifting/transfer, a fresh
agreement is required to be executed. Since the employees are working on contract basis, therefore,
execution of new contract would not in any manner effect their any right or seniority. Under these
circumstances, this Court is unable to accept the contention of counsel for the petitioner that the
post, which the petitioner is holding, is a non-transferable post and under no circumstances, she
cannot be transferred from Katni."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175915125/ 2
Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
In the above judgment, considering the same issue of transfer in respect of similarly situated
persons, the Coordinate Bench has already taken the view that transfer is permissible. The
respondents have also placed on record Human Resource Manual which also contains the provision
in Clause 3.5 stating that all fixed tenure staff would be transferable as per the need of SRLM.
Another Co- ordinate Bench of this Court in the matter of Maithali Saran Trivedi vs. State of M.P.
vide order dated 16.06.2020 dismissing the Writ Petition No.7779/2020 against transfer order by
similarly situated employees, has held as under:
'Shri Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing for the respondents/State
submits that the policy issued by the State Government dated24.02.2020
(Annexure-P/3) contained a specific provision for transfer under Clause-9 of the said
policy and accordingly, the petitioner has rightly been transferred. He further
submits that the order passed by the coordinate Bench in aforesaid writ petition on
which the petitioner is relying upon, is not helpful for the petitioner because the
Court has not considered the relevant policy dated 24.02.2020, but considered the
earlier policy dated 01.12.2015 which provides the post of contract employee is a
non-transferable post. Considering the above, I am of the opinion that taking note of
the provisions of policy dated 24.02.2020 (Annexure-P/3), the petitioner can be
transferred from one place to another and as such, the order impugned also
contained the respective provision of transfer. The coordinate Bench admittedly has
not been apprised about the existing transfer policy and, therefore, the order has
been passed in view of the provisions of policy dated 01.12.2015, the petitioner,
therefore, is not entitled to get any benefit of the order passed by the coordinate
Bench and principle of parity is also not applicable in the present facts and
circumstances of the case.' Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has placed
reliance upon the interim order passed in WP No.16811/2020 but the said writ
petition has subsequently been dismissed by the Co-ordinate Bench by order dated
21.12.2020 by holding as under:
'In the present case, the petitioner failed to demonstrate any such illegality in the
order on the basis of which interference can be made that too exercising the
jurisdiction of Article 226 of the Constitution of India. As per the settled principle of
law the employer is the best judge to consider as to where and how services of its
employees can be utilized and after raising grievance before the employer, impugned
order has been passed rejecting the request made by the petitioner. Therefore, in
such circumstance judicial review in a matter of transfer is not permissible and
accordingly as such I do not find any substance in the petition.' It is the settled
position in law that the services of a contract employee are governed by the terms of
the contract. In the present case, the appointment order of the petitioner itself
contains a clause relating to transfer and in addition thereto the policy also provides
for transfer, hence, in terms thereof, the respondents have right to transfer the
petitioner. The impugned order of transfer is a general order of transfer whereby
several such employees W.P. No.15911/2020 & connected cases have been
transferred to different places on account of the administrative exigency.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175915125/ 3
Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
In the reply, the respondents have demonstrated that the posts are lying vacant at
transferred place. The petitioner has placed reliance upon the Full Bench judgment of
this Court in the case of Ashok Tiwari(supra) but in that case also it has been held
that transfer is permissible if conditions of service and the contract of service
contemplates a provision for transfer from one place to another, hence, the petitioner
is not entitled to the benefit of the said judgment. Learned counsel for the petitioner
has also placed reliance upon the judgment in the matter of Vandana
Dandotiya(supra) but in that case the terms of appointment were different.
The record further reflects that the petitioner has already been relieved but he has
not joined at the transferred place though there was no interim protection in the
matter. Hence, the conduct of the petitioner also disentitles him for any relief in
exercise of the equitable jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The impugned order of transfer has not been shown to have been passed in violation
of any statutory provision nor any malafide has been alleged or established. The
respondents have duly considered the petitioner'(cid:128)s representation against the
impugned order of transfer and have rejected it by a reasoned order. The Supreme
Court in the matter of Shilpi Bose vs. State of Bihar reported in 1991 Supp. (2) SCC
659 considering the scope of interference in a petition challenging the order of
transfer has held as under:
4. In our opinion, the courts should not interfere with a transfer order which is made in public
interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any
mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide. A government servant holding a
transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be
transferred from one place to the other. Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not
violate any of his legal rights. Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions
or orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party should
approach the higher authorities in the department......(cid:129) In view of the above, I am of the opinion
that no case for interference in the impugned order of transfer is made out. The petitions are
accordingly dismissed.
The signed order be placed in the record of WP No.15911/2020 and a copy thereof be placed in the
record of connected writ petitions."
4. In view of above, there is no substance qua the first ground.
5. As regards other ground that the petitioner's mother-in-law being old, ailing and disabled is
concerned, the same does not relate to the field of law but compassion, since it lies within the
exclusive domain of the employer to consider and, therefore, this Court ought not to dwell into the
same and thus extends liberty to the petitioner to make appropriate representation in this regard to
the employer, who is obliged to consider the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175915125/ 4
Seema Pasi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 March, 2021
6. As regards the third ground of similar issue having been decided earlier in W.P. No.8931/2020
vide Annexure-P/5 does not impress this Court as bare perusal of order dated 06.08.2020 passed in
the said case vide Annexure-P/5 reveals that the same relates the post of Programme Officer, which
is distinct and is governed by different set of Rules, Regulations and Scheme and, therefore, no
parity can be drawn. Thus, the order Annexure-P/5 is of no avail to the petitioner.
7. Once it is held that the services attached to a particular post are transferable when the scope of
interference in matters of transfer and shifting are extremely limited. The law in regard to
interference in the matter of transfer of service is well settled. It is settled law in service
jurisprudence that proven malafide, violation of constitutional or statutory provision, transfer order
having been passed by incompetent authority or the same causing adverse effect to service
conditions of the transferred employee, are some of the limited grounds on which an order of
transfer of service can be successfully challenged. None of these grounds are made out in the present
case and, therefore, this Court declines interference in the matter.
8. Accordingly, the present writ petition stands dismissed, sans cost.
(Sheel Nagu) Judge pn
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175915125/ 5
