Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.R.C.No.767 of 2015
and Crl.M.P.No.1 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 21.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE Ms.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.R.C.No.767 of 2015
and
Crl.M.P.No.1 of 2015
Sekar ... Petitioner
Vs.
State by
Inspector of Police,
H-1, Washermenpet Police Station,
Chennai-21
Crime No.717 of 2011 ... Respondent
Criminal Revision Case filed under Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C praying
to call for records and set aside the order passed by the learned III Additional
Sessions Judge, Chennai, i/c learned II Additional Sessions Judge, Chennai in
Crl.M.P.No.1857 of 2015 dated 10.07.2015 in S.C.No.399 of 2014.
For Petitioner : Mr.A.Nagarajan
For Respondent : Mr.A.Gopinath, GA (Crl.side)
***
ORDER
The Criminal Revision Case has been preferred challenging the judgment of the learned III
Additional Sessions Judge, Chennai, i/c learned II https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Additional
Sessions Judge, Chennai in Crl.M.P.No.1857 of 2015 dated 10.07.2015 in S.C.No.399 of 2014.
2. The above miscellaneous petition has been filed by the revision petitioner before the learned
Sessions Judge for discharging him from the charges for the offence under Section 306 IPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 1
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
3. The case of the prosecution is that the deceased has been living along with his family at a temple
house belonging to Kothandaramar temple near Washermenpet. The accused is a clerk working
under the Executive Officer of the said temple. An eviction order has already been passed by the civil
Court and even thereafter, the deceased was living in the temple premises without paying rental
dues. When the deceased and his wife came to the office of the Executive Officer, the accused abused
him and because of which the deceased had committed suicide.
4. A case has been registered based on the complaint given by the deceased immediately after set fire
on himself and got burnt. The case has https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis been registered in Crime
No.717 of 2011 for the offence under Section 309 IPC. At that point of time, no case has been
registered against the deceased for offence under Section 309 r/w. 109 IPC. It appears from records
that in the complaint given by the deceased, the deceased himself is the accused for committing the
offence under Section 309 IPC. The averment made in the complaint would show about the
deceased himself had admitted about a civil case in connection with his eviction and it was over.
Thereafter, he went to the office of the Executive officer for settling the rental dues. It is alleged that
when the deceased was conversing with the Executive Officer, the accused, who was working as a
Clerk in that office came and uttered the following words:
“,tq;f vy;yhk; jpULthq;f> J}f;F Nghl;Lf;F thq;f> fpU\;zhapy; Cj;jpf;Fthq;f> nghWf;fp
nghWk;Nghf;F vd;W mrpq;fkhf jpl;bdhd;. mbf;fTk; te;jhh;> ehd; fkp\dh;fpl;Nl
gpbr;R nfhLj;J nrapYf;F mDg;gpLNthd;> nghz;lhl;bia $l;bfpl;L Nghlh ,y;Nyd;dh me;j
tPlb ; Ny ,Uf;f khl;Nl.”
5. It is alleged by the deceased in his complaint that because of the above words, he got frustrated
and purchased petrol and went near the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis E.O.Office and poured
the petrol over him and set fire.
6. The Petition filed before the learned III Additional Sessions Judge, Chennai, by the accused to
discharge him was dismissed by the trial Judge for the following reasons:
“vdNt ,t; tof;fpid nghWj;J Fw;wk;rhl;lg;gl;lth; kPjhd tof;if rhl;rpfs; kw;Wk; rhz;whtzq;fspd;
mbg;gilapy; tprhhpj;J mjd; gpwNf mtiu ,e;j tof;fpypUe;J ePf;fyhkh my;yJ Ntz;lhkh vd;gJ KbT nra;a
KbAk; jw;NghJs;s Mtzq;fs;> thf;F%yq;fs;> Gyd;tprhuiz nra;jpfspypUe;J vjphp kPJ Fw;wr;rhl;L
tidtjw;Fhpa Nghjpa mbg;gil fhuzq;fs; cs;sjhf njd;gLtjhYk;
kDjhuUf;F Mjuthd #o;epiyNah my;yJ MjuTfNsh vJTk; vOhjepiyapYk; kDjhuUk; jdJ jug;gpid
ve;jypjj;jpYk; jw;NghJ epUgpj;Jf; nfhs;shj epiyapYk; Muk;gfhy fl;lj;jpYs;s ,t;tof;fpypUe;J jw;NghJ
kDjhuiu tof;fpy; ,Ue;J tpLtpf;f ,ayhJ.”
7. According to the learned trial Judge, the accused cannot be discharged from the offence, if there
are sufficient grounds to frame charges against him for the offence under Section 306 IPC. It is to be
noted that the accused was brought into the case subsequent to the death of the deceased and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis he has been charged for the offence under Section 306 IPC.
Aggrieved over that the petitioner has filed the criminal revision case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 2
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
8. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Government Advocate (Crl.Side) for
the State.
9. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is no proximity between suicide
committed by the deceased and the action on the part of the accused. He further submitted that
when the accused had not done any action or omission and created such circumstances, which
would leave the deceased to chose no other option except to commit suicide. It is further submitted
that no such case has been made out from the records of the prosecution; since the accused is a
Government servant, he was threatened by the deceased for having executed his lawful duties.
10. In support of his above contentions, he cited the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
rendered in Shabbir Hussain Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh & ORS reported in LL 2021 SC 341.
In the said judgment it https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis is held as under:
“Abetment by a person is when a person instigates another to do something.
Instigation can be inferred where the accused had, by his acts or omission created
such circumstances that the deceased was left with no option except to commit
suicide. [Chitresh Kumar Chopra V. State (Government of NCT of Delhi)(2009) 16
SCC 605]”
11. The learned Government Advocate (Crl.Side) has stated that when prima facie materials are
available against the accused, it is uncalled for, the trial Court to look into the merits of the case and
discharge the accused. He further submitted that the learned trial Judge has rightly appreciated the
question of law and dismissed the petition.
12. Points for consideration:
“Whether the sentence imposed by the lower Appellate Court confirming the
judgment of the learned trial Judge is unfair, improper or not legal and in conformity
with the offence proved to have committed by the accused?”
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
13. It has been held time and again by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various cases that in order to
charge the accused for the offence under Section 306 IPC, the prosecution has to establish that some
action on the part of the accused should amount to abetment or instigation so as to induce the
deceased to opt the one and only choice of committing suicide. With regard to the fact of abetment,
there should be some intentional aiding and doing something in order to facilitate the deceased to
commit suicide.
14. In the case on hand, even as per the statement of the deceased, the accused was not present near
the deceased, when he poured petrol upon himself and set fire. The deceased has chosen the place of
occurrence near the office of the Executive Office and self-humiliated him. This is obviously with an
intention that he should be noticed by the authorities, more specifically by the accused. This would
only show that the deceased had grudge against the accused and in order to avenge his revenge on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 3
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
him, the deceased went extremely sadistic and self-humiliated by pointing the accused as the reason
for his death. The accused had not abetted any act of suicide by doing some acts, which would
amount to aiding the deceased to commit suicide. The accused, on his own volition, went to the
petrol bunk, bought petrol and set fire on himself.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. In this context, it is relevant to refer the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in
Gurcharan Singh Vs. State of Punjab reported in (2020) 10 SCC Online SC 796. In the said
judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had held that in order to prove the offence of abetment, the
state of mind on the part of the accused should be visible and it should prove that the accused has
guilty mind to abet the deceased to commit suicide. The relevant observation in the judgment in:
“10.The submissions of the learned counsel have been considered. In order to give the
finding of abetment under Section 107 IPC, the accused should instigate a person
either by act of omission or commission and only then, a case of abetment is made
out. In the present case, however, there is no direct evidence of cruelty against the
husband or the in-laws. There is nothing on record to show which particular hope or
expectation of the deceased was frustrated by the husband. Evidence is also lacking
on wilful neglect of the appellant, which led to the suicidal death. Whereas contrary
evidence is available to suggest that care and treatment was given to the deceased in
the matrimonial home and in the hospital, and during the three years of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis marriage, there was no instance of maltreatment,
attributable to dowry demand. The demand of Rs 20,000 for purchase of a plot (in
front of the residence which might have incidentally become available for sale just at
that time), after three years of marriage, was ruled out by the trial court as the
possible cause for the suicidal death. In any case, PW 2 stated that this sum was a
“cash loan” asked for buying the plot. Thus, a loan may have been sought by the
accused which could not be given. But there is nothing to show that the deceased was
harassed on this count in the matrimonial home. In the face of such material, it is
difficult to conclude that Shinder Kaur was pushed to commit suicide by the
circumstances or atmosphere created by the appellant.
....
15. As in all crimes, mens rea has to be established.
To prove the offence of abetment, as specified under Section 107 IPC, the state of mind to commit a
particular crime must be visible, to determine the culpability. In order to prove mens rea, there has
to be something on record to establish or show that the appellant herein had a guilty mind and in
furtherance of that state of mind, abetted the suicide https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of the
deceased. The ingredient of mens rea cannot be assumed to be ostensibly present but has to be
visible and conspicuous. However, what transpires in the present matter is that both the trial court
as well as the High Court never examined whether the appellant had the mens rea for the crime he is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 4
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
held to have committed. The conviction of the appellant by the trial court as well as the High Court
on the theory that the woman with two young kids might have committed suicide possibly because
of the harassment faced by her in the matrimonial house is not at all borne out by the evidence in
the case. Testimonies of the PWs do not show that the wife was unhappy because of the appellant
and she was forced to take such a step on his account.
....
19. Proceeding with the above understanding of the law and applying the ratios to the facts in the
present case, what is apparent is that no overt act or illegal omission is seen from the appellant's
side, in taking due care of his deceased wife. The evidence also does not indicate that the deceased
faced persistent harassment from her husband. Nothing to this effect is testified by the parents or
any of the other prosecution witnesses. The trial court and the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
High Court speculated on the unnatural death and without any evidence concluded only through
conjectures, that the appellant is guilty of abetting the suicide of his wife.
20. In such circumstances, we have no hesitation in declaring that the trial court and the High Court
erred in concluding that the deceased was driven to commit suicide by the circumstances or
atmosphere in the matrimonial home. This is nothing more than an inference, without any material
support. Therefore, the same cannot be the basis for sustaining conviction of the appellant under
Section 306 IPC.”
16. The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in Sanju Alias Sanjay Singh Sengar Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh reported in (2002) 5 SCC 371 also lends support to the above said point as
below:
“6.Section 107 IPC defines abetment to mean that a person abet the doing of a thing if
he firstly, instigates any person to do that thing; or secondly, engages with one or
more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of
that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or thirdly, intentionally aids,
by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.”
17. In yet another decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in Gangula Mohan Reddy Vs.
State of Andhra Pradesh reported in (2010) 1 SCC 750. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that suicide
itself is not an offence under Section 302 IPC. In the case on hand the deceased has been booked for
the offence under Section 309 IPC only immediately after the filing of his complaint. Hence the
above judgment seems to be relevant and the said judgment is held as under:
6. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the conviction of the
appellant is totally unsustainable because no ingredients of offence under Section
306 of the Code can be made out in the facts and circumstances of this case. It would
be profitable to set out Section 306 of the Code:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 5
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
“306. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis either description for a term which may extend to
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
7. The word “suicide” in itself is nowhere defined in the Penal Code, however its
meaning and import is well known and requires no explanation. “Sui” means “self”
and “cide” means “killing”, thus implying an act of self-killing. In short, a person
committing suicide must commit it by himself, irrespective of the means employed by
him in achieving his object of killing himself.
8. Suicide by itself is not an offence under either English or Indian criminal law,
though at one time it was a felony in England. In England, the former law was of the
nature of being a deterrent to people as it provided penalties of two types:
• Degradation of corpse of the deceased by burying it on the highway with a stake
through its chest. • Forfeiture of property of the deceased by the State. This penalty
was later distilled down to merely not providing a full Christian burial, unless the
deceased could be proved to be of unsound mind. However, currently there is no
punishment for suicide after the enactment of the Suicide Act, 1961
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis which proclaims that the rule of law whereby it was
a crime for a person to commit suicide, has been abrogated.
9. In our country, while suicide in itself is not an offence, considering that the
successful offender is beyond the reach of law, attempt to suicide is an offence under
Section 309 IPC.
10. “Abetment” has been defined under Section 107 of the Code. We deem it
appropriate to reproduce Section 107, which reads as under:
“107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the doing of a thing, who—
First.—Instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly.—Engages with one or
more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act
or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the
doing of that thing; or Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the
doing of that thing.” Explanation 2 which has been inserted along with Section 107
reads as under:
“Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act,
does anything in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis order to facilitate the commission
of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of
that act.”
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 6
Sekar vs State By on 21 December, 2021
18. From the recent judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held in S.L.P.No.7284 of 2017 dated
10.02.2017, it is made crystal clear that mere harassment without positive action on the part of the
accused proximity to the time of occurrence, he cannot be held liable for the offence under Section
306 IPC. The relevant observation is extracted as under: [Shabbir Hussain Vs. The State of Madhya
Pradesh & ORS reported in LL 2021 SC 341.] “Mere harassment without any positive action on the
part of the accused proximate to the time of occurrence which led to the suicide would not amount
to an offence under Section 306 IPC [Amalendu Pal V. State of West Bangal (2010) 1 SCC 707]”
19. The legal position on the point of abetment to commit the suicide has been well settled in the
above decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. So the accused ought to have done any positive
action for the purpose of committing an offence abetting the deceased to commit suicide. Without
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the said act, he cannot be charged for the offence under Section
306 IPC. In the case on hand, it is alleged that the accused had abused the deceased at the office of
the Executive officer. The deceased tried to pass a serious threat for the accused by attemting to
commit suicide near the office of the Executive officer. The accused has not done any positive action
in order to abet the deceased to commit suicide. Neither he had any intention of forcing the
deceased to commit suicide, Under such circumstances, the learned trial Judge ought to have
considered the absence of prima facie materials to book the accused for the offence under Section
306 IPC. The above omission on the part of the learned trial Judge would render his order set aside.
20. In the result, this Criminal Revision Case is allowed. The order of the learned III Additional
Sessions Judge, Chennai, dated 10.07.2015 passed in S.C.No.399 of 2014 is set aside. Consequently,
connected criminal miscellaneous petition is closed. The judgment of the trial Court is set aside.
21.12.2021 Index: Yes/No Speaking / Non Speaking Order rpl https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1.The III Additional Sessions Judge, Chennai.
2.The Inspector of Police, H-1, Washermenpet Police Station, Chennai-21.
3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N.MANJULA, J rpl 21.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4358744/ 7
