Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj
Kumar on 4 December, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) No. 2321/2019 (O&M)
Reserved on: 20.10.2023
Pronounced on: 04.12.2023
1. Sh. Guru Dutt S/o Late Sh. Kranti
Ghosh Grandson of late Sh. Hardutt
Sharma, R/o H. No. 1/1, Extension-1
Trikuta Nagar Jammu
2. Sh. Rajinder Kumar S/o Late Sh.
Hardutt, Sharma, R/o H. No. 1/1,
Extension-1 Trikuta Nagar Jammu
3. Sh. Deepak Kumar S/o Late Sh.
Hardutt, Sharma, R/o H. No. 167, Tope
Sherkhania Tehsil and District Jammu ...Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. R. K. S Thakur, Advocate
v.
1. Siddhant Daluja S/o Sh. Raj Kumar
Daluja R/o H. No. 192/1 Trikuta Nagar
Jammu .... Contenting Respondent
2. Jammu Development Authority through
its Secretary, Vikas Bhawan, Rail Head
Complex, Jammu .... Proforma Respondent
Through:- Mr. R. K. Jain, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Pranav Jain, Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioners have invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court to assail Order dated 15.03.2019 passed by
learned 1st Civil Subordinate Judge (Special Municipal Mobile Magistrate), Jammu (trial Court, for
short) vide which defence of the petitioners came to be struck of in a Suit titled „Sh. Siddhant Daluja
v. Guru Dutt and ors.(cid:129)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 1
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
2. Before grounds of challenge urged in the petition are adverted to, it shall be expedient to have an
overview of some uncontroverted facts of the case.
3. A civil Suit came to be filed by respondent No.1/plaintiff against petitioners/defendants.
Defendants entered appearance in the trial court of their own on 30.03.2017 and were directed to
file written statement. On 01.05.2017 none appeared for the defendants and they were awaited. On
05.07.2017, time for filing written statement was extended by the trial court in the presence of
learned counsel for the plaintiff. On 25.08.2017, none appeared for the plaintiff and he was awaited
by the trial court. On 09.10.2017, time for filing written statement was again extended by the trial
court in the presence of learned counsel for the plaintiff and case was adjourned for 04.12.2017.
However, written statement was filed by the defendants on 02.11.2017 i.e. before the next date of
hearing fixed for 04.12.2017, which was opposed by learned counsel for the plaintiff on the ground
of limitation. An application came to be filed by the plaintiff on 03.05.2018 in terms of Order VIII
Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, CPC) for striking out the defence of the
defendants on the premise that written statement was not filed within the statutory period
envisaged under Order VIII CPC. Application was opposed by the defendants on the ground that
since time for filing written statement was extended by the trial court from time to time, which was
not opposed by the plaintiff, therefore, plaintiff waived his right to oppose the filing of written
statement by the defendants after the extension of time granted by the trial Court. Learned trial
Court vide impugned order allowed the application filed by the plaintiff on the solitary ground that
defendants have failed to give sufficient reasons, which prevented them from filing written
statement in time.
4. The defendants/petitioners have questioned the impugned order inter alia on the same grounds
on which application filed by respondent No.1/plaintiff under Order VIII Rule 10 CPC, for striking
of defence of the petitioners was opposed. According to the defendants, since time for filing written
statement was extended by the trial court itself from time to time in the very presence of the
plaintiff, therefore, finding of the trial court that petitioners-defendants have failed to give sufficient
reasons for not filing written statement within the prescribed period is perverse and is liable to be
quashed.
5. Heard arguments and perused the record.
6. Mr. R. K. S. Thakur, learned counsel appearing for the defendants has argued that Order VIII
Rule 1 CPC provides that defendant shall present a written statement of his defence within 30 days
from the date of service of summons on him and since, in the present case, defendants caused
appearance in the trial Court of their own and no summons were ever served upon them, therefore,
provisions contained in Order VIII Rule 1 CPC is not attracted in the present case. Mr. Thakur also
submitted that since there is nothing on record to suggest that summons purported to be served
upon the defendants was accompanied by a copy of the plaint, in terms of Order V Rule 2 CPC,
therefore, it otherwise, cannot be termed as a valid service.
7. There is no dispute to the settled position of law that mere issuance of summons is not enough to
make the defendant know about the case against him, unless a copy of the plaint or concise
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 2
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
statement thereof is served upon him. However, I have failed to subscribe to the opinion of learned
counsel for the petitioners-defendants that since defendants appeared in the case of their own,
therefore, Order VIII Rule 1 CPC was not attracted, in the present case. Proviso appended to Rule 1
of Order V CPC provides that no summons shall be issued when defendant appear at the
presentation of the plaint and admit the plaintiff(cid:129)s claim. Though said proviso is applicable in cases
where defendant appears at the presentation of the plaint and admit the claim of the plaintiff,
however, it is sufficient to indicate that requirement of issuance of summons is dispensed with, if
defendant appears of his own at the time or after the presentation of the plaint, if service is not
effected upon him. I am fortified by Bank of Bengal v. R. Currie and Co. reported as 1969 Legal
Eagle (CAL) 398. Relevant excerpt whereof reads as below:
"...I think that defendants having voluntarily appeared in court, the necessity of
serving a summons for appearance was dispensed with....."
8. For the aforesaid reasons argument of learned counsel for the defendants/petitioners that since
summons were never effected upon the defendants, therefore, order VIII Rule 1 CPC is not
applicable to the present case, is misconceived. In case, defendants voluntarily cause appearance in
the court before issuance of summons or before service of summons is validly effected upon them,
there is deemed service on the defendants and period of filing of written statement would be
reckoned from the date of appearance of the defendants in the Court.
9. Petitioners-defendants have assailed the impugned order of striking of their defence by the trial
court on the predominant premise that since time for filing the written statement was extended by
the trial court from time to time, in the very presence of the plaintiff and which was never opposed
by the plaintiff, therefore, plaintiff was precluded from opposing the filing of written statement by
the defendants after the statutory period of 90 days. According to Mr. Thakur, learned counsel
appearing for the defendants provision regarding filing of writ statement in terms of Rule 1 of Order
VIII CPC is directory in nature and once discretion was exercised by the trial court by extension of
time for filing the written statement to the knowledge of the plaintiff, therefore, finding of the trial
court that defendants/petitioners have not given sufficient reason which precluded them from filing
written statement within the statutory period sans justification and is liable to be set aside. He had
relied upon Kailash v. Nanhku; AIR 2005 SC 2441, Amar Rice Mills and anr. v. Union Bank of India;
2020 (5) JKJ[HC] 284, Salem Advocate Bar Association, Tamil Nadu v. Union of India (UOI); AIR
2005 SC 3353 and R.N. Jadi & Brothers and ors. v. Subashchandra; 2007(6) SCC 420.
10. Mr. R. K. Jain, learned senior Advocate for respondent No. 1/plaintiff, ex adverso, would submit
that since petitioners-defendants failed to file written statement, despite service of summons within
30 days, extendable upto 120 days, as per amended provisions of Order VIII Rule 1 CPC or even
upto 90 days as per un-amended provision of Order VIII Rule 1 CPC, therefore, right of the
defendants/petitioners stood automatically forfeited without any formal order from the trial court.
According to learned senior Counsel, the substituted provision of Order VIII Rule 1 CPC is
retrospective in nature, therefore, defendants were under legal obligation to file written statement
within prescribed period and since they failed to do so, their right to file written statement after the
expiry of 120 days in view of the mandatory substituted provision of Order VIII Rule 1 CPC had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 3
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
expired with the efflux of time. Learned Senior Counsel has denied that since time to file written
statement was extended by the trial court, therefore, plaintiff waived of his right of objection to the
filing of written statement after the expiry of statutory period. Learned senior Counsel appearing for
the contesting respondent/plaintiff is of the view that since there was no separate application filed
by the defendants giving sufficient reasons for condonation of delay in filing the written statement,
therefore, there was no occasion for the trial court to extend the period for filing of the written
statement. According to learned counsel for the plaintiff, it is only after an explanation is tendered
by the defendants that they can be allowed to file the written statement on such other day as may be
specified by the court, for reasons to be recorded in writing within the meaning of Rule 1 of Order
VIII (i) CPC. He has relied upon Parshotam Gupta v. National Highway Authority of India and anr.;
2017 (5) JKJ[HC] 243, Kishore Kumar and anr. v. Joginder Pal and anr.; 2010 (1) JKJ 484, ATCOM
Technologies limited v. Y. A. Chunawala and Co. and ors.; 2018 (6) SCC 639 and Amit Chawala v.
Nirmal Chawala; 2020 (3) JKJ
473.
11. Order VIII Rule 1 CPC, as amended by Act 46 of 1999, provided that defendant shall, within 30
days from the date of service of summons on him, present written statement of his defence. This
provision came to be amended by the Amendment Act 22 of 2002, which enabled the court to
extend the time for filing written statement, on such other day, as may be specified by the court, for
reasons to be recorded in writing therefor, but which shall not be later than 90 days from the date of
service of summons. It further came to be amended by Amendment Act of 2018 which now enables
the Court to extend the period to file the written statement, on such other day, as may be specified
by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs, as the court deems
fit, but which shall not be later than 120 days from the date of service of summons.
12. It is pertinent to mention that amended provision of Rule 1 of Order VIII(i) CPC also provides
that on the expiry 120 days from the date of service of summons, defendants shall forfeit the right to
file the written statement and Court shall not allow the written statement to be taken on record.
From a careful reading of the language in which the amended Order VIII Rule 1(i) CPC is couched, it
is manifestly clear that it casts an obligation on the defendants to file written statement within
prescribed period of 30 days from the date of service of summons on him and within the extended
time frame of 120 days. The consequences flowing from the non extension of time have been
specifically provided as provision is couched in a negative language, which is mandatory in
character. Therefore, there is no dispute that under the amended Order VIII Rule 1(i) CPC, if a
defendant fails to file written statement within the statutory period of 30 days or within the
extended time of 120 days, his right to file written statement shall stand forfeited and discretion of
the Court to extend the period for filing the written statement is ceased after the amendment of
2018.
13. It is pertinent to mention that in the present case, suit came to be filed by the contesting
respondent/plaintiff in the trial Court on 28.01.2017 i.e. before the amendment of Order VIII Rule
(i) CPC by virtue of Amendment Act of 2018. It is also evident from Section i(ii) of Amended Act of
2018 that it shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Government Gazette.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 4
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
Therefore, it is clear that Act of 2018 is prospective in nature and cannot be made applicable
retrospectively. At the time of institution of Suit it was the unamended Order VIII Rule 1 CPC,
amended by way of Amendment Act XXII of 2002 which was occupying the field and amended Act
of 2018 is not attracted in the present case. In this view of the matter, period for filing written
statement, in the present case, was 30 days extendable upto 90 days in terms of Amendment Act
XXII of 2002. Since the consequences flowing from the non extension of time were not specifically
provided in the said provision, therefore, it was held by Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court and various High
Courts across the country that provision does not specifically take away the power of the court to
take the written statement on record though filed beyond statutory time provided for. Hon(cid:129)ble
Supreme Court in Kailash v. Nanhku (supra) while interpreting the provisions of un-amended Order
VIII Rule 1 CPC and the consequences flowing thereof has made following observation:
"27. Three things are clear. Firstly, a careful reading of the language in which Order
VIII, Rule 1 has been drafted, shows that it casts an obligation on the defendant to file
the written statement within 30 days from the date of service of summons on him
and within the extended time falling within 90 days. The provision does not deal with
the power of the court and also does not specifically take away the power of the court
to take the written statement on record though filed beyond the time as provided for.
Secondly, the nature of the provision contained in Order VIII, Rule 1 is procedural. It
is not a part of the substantive law. Thirdly, the object behind substituting Order
VIII, Rule 1 in the present shape is to curb the mischief of unscrupulous defendants
adopting dilatory tactics, delaying the disposal of cases much to the chagrin of the
plaintiffs and petitioners approaching the court for quick relief and also to the serious
inconvenience of the court faced with frequent prayers for adjournments. The object
is to expedite the hearing and not to scuttle the same. The process of justice may be
speeded up and hurried but the fairness which is a basic element of justice cannot be
permitted to be buried.
30. It is also to be noted that though the power of the Court under the proviso
appended to Rule 1 of Order VIII is circumscribed by the words-"shall not be later
than ninety days" but the consequences flowing from non-extension of time are not
specifically provided though they may be read by necessary implication. Merely,
because a provision of law is couched in a negative language implying mandatory
character, the same is not without exceptions. The courts, when called upon to
interpret the nature of the provision, may, keeping in view the entire context in which
the provision came to be enacted, hold the same to be directory though worded in the
negative form.
14. A similar view has been expressed by the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in Salem Advocate Bar
Association, Tamil Naidu (supra) that provision of Order VIII Rule 1 providing for upper limit of 90
days to file written statement is not mandatory. Relevant excerpt reads as below:
"..................The effect would be that under Rule 10 of Order VIII, the court in its
discretion would have power to allow the defendant to file written statement even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 5
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
after expiry of period of 90 days provided in Order VIII Rule 1. There is no restriction
in Order VIII Rule 10 that after expiry of ninety days, further time cannot be granted.
The Court has wide power to 'make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit'.
Clearly, therefore, the provision of Order VIII Rule 1 providing for upper limit of 90
days to file written statement is directory..............."
15. Same principle has been reiterated by Co-ordinate Benches of this Court in Parshotam Gupta
and Amar Rice Mills (supra).
16. The case law cited at bar by learned counsel for the contesting respondent/plaintiff is
distinguishable on facts and circumstances of the present case for the following reasons.
17. In Parshotam Gupta, an application for condonation of delay in filing the written statement was
filed by the defendant explaining the reasons which prevented him from filing the written statement
within the stipulated period of time and learned trial court condoned the delay as sufficient cause
was found for not filing the written statement within the statutory period. True, it is that no such
application has been made by the defendants/petitioners in the present case, however, the fact
remains that learned trial court extended time for filing the written statement by the defendants in
the very presence of the plaintiff/contesting respondent without any objection from him.
18. In Mehar Chand respondent No. 1 failed to file written statement within the prescribed period of
30 days. Extension of time was sought even after the expiry of the extended period of 90 days. He
filed an application for extension of time to file the written statement without seeking condonation
of delay. Since learned trial court extended the time to file the written statement after huge lapse of
more than 03 years from the date of service of summons, in a mechanical fashion and without
assigning plausible reasons therefor, the order of the trial court condoning huge delay of filing the
written statement was set aside by this court. Similarly, in ATCOM Technologies Limited (supra),
Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court set aside the order of the High Court condoning abnormal delay of 5 years
and 54 days in filing the written statement without any justification. In all these cases, condonation
of inordinate delay in filing written statement was called into question. On the contrary, the
extension of time by the trial court in filing the written statement, in the present case, in the
presence of learned counsel for the plaintiff was never called into question by the plaintiff.
19. Record bears testimony to the fact that plaintiff remained a mute spectator even after extension
of time by the trial court for filing written statement till same was filed by the
defendants/petitioners. Petitioners -defendants in their objection to the application preferred by the
contesting respondent/plaintiff have clearly mentioned that since time for filing written statement
was extended by the trial court from time to time which was not opposed by the plaintiff, therefore,
plaintiff waived his right to oppose the filing of the written statement filed by the defendants. It was
further submitted that provisions of Order VIII Rule 1 CPC, being directory in nature, trial court has
ample power to grant time for filing the written statement. Finding of learned trial court, therefore,
that defendants- petitioners have failed to give sufficient reasons which prevented them from filing
the written statement in time, is perverse.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 6
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
20. Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in R. N. Jadi and Brothers (supra) in a similar fact situation, allowed
the written statement to be taken on record, when trial court had granted time to file the same even
after the expiry of the statutory period of 90 days. Relevant paragraph of the judgment reads as
below:
"8. The matter can be looked at from another angle. Undisputedly, the trial Court had
granted time upto 8.6.2004 which undisputedly fell beyond 90 days. There is no
dispute that the written statement was filed on 8.6.2004."
21. Mr. Jain, learned senior Advocate, appearing for respondent No.1/plaintiff has also questioned
jurisdiction of this Court. According to learned senior counsel, petitioners have invoked supervisory
jurisdiction of this Court under Section 104 of Constitution of erstwhile State of J&K, for the
purpose of challenging an interlocutory order which is not permissible under law.
22. Supervisory jurisdiction vested in the High Court under Section 104 of the Constitution of J&K is
akin to Article 227 of Constitution of India. It is trite that power of superintendence and control to
interfere with the orders of Tribunals or Courts inferior to it cannot be exercised by the High Courts
on the drop of a hat. As per the guidelines laid down by Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in Waryam Singh v.
Amarnath; AIR 1954 SC 215, followed in the subsequent decisions on the issue, High Courts in
exercise of their jurisdiction of superintendence can interfere with the orders of the courts and
tribunals subordinate to it, "within the bounds of their authority" and in order to ensure that law is
followed by the tribunals and the courts subordinate to the High Court to exercise jurisdiction
vested in them and not by declining to exercise its jurisdiction which is vested in them. In addition
to it, High Court is also vested with the power to interfere in exercise of its power of
superintendence over the courts and tribunals subordinate to it when the orders passed by such
tribunals and courts are downright perverse. Therefore, it is settled position of law that this
jurisdiction of superintendence to be exercised by the High Court over the Subordinate Courts and
Tribunals is to be exercised with circumspection and "ex debito justitie". Mere error of law or fact
would not warrant interference and it may also be not justifiable where a different view is possible in
the facts and circumstances of a case.
23. If present case is approached and impugned order in the present case is analyzed with the
aforesaid legal background in mind, it is manifest that impugned order passed by the trial court
striking of the defence of the defendants/petitioners after time for filing the written statement was
extended by the trial court itself in the very presence of the plaintiff/contesting respondents herein,
without any opposition therefrom, is unjustifiable, illegal and perverse and needs interference by
this Court.
24. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed hereinabove, present petition is allowed
and impugned order is set aside. Consequentially application filed by the plaintinff/contesting
respondent for striking of defence of the defendants/petitioners is dismissed. Written statement
filed by the defendants shall be taken on record and learned trial court shall proceed with the trial of
the case in accordance with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 7
Sh. Guru Dutt S/O Late Sh. Kranti vs Siddhant Daluja S/O Sh. Raj Kumar on 4 December, 2023
(RAJESH SEKHRI) JUDGE Jammu:
04.12.2023 (Paramjeet) Whether the Judgment is speaking? Yes Whether the
Judgment is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82703920/ 8
