Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
Author: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
Bench: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
SINGLE BENCH : RAJEEV KUMAR DUBEY, J
Criminal Appeal No. 1392/1997
Shakil Khan and Anr.
Vs.
State of M.P.
===============================================
Shri Manish Datt, learned Sr. counsel with Shri Amber Mishra, counsel for
the appellants.
Shri Sunil Gupta, P.L. for the respondent / State.
===============================================
JUDGMENT
(Reserved on 11.11.2021 Delivered on 06.12.2021) This criminal appeal has been filed under Section
374(2) of the Cr.P.C. against the judgment dated 9th July, 1997 passed by Ist Additional Sessions
Judge, Balaghat in Sessions Trial No.133/1996, whereby the learned Sessions Judge found
appellants No.1 Shakil Khan & appellant No.2 Vahid Khan guilty and convicted and sentenced them
as under:-
Appellants conviction Sentence Fine Default
stipulatio
n
Shakil Khan under Section only under Section
& 363/34 & 366/34 of IPC which Rs.1,000/- Six
Vahid Khan 366/34 of is graver one months
IPC Four years R.I. S.I.
Shakil Khan 342 IPC Three months R.I.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 1
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
2. Brief facts of the case which are relevant for disposal of this appeal are that prosecutrix PW-1, (her
name and identity imposed by law contained in Section 228A of IPC is not disclosed) was a minor at
the time of the incident and was studying in VIII class. Appellant No.1 Shakil Khan used to come to
her house for tuition. On 08.01.1996, she came out from her house to go to school. At around 11:00
am, when she reached near Ram temple, one auto-rickshaw was standing there. When she passed by
the auto- rickshaw, appellant no.1 Shakil Khan got down from the auto-rickshaw and told her that
her course was incomplete, which she needed to complete, so she should go with him. Prosecutrix
told appellant No.1 Shakil Khan that she is going to school now, she would complete the course later,
but Shakil Khan forcibly dragged her and made her sit in the said auto. Appellant No.2 Vahid Khan,
the auto driver took the auto from the street in front of the high school to Lavra Road, Narsingh
Tola, where he stopped the auto at the behest of appellant No.1 Shakil Khan in front of a house.
Appellant No.1 Shakil Khan took her out of the auto and forcibly took her in a room of that house
which was taken by Beniram Rajak (PW-4) on rent and bolted the door of the room from inside and
forcibly took off her clothes. When she objected he threatened to kill her and raped her. She tried to
run away, but appellant No.1 Shakil Khan did not let her go out of the room. Hemraj (PW-3) and
Satish (PW-4) saw the Shakil Khan taking the prosecutrix in the auto, they informed the uncle of
Prosecutrix, Ramchand Awasthi (PW-2). He went to the school, where he did not find the
prosecutrix in the school, so he went to the police station Baihar, Distt. Balaghat and lodged the
report (Ex.P-1). S.R. Marskole (PW-9), Station House Officer, P.S. Baihar, wrote that report and
registered Crime No.02/96 for the offences punishable under Sections 363, 366 of IPC against the
appellant No.1 Shakil Khan and investigated the matter. During the investigation, he called
appellant no.2 Vahid Khan, who informed the police that he had left appellant No.1 Shakil Khan and
prosecutrix at the house of Beniram Rajak (PW-4) located at Narsingh Tola, on which S.R. Marskole
(PW-9) alongwith Hemraj (PW-3) and Satish went to the house where they found the appellant no.1
Shakil Khan and prosecutrix in the room. S.R. Marskole (PW-9) recovered the prosecutrix from the
possession of appellant No.1 Shakil Khan and prepared a recovery memo (Ex.P.-19). He also seized
one packet of condoms and one brief from the spot, one auto from the possession of appellant no.2
Vahid Khan, two condoms and one sweater from the possession appellant No.1 Shakil and prepared
seizure memo (Ex.P-2 to P-4) respectively. He also prepared the spot map (Ex.P-15) and sent the
prosecutrix for medical examination to the District Hospital, Balaghat, where Dr. Paraskar
examined her and gave a report. She also prepared the slides of her vaginal swab and sent it to P.S.
Baihar through Constable in a sealed packet, which was seized by S.R. Marskole (PW-9), and
prepared a seizure memo (Ex.P-17). During investigation S.R. Marskole (PW-9) also sent appellant
no.1 Shakil for medical examination at Civil Hospital Baihar where Dr. R.K. Chaturvedi examined
him and gave a report (Ex.P-8). He also prepared the slides of his semen and sent it to P.S. Baihar
through Constable in a sealed packet, which was seized by S.R. Marskole (PW-9). For knowing the
age of the prosecutrix Dr. Sajnay Shukla (PW-6), Medical Officer, District Hospital Balaghat
conducted ossification test and gave the ossification test report (Ex.P-9) to the effect that the
approximate age of the prosecutrix is between 15 to 17 years. S.R. Marskole (PW-9) also recorded
the statements of prosecutrix (PW-1), Ramchand Awasthi (PW-2), Hemraj (PW-3) and Beniram
(PW-4). He also sent all the seized articles for chemical examination to Forensic Science Laboratory,
Sagar alongwith a draft (Ex.P-21) through S.P. Balaghat, from where report (Ex.P-22) came and
filed a charge-sheet against the appellants before the JMFC, Baihar. On that charge-sheet criminal
case No. 246/96 was registered. Learned JMFC, Baihar committed the case to the Court of Sessions,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 2
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
where S.T. No.133/96 was registered.
3. Learned First Additional Sessions Judge, Balaghat framed charges under Section 363/34, 366/34,
342 and 376 of the IPC against appellant No.1 Shakil Khan and under Sections 363/34 & 366/34 of
the IPC against appellant No.2 Vahid Khan and tried the case. Though appellants abjured the guilt,
after trial, learned trial Court acquitted appellant No.1 Shakil Khan for the offence punishable under
Section 376 IPC and only found him guilty for the offence punishable under Section 363/34 &
366/34 and 342 of IPC and appellant No.2 Vahid Khan guilty for the offence punishable under
Sections 363/34 & 366/34 of IPC and sentenced them as aforesaid. Being aggrieved by the
impugned judgment, appellant No.1 Shakil and appellant No. 2 Vahid Khan have preferred this
Criminal Appeal.
4. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that it is alleged that at the time of incident
prosecutrix studied in VIII class, but no documentary evidence, school entry registrar etc. were
produced by the prosecution in the evidence to prove her age. The prosecution for proving the age of
prosecutrix only produced an ossification test report in which the age of the prosecutrix is
mentioned between 15 to 17 years, which is the approximate age, in which a variation of 3 years is
possible, so in the absence of any other documentary evidence only on the basis of ossification test
report in which the approximate age of the prosecutrix is mentioned as 15 to 17 years, it cannot be
held that at the time of the incident the age of the prosecutrix was below 18 years. Learned trial
Court committed a mistake in holding that at the time of the incident the age of the prosecutrix was
below 18 years. From the statement of the prosecutrix, it is apparent that the prosecutrix was the
consenting party and went with appellant no. 1 Shakil on her own will. Learned trial Court itself
found that the prosecutrix was the consenting party and acquitted appellant No.1 Shakil from the
charge under Section 376 of IPC. In these circumstances learned trial Court committed a mistake in
finding appellants guilty for the aforesaid offences. He further submitted that the only allegation
against appellant no.2 Vahid Khan is that he was the driver of the said auto by which appellant No.1
Shakil took the prosecutrix from the school to the house of Beniram Rajak (PW-4). Appellant no.2
Vahid Khan is the auto driver and he runs the auto for his livelihood. There is no evidence on record
to show that appellant no.2 Vahid Khan knowingly that the prosecutrix was minor and she was
being wrongfully taken by the appellant no.1 Shakil against her will, took her from one place to
another place. On the contrary, the trial court itself held that the prosecutrix was the consenting
party and went with appellant no.1 Shakil on her own will. In these circumstances merely on the
basis that appellant no.2 Vahid Khan who is the auto driver and runs the auto for his livelihood took
prosecutrix and appellant no.1 Shakil from one place to another place by his auto, it cannot be said
that appellant no.2 Vahid Khan was also involved in the crime. Learned trial court committed a
mistake in finding appellant No.2 Vahid Khan guilty for the offence punishable under Sections
363/34, 366/34 of the IPC. So the judgment of the trial court be set aside and appellants be
acquitted from all the charges.
5. On the other hand, learned counsel for the State submitted that from the evidence produced by
the prosecution, the guilt of the appellants is clearly proved. So, the learned trial court did not
commit any mistake in finding the appellants guilty for the aforesaid offences and prayed for
rejection of the appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 3
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
6. Point of determination in this appeal is whether the conviction of appellant No.1 Shakil Khan
under Sections 363/34, 366/34, 342 of IPC and appellant No.2 Vahid Khan under Sections 363/34,
366/34 of IPC and sentence awarded by the trial Court to appellant No.1 Shakil under Sections
366/34 and 342 of IPC and sentence awarded to appellant No.2 Vahid Khan under Section 366/34
of IPC are liable to be set aside for the reasons stated in the memo of appeal and arguments
advanced before this Court.
7. Regarding the age of the prosecutrix Ramchandra Awasthi (PW-2), uncle of the prosecutrix
deposed that the date of birth of the prosecutrix is 10/01/1982 and at the time of the incident the
age of the prosecutrix was 15 years 6 months. For proving the age of the prosecutrix, the prosecution
also produced the ossification test report (Ex.P-9), which was given by Dr. Sanjay Shukla (PW-9).
He deposed that on 10/01/1996 he was posted as a medical officer at District Hospital, Balaghat and
on examination of the X- ray plates of the prosecutrix, he found that the epiphysis of her knee joint
was fused which is fused at the age of 15 years, but the epiphysis of her wrist joint which is fused in
the age of 17 years and iliac bone of her hip joint which is fused in the age of 19 years were not fused.
On that basis, he found that the age of the prosecutrix was 15 to 17 years. Learned counsel of the
appellants submitted that the age mentioned in the ossification test report (Ex.P-9) is the
approximate age and not a conclusive and in that age a variation of 2 years is possible and when
there is a possibility of margin of error of two years, then the view in favour of the appellant/accused
should be taken and it should be held that on the date of the kidnapping, the prosecutrix was above
18 years of age. In this regard, learned counsel of the appellants also placed reliance on the
judgments of Apex Court passed in the case of Mukarrab and Ors. Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
reported in 2017(2) SCC 210. But the facts of that case does not match with the present case. In that
case when ossification tests of appellants/accused were conducted both the accused were much
beyond 25 years of age. Their epiphysis of knee joint wrist joint and iliac bone of hip joint were fused
due to which the medical board is not in a position to find their exact age and determine the age of
appellants between 35 to 40 years. In these circumstances, the Apex Court held that the age
determination based on the ossification test though may be useful is not conclusive. Learned counsel
of the appellants also placed reliance on the judgment passed by Apex Court in the case of Jaya Mala
Vs. Home Secretary, Govt. of Jammu & Kashmir and ors. reported in AIR 1982 SC 1297, State of
Rajasthan Vs. N.K. reported in (2000) 5 SCC 30. In both these cases, the Apex Court held that one
can take judicial notice that the margin of error in age ascertained by radiological examination is
two years on either side. However, in both these cases, the Apex Court has not held that the said
margin of two years should always be taken on the higher side. Whether the margin of error of two
years is to be taken on the lower side or on the higher side, would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case.
8. The Supreme Court in the case of Ram Suresh Singh Vs. Prabhat Singh reported in (2009) 6 SCC
681 has held as under:
"15. We are not oblivious of the fact that it is difficult to lay down a law as to whether
in a case of this nature, the lower or the upper age or the average age should be taken
into consideration. Each case depends on its own facts."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 4
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
9. In the case of State of U.P. v. Chhotey Lal, (2011) 2 SCC 550 Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-
"13. We find ourselves in agreement with the view of the trial court regarding the age
of the prosecutrix. The High Court conjectured that the age of the prosecutrix could
be even 19 years. This appears to have been done by adding two years to the age
opined by PW 5. There is no such rule, much less an absolute one that two years have
to be added to the age determined by a doctor. We are supported by a three-Judge
Bench decision of this Court in State of Karnataka v. Bantara Sudhakara [(2008) 11
SCC 38 : (2008) 3 SCC (Cri) 955] wherein this Court at SCC p. 41 of the Report stated
as under
(SCC para 12) "12. ... Additionally, merely because the doctor's evidence showed that
the victims belong to the age group of 14 to 16, to conclude that the two years age has
to be added to the upper age limit is without any foundation."
10. In the case of Jyoti Prakash Rai Vs. State of Bihar reported in (2008)15 SCC 223 Apex Court also
clarify that position and held after a certain age it is difficult to determine the exact age of the person
concerned on the basis of ossification test or other tests because of that apex court in a number of
judgments has held that the age determined by the doctors should be given the flexibility of 2 years
on either side.
11. From the above pronouncements of the Apex Court, it transpires that there is no such rule, much
less an absolute one that two years have to be added to the age determined by a doctor. Whether the
margin of error of two years is to be taken depends on the facts and circumstances of each case and
the margin of error of two years is to be taken on the lower side or on the higher side, would also
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
12. In this case, Dr. Sanjay Shukla (PW-9) who gave the ossification test report (Ex.P-9) clearly
deposed that the epiphysis of the prosecutrix's knee joint was fused which is fused at the age of 15
years but the epiphysis of her wrist joint which is fused in the age of 17 years and iliac bone of her
hip joint which is fused in the age of 19 years was not fused and on that basis, he determined the age
of prosecutrix between 15 to 17 years and in his cross- examination he clearly denied from the
suggestion that in the given age a difference of two years is possible. So in these circumstances in the
considered opinion of this court, the trial court did not commit any mistake in finding that at the
time of the incident the age of the prosecutrix was above 16 years and around 17 years.
13. On the point that appellant No.1 Shakil Khan forcibly took prosecutrix from the Rammandir to
the Beniram Rajak's house, where he committed rape with her, learned trial Court itself did not find
the statement of prosecutrix trustworthy and after evaluating all the prosecution evidence found
that at the time of the incident the age of the prosecutrix was above 16 years and she was the
consenting party and went with the appellant No.1 Shakil on her own will and appellant No.1 Shakil
committed intercourse with her with her consent and acquitted appellant no.1 Shakil for the offence
punishable under section 376 of IPC. The prosecution did not challenge that finding by filing an
appeal against the acquittal of the appellant No.1 Shakil under Section 376 of IPC by the trial Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 5
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
Even otherwise in this regard, the finding of the trial Court appears to be correct.
14. However, the prosecutrix (PW-1) in her examination-in-chief deposed that on the date of the
incident at about 11:00 am, when she was going to her school on foot, on the way near the school
and Ram Mandir one auto- rickshaw was parked. Appellant No.1 Shakil and appellant No.2 Vahid
Khan were sitting in that auto. When she passed by the auto-rickshaw, appellant No.1 Shakil Khan
got down from the auto-rickshaw. He caught hold of her hand and made her sit in the auto and shut
her mouth with his hand. Thereafter he told appellant No.2 Vahid Khan, to take the auto and
appellant No.2 Vahid Khan took that auto towards Narsingh Tola, where appellant No.2 Vahid Khan
stopped the auto at the behest of Shakil in front of a house. Appellant No.1 Shakil took her out of the
auto and forcibly took her in a room of that house and bolted the door of the room from inside and
forcibly took off her clothes and committed rape with her. Prosecutrix in her cross- examination
admitted that her school used to start at 11:00 a.m. while on the date of the incident she left for
school at 11:30 a.m. When appellant No.1 Shakil caught hold of her hand she did not cry. She also
admitted that Ram Mandir is 10 steps ahead of the school where the auto-rickshaw was standing.
When she walked 10 steps ahead of the school then she got the auto. If she had entered inside the
school main gate there would have been no incident. She has also admitted that the area around
Ram Mandir is congested with a lot of shops around. Had the accused persons taken the prosecutrix
by force in an auto, the incident would have been witnessed by the people present around the spot
and the shouting of prosecutrix would have been heard by them.
15. Hemraj (PW-3), who deposed that he saw appellant No.1 Shakil taking the prosecutrix in the
auto which was being driven by appellant No.2 Vahid Khan, has also not deposed in his statements
that Shakil was holding her mouth. If Shakil Khan had taken the prosecutrix against her will and she
would had resisted, then this fact must have been noticed by Hemraj (PW-3) also and he would have
deposed so in his court statement. So, the statement of the prosecutrix on that point that appellant
No.1 Shakil forcefully took her from Ram Mandir to Beniram Rajak's house against her will, where
he made sexual relations with her against her will, does not appear to be trustworthy.
16. However from the statement of the prosecutrix which was also corroborated by the statement of
Hemraj (PW-3) who saw the appellant Shakil taking prosecutrix with him in Vahid's auto and
informed Ramchandra (PW-2) and the statement of Ramchandra (PW-2) who deposed that on the
information given by Hemraj (PW-3) he searched prosecutrix in the school and when prosecutrix
was not found in the school he reported the incident to the police station and the statement of S.R.
Marskole (PW-9) who deposed that on the information of Ramchandra (PW-2) he wrote the FIR
(Ex.P-1) and thereafter he alongwith Hemraj (PW-3) and Satish went to the house of Beniram Rajak
(PW-4), where they found appellant no.1 Shakil Khan and prosecutrix in the room and recovered the
prosecutrix from the possession of appellant No.1 Shakil and prepared a recovery memo (Ex.P.-
19). It is proved that on 08/01/1996 about 11:30 a.m. prosecutrix left her house and reached the
Ram Mandir where appellant Shakil met her, who took her to Baniram Rajak's house situated at
Nahar Tola by the auto which was being driven by appellant No.2 Vahid Khan. After dropping the
appellant Shakil and prosecutrix at Beniram Rajak's house, appellant No.2 Vahid Khan went back
with his auto, after which appellant No.2 Shakil made physical relations with the prosecutrix.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 6
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
17. For proving the offence under Section 366 of IPC, it has to be proved that appellants abducted
prosecutrix against her will with the intention to marry her against her will or in order that she may
be forced to illicit intercourse. While from the prosecution evidence as discussed above it appears
that the prosecutrix went with the appellant No.1 Shakil on her own will and she was the consenting
party. So above mentioned two essential conditions for upholding conviction under Section 366/34
of IPC are not proved and, therefore, the conviction of the appellants under Section 366/34 IPC
cannot be sustained. Likewise there is no evidence on record to show that appellant no.1 Shakil
forcefully confined prosecutrix in the room. On the contrary as discussed above it appears that
prosecutrix went to Baniram Rajak's house with appellant no.1 Shakil with her consent. So offence
under Section 342 of IPC is also not proved against the appellant no.1 Shakil.
18. But an offence under Section 363 of IPC would be made out if a person takes away or entices any
minor under sixteen years of age if a male, or under eighteen years of age if a female, out of the
keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor without the consent of such guardian from lawful
guardianship. Section 361 of the Penal Code, 1860, inter alia, provides, whoever takes or entices any
minor under eighteen years of age in case of a female, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of
such minor, without the consent of such guardian, is said to kidnap such minor from lawful
guardianship. Explanation to Section 361 provides that the words "lawful guardian" include any
person lawfully entrusted with the care or custody of such minor or other person. It is not the case of
the appellant No.1 Shakil that he took the prosecutrix, who was a minor aged about 17 years, with
the consent of Ramchand Awasthi (PW-2) uncle of the prosecutrix or her parents. So, an offence
under section 363 of the IPC is clearly proved against appellant No.1 Shakil Khan.
19. Learned counsel of the appellants submitted that the prosecutrix was a fully grown-up girl and
she was in the age of discretion, sensible and aware of the intention of the appellant No.1 Shakil
went with him. Appellant No.1 Shakil himself did not take out her from the custody of her lawful
guardian. On the contrary, prosecutrix herself left her house to meet the appellant Shakil and went
with him on her own will, so offence under section 363 of IPC is also not made out against the
appellants. In this regard, he also placed reliance upon the Apex Court judgments passed in the case
of Hari Ram Vs. The State of Rajasthan, 1991 AIR SCW 721, Shyam and Anr Vs. State of
Maharashtra, AIR 1995 SC 2169, State of Karnataka Vs. Sureshbabu Puk Raj Porral (1994)1SCC 468
and S. Varadarajan Vs. State of Madras, AIR 1965 SC 942.
20. But the facts of the above mentioned cases do not match with the present case. In the case of
Suresh Babu Puk Raj Porral (supra) Apex Court found that regarding the age of prosecutrix the
prosecution evidence is not convincing and prosecutrix in her Court statement did not depose that
applicant committed intercourse with her, on that Apex Court held that the offence under Section
366 of IPC is not made out against the accused. In the case of Shyam and Another Vs. State of
Maharashtra (supra) also Hon'ble Apex Court after evaluating the statement of prosecutrix on
merits found that the prosecutrix was an unreliable witness and no credence can be given to her
word. She was a fully grown up girl and she was in the age of discretion, sensible and aware of the
intention of the accused that he was taking her away for a purpose, went with appellant on her own
will, held that no offence under section 366 of IPC is made out against the appellants. In the case of
Hari Ram (Supra) Hon'ble Apex Court on the ground that the statement of prosecutrix is not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 7
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
reliable, therefore, difficult to accept and acquitted the appellant for the offence punishable under
Section 366 of IPC. In all these cases Hon'ble Apex Court did not consider whether an offence under
section 363 of IPC is made out against the accused or not. So on the point whether offence under
Section 363 of IPC is made out against the appellants or not, these judgements do not assist the
appellants.
21. In the case of S. Vardarajan (supra) also prosecutrix telephoned the appellant asking him to meet
her on a certain road and then went to the road herself and thereafter she went with the appellant.
Therefore, the apex court held that "the part played by the accused could be regarded as facilitating
the fulfilment of the intention of the girl. That part, in our opinion, falls short of an inducement to
the minor to slip out of the keeping of her lawful guardian and is, therefore, not tantamount to
"taking".out of the keeping of her lawful guardian and is, therefore, not tantamount to "taking".
further held "the facts established do not show that Savitri would not have left K. Natarajan's house
in which her father had left her without the active help of the appellant." While in this case on the
date of the incident, prosecutrix, who was 17 years of age, left her house to go to school at 11;30 am
while her school used to start at 11:00 am and she instead of going to school reached Ram Mandir
which was located 10 steps away from her school, where appellant No.1 Shakil Khan was waiting for
her in an auto and he took her to a room by that auto, shows that the prosecutrix left her house
under a predetermined plan and met the appellant no.1 Shakil near the Ram Mandir, where Shakil
was already standing and waiting for her, from where appellant Shakil took her in an auto to
Beniram Rajak's house. These facts also show that the prosecutrix would not have left Ramchandra's
house; without the active help of the appellant no.1 Shakil Khan, who used to go to the house of
prosecutrix for tuition and in a position to influence her. So that judgement also does not help the
applicant.
22. Apex Court in the case of Kuldeep K. Mahato v. State of Bihar, (1998) 6 SCC 420 where it was
found the age of the prosecutrix at the time of the incident was between 17 and 18 years and she was
a consenting party held:-
"9. As far as conviction under Section 366 is concerned, we find that the evidence of
the prosecutrix in this behalf is not conclusive. Her evidence does not indicate that
the appellant had kidnapped the prosecutrix with the intention to marry her against
her will or in order that she may be forced to illicit intercourse. These two vital
ingredients for upholding conviction under Section 366 are not proved and,
therefore, the conviction of the appellant under Section 366 cannot be sustained."
10. Coming to the conviction under Section 363 IPC, in our opinion, having regard to the age of the
prosecutrix on the date of the occurrence being below 18 years as deposed to by Dr Maya Shankar
Thakur, (PW 5), it will have to be held that the prosecutrix was a minor on the date of the
occurrence. If this be so, we will have to examine whether prosecutrix(PW 1) was taken away from
lawful guardianship.prosecutrix (PW 1) has stated that the appellant had forced her to sit in the
tempo and thereafter at the point of a dagger, made her keep quiet. She was very much scared and
lost her senses for some time. In the meantime, the tempo reached Ramgarh. On this issue, the
defence of the appellant is that she herself came and sat in the tempo but the fact remains that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 8
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
appellant carried her to Ramgarh out of lawful guardianship. There is no serious dispute that the
prosecutrix was taken in a tempo to Ramgarh by the appellant. If this be so, then the offence of
kidnapping under Section 363 is clearly made out against the appellant for which he has been rightly
convicted for the said offence. There is no error in the judgments of the courts below in convicting
the appellant under Section 363 IPC."
23. From the statement of prosecution witnesses as discussed above it is proved that at the time of
incident the age of prosecutrix was 17 years and she was minor. Appellant No. 1 Shakil Khan took
the prosecutrix from Ram Mandir to Nahar Tola by the auto. It is not the case of appellant no. 1
Shakil that he had taken away the prosecutrix after obtaining due permission from her father or
Guardian Ramchandra (PW-2). Police recovered the prosecutrix from the possession of appellant
no.1 from the house of Beniram Rajak (PW-4). Prosecutrix (PW-1) has also not stated in her
statement that she went with appellant no.1 Shakil with the permission of her immediate guardian
Ramchandra (PW-2) or permission from her parents. So the offence under section 363 of IPC is
clearly proved against the appellant no.1 Shakil.
24. As regard to appellant No.2 Vahid Khan, only allegation against him is that he took the
prosecutrix and appellant no.1 Shakil in his auto from Ram Mandir to Beniram Rajak's house at the
behest of appellant no.1 Shakil, where he left them, but only on that basis, in the light of facts and
circumstances of the instant case, it cannot be said that the appellant no.2 Vahid Khan was also
involved in the crime. There is no evidence on record to show that appellant no.2 Vahid Khan
knowingly that the prosecutrix was minor and was being wrongfully taken by the appellant no.1
Shakil against her will took her from one place to another. On the contrary, the trial court itself held
that the prosecutrix was the consenting party and went with appellant No.1 Shakil on her own will.
In these circumstances merely on the basis that appellant No.2 Vahid Khan who is the auto driver
and runs the auto for his livelihood took prosecutrix and appellant no.1 Shakil from one place to
another place by his auto, it cannot be said that appellant no.2 Vahid Khan was also involved in the
crime. Learned trial court committed a mistake in finding appellant No.2 Vahid Khan guilty for the
offence punishable under Sections 363/34, 366/34 of the IPC.
25. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is partly allowed the conviction and sentence of appellant
no.1 Shakil Khan under Sections 366/34 and 342 IPC and conviction and sentence of appellant no.2
Vahid Khan under Sections 363/34 and 366/34 recorded by the trial Court are quashed and set
aside and the appellants are acquitted of the said offences. The bail bond of appellant No.2 Vahid
Khan is also discharged. But the conviction of the appellant no.1 Shakil Khan for the offence
punishable under Section 363/34 IPC is altered under Section 363 and upheld.
26. Learned Trial court has not awarded any sentence to appellant No.1 Shakil Khan under Section
363 of IPC instead learned trial Court sentenced appellant no.1 Shakil for the offence punishable
under section 366/34 of IPC which is the graver offence. While the offence under section 366 of IPC
is not proved against appellant no.1 Shakil. On the point of sentence learned counsel for the
appellants submitted that appellant No.1 Shakil is first offender. He has been facing trial since 1996.
He has remained in custody during the trial of the case from 10/01/1996 to 09/07/1997 and after
judgment also remained in jail during the pendency of this appeal from 10/07/1997 to 16/07/1997.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 9
Shakil Khan & Anr. vs The State Of M.P. on 6 December, 2021
There is no minimum sentence prescribed under section 363 of IPC. So appellant No.1 Shakil be
sentenced for the period he has already undergone.
27. Looking to the facts and circumstances of the case and as to the fact that appellant No.1 Shakil is
the first offender, who has been facing trial Since 1996 and has remained in custody during the trial
of the case from 10/01/1996 to 09/07/1997 and even after judgment remained in jail during the
pendency of this appeal from 10/07/1997 to 16/07/1997. There is no minimum sentence prescribed
under Section 363 of IPC. Appellant No.1 Shakil Khan is sentenced to 1 Year 7 months R.I. and a fine
of Rs.1,000/- for the offence punishable under Sections 363 of IPC. In default of fine, he shall
undergo 6 months R.I. The period already undergone shall be set off from the period of substantive
Jail sentence. If any fine amount has been deposited by appellant no.1 Shakil for the offences
punishable under Section 366/34 of IPC, that fine amount shall be set off against this fine amount.
A copy of this order be sent to the Trial Court for information and necessary compliance along with
the record.
Certified copy as per rules.
(Rajeev Kumar Dubey) JUDGE sarathe
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20218694/ 10
