Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6 February, 2020
Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6
February, 2020
Author: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
Bench: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
W.P.(MD)No.2337 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 06.02.2020
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA
W.P.(MD)No.2337 of 2020
Shanmugavadivel ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police,
Madurai District.
2. The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Office of the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Madurai.
3. The Inspector of Police
Silaiman Police Station
Madurai District. ... Respondents
Prayer : Writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
for issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents herein to
remove petitioner's name from the History Sheet No.70/2005 maintained
by the third respondent within the time stipulated by this Court.
For Petitioner : Mr.C. Jeganathan
For Respondents : Mrs.S.Bharathi
Government Advocate(Crl.Side)
ORDER
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/17727089/ 1
Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6 February, 2020
The prayer sought for in the present Wirt Petition is to direct the directing the respondents herein to
remove petitioner's name from the http://www.judis.nic.in History Sheet No.70/2005 maintained
by the third respondent within the time stipulated by this Court.
2. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that the petitioner is doing
agriculture. The third respondent police, Karuppaoorani Police Station and Virudhunagar Police
Station have registered false cases against the petitioner and most of the cases were closed as
mistake of fact and in some of such ases, there is no evidence or material to substantiate the false
cases and the police so far did not file the charge sheet in such false cases. He would further submit
that the third respondent has also opened a History Sheet in H.S.No. 70 of 2005. In continuation, in
order to harass the petitioner and to restrict his movements, at the instigation of the superior
officers in the Police Department, Histroy Sheeted Rowdy Book was opened at the second
respondent police station and the petitioner was compelled to attend the police station in the pretext
of enquiry in a routine manner. In this regard, the petitioner had already made representation on
17.12.2019 to delete the name in the History Sheet, but the respondents have not yet considered till
date. Therefore, he sought for allowing the writ petition.
3. The learned Government Advocate(Crl.Side) appearing for the respondents submitted that the
petitioner is an habitual offender indulging http://www.judis.nic.in in rowdy activities, extortion,
katta panchayats, etc. Hence, History Sheeted Rowdy Book was opened at the second respondent
police station as against the petitioner and it is being extended regularly as per the Police Standing
Order. Therefore, he prays to dismiss the writ petition.
4.Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and the learned Government
Advocate(Crl.Side) appearing for the respondents.
5.The issue involved in this writ petition has already been dealt with by the Madurai Bench of this
Court and detailed order has been passed in W.P.(MD)No.19651 of 2017 on 26.09.2018. On the
basis of the above said Order, the Director General Of Police, Chennai issued a circular in Rc.No.
66569/Crime 3(2)/2019 dated 24.04.2019, which reads as follows :-
7.From the above judgments the following principles emerge insofar as history
sheeters are concerned:
a. In order to facilitate the study of crime and criminals, the Police Standing Orders
provides a mechanism, whereby every Police Station shall maintain a crime history,
which shall be a confidential record. In this record all cases of crime that are
mentioned in PSO No.742, which provides various classes of crime, shall be entered
and even an attempt to commit those offences, are entered in the records maintained
in the Police Station.
http://www.judis.nic.in b. These crime records maintained by the Various Police
Stations shall be reviewed every year by the Inspector of Police of the concerned
Police Station. On such review, the Inspector of Police has to furnish a concise
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/17727089/ 2
Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6 February, 2020
appreciation of the year's crime for the benefit of the Superior Officers and also to
make suggestions in order to improve the quality of crime control. The review
undertaken by the Inspector of Police is not merely a catalogue of the crime in the
year. It should reflect the valuable suggestions in order to prevent such crimes in
future and to provide ways and means of handling serious offences in an effective
manner.
c. History Sheet can be opened by the concerned Police Station under two
circumstances. The first circumstance is provided under PSO No.746, which states
that the history sheet can be opened against a person who is a resident (permanently
or temporarily) within the station limit, who is known or believed to be addicted to
commission of crime, whether convicted or not. Here the thrust is on the habituality
or the propensity to commit a crime by a person, which is sought to be monitored by
opening a history sheet.
d. The second category of persons against whom history sheet can be opened are the
persons, who are convicted for various offences that has been listed in PSO No.747,
wherein opening of the history sheet is automatic.
e. In the first category of opening history sheet, month wise scrutiny or a close watch
on the person concerned is contemplated. Here also there is sub-catogrization as,
close watch bad characters and non-close watch bad characters. In the former, the
entry shall be made month wise and in the later, the http://www.judis.nic.in entry
shall be made once in a quarter. What is entered is normally anything of interest in
respect of the bad character, which goes to the notice of the Police. These records
must be checked and brought upto date once in a year. Here the main thrust is on
“Current Doings”.
f. In the second category of opening history sheet, a mere act of conviction under the
offences listed in PSO No.747 is enough. The name of the persons, who have been
convicted for those offences can be retained for a period of two years after their
release from jail.
g. PSO No.748, is the most important provision, which deals with discontinuance of
history sheet. This provision is common to both the categories falling under PSO
Nos.746 and 747. As per PSO No. 748, the Superintendent of Police may order a
closure of a history sheet at any time. But, the Divisional Officer can order closure of
history sheet only after the expiry of the period stipulated in PSO No.747.
h. As per PSO 748, where retention of the history sheet is considered to be necessary,
even after two years of registration, orders of an Officer of and above the rank of
Assistant Superintendent of Police/ Deputy Superintendent of Police must be taken
for extension for the first instance upto the end of next December. For further annual
extension from January to December, separate orders must be passed every time by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/17727089/ 3
Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6 February, 2020
an Officer of and above the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police / Deputy
Superintendent of Police. This provision is made applicable even for rowdy sheeters.
i. For the purpose of passing such orders, there must be valid materials available on
record and it http://www.judis.nic.in cannot be passed on the whims and fancies of
the Police Officers. Therefore, the authority empowered to extend the period of
retention of the names of the persons in the history sheet, should record his reasons
based on both objective and subjective instructions.
j. Branding a person as a history sheeted rowdy, taints the name and image of the
person. It is true that the entire purpose of maintaining a history sheet is to ensure
public peace. However, it should be balanced with the fundamental right guaranteed
to every citizen under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, a fair and
reasonable decision, based on the materials, with sufficient reasons, becomes sine
qua non to retain the name of a person as a history sheeter beyond the period
stipulated in the Police Standing Orders.
k. This Court has time and again brought the above principle to the notice of the
Higher Police Officials and in one of the judgments in Manivanan Vs. State
represented by The District Collector, Coimbatore District and Others, reported in
(2013) 7 MLJ 501, this Court felt that there is lack of understanding on the part of the
Police in maintaining history sheet and therefore, directed the Director General of
Police to issue necessary instructions / guidelines / circulars with regard to the
manner in which it has to be maintained and the manner in which the orders will
have to be passed for extension of the period to continue a person as a history
sheeter.
8.The above principles that has been culled out of various decisions of this Court will
now be applied to each case in order to see if the Police officials have scrupulously
followed all the Police Standing http://www.judis.nic.in Orders and the judgments of
this Court, while retaining the name of a person as a history sheeter, beyond the
stipulated period.
6. In view of the above circular passed by the Director General of Police, Chennai, this Court is
inclined to pass the following orders :-
(i) the first respondent is directed to consider the petitioner's representation, dated
17.12.2019 and pass orders, on merits and in accordance with law, within a period of
four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this Order.
7. With the above directions, the writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/17727089/ 4
Shanmugavadivel vs The Superintendent Of Police on 6 February, 2020
06.02.2020
Internet : Yes / No
Index : Yes / No
ksa
http://www.judis.nic.in
To
1.The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police, Madurai District.
2. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Office of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Madurai.
3. The Inspector of Police Silaiman Police Station Madurai District .
4.The Additional Public Prosecutor, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai.
http://www.judis.nic.in A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA, J.
ksa 06.02.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/17727089/ 5
