Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3
April, 2025
Author: Manju Rani Chauhan
Bench: Manju Rani Chauhan
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:46549
Court No. - 52
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 4392 of 2025
Applicant :- Sharad Chandra Pandey
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 5 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Amit Daga,Raghvendra Pratap
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Mrs. Manju Rani Chauhan,J.
1. Heard Mr. Raghvendra Pratap, learned counsel for the applicant as well as Mr. Mayank Awasthi,
learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
2. This application U/S 528 BNSS has been filed to quash the order dated 29.11.2024 passed in
Criminal Revision No.103 of 2024 (Sharad Chandra Pandey vs. State of U.P. and Others) passed by
Additional Session Judge, Ist, Court No.1, Basti as well as order dated 31.01.2024 passed in Criminal
Misc. Case No.1775 of 2023 (Sharad Chandra Pandey vs. Garima Tripathi and Others) passed by
A.C.J.M. III, Court No.11, Basti, pending in the court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate-III,
Court No.11, Basti.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 1
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
3. Considering the nature of the order under challenge as well as order proposed to be passed, as
purely equal question is involved, no fruitful purpose will be served in keeping this matter pending,
therefore, the matter is being decided at this stage without calling for counter affidavit.
4. Brief facts of the case are that an application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. has been moved by the
applicant with the allegations that the marriage of applicant was solemnized with one Garima on
01.02.2017, according to Hindu rites and rituals. The gauna ritual was performed on 29.11.2017 and
the applicant's wife went to her in-laws house. The applicant was appointed as Assistant Teacher in
the year 2018. His wife was blessed with twins. The conduct of the applicant's wife was not proper
and under the protection of her family members, she had friendly relationship with one Jaihind
Yadav-driver. After coming to know about the aforesaid relationship of his wife with Jaihind Yadav,
the relations between the applicant and her wife became strained, however, the applicant still tried
to sort out the matter. Despite the aforesaid fact, the applicant's wife left her in-laws house in the
year 2020 taking away her stree dhan and her entire belongings and started residing at her parents'
place. Despite repeated requests, when she did not come back in three years, a divorce petition was
filed on 11.07.2023 in which notices were served upon his wife. After coming to know about the
aforesaid through the notice as received by applicant's wife, she came to the applicant's house along
with her brother Gaurav Tripathi, mother Archana Tripathi and two unknown persons on
01.09.2023 and broke the lock of applicant's house. When the applicant came to know about the
aforesaid, he along with his family members went there, where he was abused by his wife-Garima
and her family members. The family members of Garima (applicant's wife) left her at the applicant's
house and went away. Several other incidents have been narrated in the application under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C. wherein the applicant's wife broke the lock of room of Rahul (younger brother of the
applicant) and took away cash and jewellery. The other incidents as narrated in the application
under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. make out a cognizable offence against the applicant's wife-Garima and
her family members. The aforesaid application has been treated as complaint case by order dated
31.01.2024, refusing the prayer to issue direction to lodge the FIR on the ground that all the facts
are known to the applicant and no further investigation is required. The revision against the
aforesaid order has also been rejected on the same ground.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
discloses commission of cognizable offence and as such the Magistrate must have directed for
registration of first information report and investigation by the police, instead of treating the
application as a complaint case. He further submits that the order impugned has been passed
mechanically and in a routine manner, which does not manifest the application of judicious mind to
the facts of the case and law applicable therein. In support of his submission, he has placed reliance
upon the judgment passed by this Court in the case of Anmol Singh vs. State of U.P. and Others
reported in 2021 (1) ADJ 400.
6. Learned A.G.A. on the other hand has supported the impugned order and has pointed out that the
grievance of the applicant has not gone unattended by the court below. The court below after taking
into consideration the entire gamut of the facts and circumstances of the case has rightly concluded
to treat the application filed by the applicant under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. as a complaint. The
applicant shall still have an opportunity to prove his case before the court below.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 2
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
7. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, the following question has come up for
consideration before this Court :-
'Whether the Magistrate is bound to pass an order on each and every application
underSection 156(3)Cr.P.C. containing allegations of commission of a cognizable
offence for registration of the F.I.R. and its investigation by the police even if those
allegations, prima-facie, do not appear to be genuine and do not appeal to reason, or
he can exercise judicial discretion in the matter and can pass order for treating it as
'complaint' or to reject it in suitable cases?'
8. In other words, the question arises that when a Magistrate is approached by a complainant with
an application praying for a direction to the police under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. to register and
investigate an alleged cognizable offence, why he should :-
(a) grant the relief of registration of a case and its investigation by the police under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and when should he
(b) treat the application as a complaint and follow the procedure of Chapter XV of
Cr.P.C.
9. Before dealing with the question, it will be appropriate to discuss some provisions to answer the
aforesaid question.
10. Section 154 and 156 Cr.P.C. provides for the registration and investigation of complaint. The
same are reproduced herein under:-
"154. Information in cognizable cases.
(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given
orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or
under his direction, and be read Over to the informant; and every such information,
whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the
person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by
such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub- section (1) shall be given
forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.
(3)Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police
station to record the information referred to in subsection (1) may send the substance
of such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police
concerned who, if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a
cognizable offence, shall either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation
to be made by any police officer subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 3
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
Code, and such officer shall have all the powers of an officer in charge of the police
station in relation to that offence."
11. Section 156 Cr.P.C. is quoted herein below:-
"156. Police officer' s power to investigate cognizable case.
(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate,
investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area
within the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the
provisions of Chapter XIII.
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in
question on the ground that the case was one which such officer was not empowered
under this section to investigate.
(3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 190 may order such an investigation as
above- mentioned."
12. From the perusal of the aforesaid provision as well as Section 154 Cr.P.C., it is evident that the
police can investigate into matters relating to commission of 'cognizable offences' brought to its
notice under section 154 Cr.P.C. Officer-in-charge of police station has power to investigate U/S
156(1) in such case. Magistrate has power to take cognizance u/s 190 Cr.P.C. on receiving the
'complaint'. Thus the matter relating to section 156 (3) relates to power of Magistrate to order
investigation by police in matters relating to cognizable offences brought before it through
complaint. Complaint has been defined in section 2(d) Cr.P.C. of as follows : "complaint means any
allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Code,
that some person whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a
Police report." Code of Criminal Procedure has given different type of powers to deal with such
matters relating to commission of cognizable offences when brought before it. A Division bench of
this Court in the case of 'Sukhwasi v. State of U.P., 2007(59) ACC 739' held as under:
"Applications under section 156(3) Cr.P.C. are coming in torrents. Provisions under
section 156(3) Cr.P.C. should be used sparingly. They should not be used unless there
is something unusual and extra ordinary like miscarriage of justice which warrants a
direction to the Police to register a case. Such application should not be allowed
because the law provides them with an alternative remedy of filing a complaint;
therefore, recourse should not normally be permitted for availing the provisions of
section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
The reference is, therefore, answered in the manner that it is not incumbent upon a
Magistrate to allow an application section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and there is no such legal
mandate."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 4
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
However, the said judgement does not provide any reason as to why FIR should not be registered in
respect of a cognizable offence.
13. The Apex Court in the case of Lalita Kumari Vs Goverment of Uttar Pradesh and another,
reported in 2014 (2) SCC 1 has discussed as follows :-
"i) Registration of FIR is mandatory under Section 154 of the Code, if the information
discloses commission of a cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry is
permissible in such a situation.
ii) If the information received does not disclose a cognizable offence but indicates the
necessity for an inquiry, a preliminary inquiry may be conducted only to ascertain
whether cognizable offence is disclosed or not.
iii) If the inquiry discloses the commission of a cognizable offence, the FIR must be
registered. In cases where preliminary inquiry ends in closing the complaint, a copy
of the entry of such closure must be supplied to the first informant forthwith and not
later than one week. It must disclose reasons in brief for closing the complaint and
not proceeding further.
iv) The police officer cannot avoid his duty of registering offence if cognizable offence
is disclosed. Action must be taken against erring officers who do not register the FIR
if information received by him discloses a cognizable offence.
v) The scope of preliminary inquiry is not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the
information received but only to ascertain whether the information reveals any
cognizable offence.
vi) As to what type and in which cases preliminary inquiry is to be conducted will
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made are as under:
a) Matrimonial disputes/ family disputes
b) Commercial offences
c) Medical negligence cases
d) Corruption cases
e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution, for
example, over 3 months delay in reporting the matter without satisfactorily
explaining the reasons for delay.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 5
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all conditions which may warrant
preliminary inquiry.
vii) While ensuring and protecting the rights of the accused and the complainant, a preliminary
inquiry should be made time bound and in any case it should not exceed 7 days. The fact of such
delay and the causes of it must be reflected in the General Diary entry.
viii) Since the General Diary/Station Diary/Daily Diary is the record of all information received in a
police station, we direct that all information relating to cognizable offences, whether resulting in
registration of FIR or leading to an inquiry, must be mandatorily and meticulously reflected in the
said Diary and the decision to conduct a preliminary inquiry must also be reflected, as mentioned
above."
14. From the above discussion, it is clear that the scheme of Cr.P.C. and the prevailing circumstances
require that the option to direct the registration of the case and its investigation by the police should
be exercised where some "investigation" is required, which is of a nature that is not possible for the
private complainant, and which can only be done by the police upon whom statute has conferred the
powers essential for investigation, for example (1) where the full details of the accused are not
known to the complainant and the same can be determined only as a result of investigation, or (2)
where recovery of abducted person or stolen property is required to be made by conducting raids or
searches of suspected places or persons, or (3) where for the purpose of launching a successful
prosecution of the accused evidence is required to be collected and preserved. To illustrate by
example cases may be visualized where for production before Court at the trial (a) sample of blood
soaked soil is to be taken and kept sealed for fixing the place of incident; or (b) recovery of case
property is to be made and kept sealed; or (c) recovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act; or (d)
preparation of inquest report; or (e) witnesses are not known and have to be found out or discovered
through the process of investigation.
15. Thus, where the complainant is in possession of the complete details of all the accused as well as
the witnesses who have to be examined and neither recovery is needed nor any such material
evidence is required to be collected which can be done only by the police, no "investigation" would
normally be required and the procedure of complaint case should be adopted. It must be kept in
mind that adding unnecessary cases to the diary of the police would impair their efficiency in respect
of cases genuinely requiring investigation. Besides even after taking cognizance and proceeding
under Chapter XV the Magistrate can still under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. order investigation, even
thought of a limited nature.
16. The position has been clarified in the judgement passed by the Apex Court in the case of Suresh
Chand Jain vs. State of M.P. and Another reported in (2001) 2 SCC 628 which while dealing with the
issue has held as follows :-
"Any Judicial Magistrate, before taking cognizance of the offence, can order
investigation under Section 156(3) of the Code. If he does so, he is not to examine the
complainant on oath because he was not taking cognizance of any offence therein.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 6
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
For the purpose of enabling the police to start investigation it is open to the
Magistrate to direct the police to register an FIR. There is nothing illegal in doing so.
After all registration of an FIR involves only the process of entering the substance of
the information relating to the commission of the cognizable offence in a book kept
by the officer in charge of the police station as indicated in Section 154 of the Code.
Even if a Magistrate does not say in so many words while directing investigation
under Section 156(3) of the Code that an FIR should be registered, it is the duty of the
officer in charge of the police station to register the FIR regarding the cognizable
offence disclosed by the complaint because that police officer could take further steps
contemplated in Chapter XII of the Code only thereafter."
17. The Co-ordinate Bench of this Court while dealing with the issue in the case of Lalaram v. State
of U.P. and 13 others passed in Criminal Revision No. 1611 of 2020, decided on 18.12.2020 (Neutral
Citation No. - 2020:AHC:119365) has summarized the following propositions :-
"40. From the aforesaid judgments, some of the following proposition of law, well
settled, may be summarized as under :-
(40.01). Under Section 154 of the Code, if the information discloses commission of a
cognizable offence it is the mandatory duty of the police officer in charge to register
the FIR. He cannot avoid his duty of registering offence, if cognizable offence is made
out.
(40.02). If FIR is not registered, the person aggrieved by a refusal to record the
information has remedy to approach the Superintendent of Police by submitting an
application in writing and by post to enable him to satisfy if such information
discloses the commission of a cognizable offence and in case of such satisfaction,
either to investigate himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer
subordinate to him.
(40.03). If the person still feels aggrieved from inaction of the police authorities he
has the remedy to approach the Magistrate by way of application under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C., (40.04). On such an application having been made, if, the Magistrate
finds that a cognizable offence is made out, the Magistrate may direct the police to
register the FIR and investigate the matter, without taking cognizance.
(40.05). The other option open to the Magistrate is to take cognizance on the
complaint, register it as a complaint case and proceed as per the procedure
prescribed under Chapter XV Cr.P.C. The Magistrate would record the statement of
the complainant and the witnesses if any present, under Section 200 Cr.P.C. He may,
if he thinks fit and shall in cases where accused resides outside the area of exercise of
jurisdiction of the Magistrate concerned, either inquire into the case himself or direct
an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks
fit, under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. Thereafter, he shall pass order, either under Section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 7
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
203 dismissing the complaint, for brief reasons to be recorded, or he shall issue
process under Section 204 Cr.P.C.
(40.06). In either case, i.e. issuing direction for investigation by the police officer
under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. or taking cognizance and registering it as a complaint
case, the Magistrate has to apply judicial mind. There cannot be mechanical exercise
of jurisdiction or exercise in a routine manner. Mere statement in the order that he
has gone through the complaint, documents and heard the complainant will not be
sufficient. What weighed with the Magistrate to order investigation or to take
cognizance should be reflected in the order, although a detailed expression of his
view is neither required nor warranted.
(40.07). The exercise of discretion by the Magistrate is basically guided by interest of
justice, from case to case.
(40.08). However, where some investigation is required which is of a nature that is
not possible for the private complainant and which can only be done by the police
officer upon whom statute has conferred the powers essential for investigation, the
option to direct the registration of the FIR and its investigation by the police officer
should be exercised, for example:-
(i) where the full details of the accused are not known to the complainant and the
same can be determined only as a result of investigation, or
(ii) where recovery of abducted person or stolen property is required to be made by
conducting raids or searches of suspected places or persons, or
(iii) where for the purpose of launching a successful prosecution of the accused
evidence is required to be collected and preserved, and to illustrate this, by few
example cases may be visualized where for production before Court at the trial
(a) sample of blood soaked soil is to be taken and kept sealed for fixing the place of
incident; or
(b) recovery of case property is to be made and kept sealed; or
(c) recovery under Section 27 of the Evidence Act; or
(d) preparation of inquest report; or
(e) witnesses are not known and have to be found out or discovered through the
process of investigation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 8
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
(40.09). Where the complainant is in possession of the complete details of all the accused and the
witnesses who have to be examined and neither recovery is needed nor any such material evidence is
required to be collected which can be done only by the police, no "investigation" would normally be
required and the procedure of complaint case should be adopted.
(40.10). Category of cases falling under para 120.6 in Lalita Kumari (Supra) i.e.
(a) Matrimonial disputes/family disputes
(b) Commercial offences
(c) Medical negligence cases,
(d) Corruption cases
(e) Cases where there is abnormal delay in filling criminal complaint etc. may fall under Section 202
Cr.P.C.
(40.11). The Magistrate should also keep in view that primarily, it is the duty of the State/police to
investigate the cases involving cognizable offence. Generally, the burden of proof to bring the guilt of
the accused is on the State and this burden is a heavy burden to prove the guilt beyond all
reasonable doubts. This burden should not unreasonably be shifted on an individual/complainant
from the State by treating the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. as a complaint case.
(40.12). The investigation which the police officer or such other person makes in pursuance of the
direction of the Magistrate under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. is the same kind of investigation as is
required to be conducted by police officer, under Chapter XII Cr.P.C. which ends with submission of
the report as per Section 173(2) Cr.P.C.
(40.13). The distinction between the investigation by the police officer under Section 156(3) and
under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. is that the former is at the pre-cognizance stage and the latter is at post
cognizance stage, when the Magistrate is seisin of the case. The investigation under Section 202(1)
Cr.P.C. is for the purpose of ascertaining the truth or false hood of the complaint for helping the
Magistrate to decide, whether or not there is sufficient ground, for him to proceed further against
the accused by issuing process, whereas, the inquiry report under Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. of the
investigation made by the police of its own or under the directions of the Magistrate under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C. is for the purpose of enabling the Magistrate to take cognizance of an offence under
Section 190(1)(a) Cr.P.C.
(40.14). Once cognizance is taken on the application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. by the Magistrate
and he embarks upon the procedure embodied in Chapter XV, he would not be competent to revert
to the pre-cognizance stage under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 9
Sharad Chandra Pandey vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 April, 2025
(40.15). If the Magistrate did not order for police investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and
took cognizance of the case, that would not be bar to the exercise of the power of the Magistrate for
directing the police investigation under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C."
18. Perusal of the impugned order shows that no sufficient reason has been disclosed, on the basis of
which, the Magistrate has proceeded to treat the application under section 156(3) Cr.P.C. as a
complaint. Merely because the facts are in the knowledge of the applicant, direction to lodge FIR
cannot be refused. The gravity/seriousness of the offence; the requirement of the evidence for the
purpose of launching a successful prosecution, and basically the interest of justice depending on the
facts of each case, need be considered in passing the order under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. The
impugned order does not assign any valid reason nor reflects application of judicious mind and has
been passed in a mechanical manner only on the ground that the facts of the case were within the
knowledge of the applicant, thus, the same is liable to be set-aside.
19. The present Application U/S 528 BNSS is allowed.
20. Accordingly, the impugned order dated 31.01.2024 and order dated 29.11.2024 are set aside
with the direction to the court concerned to pass a fresh order on the application under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C. filed by the applicant after affording opportunity of hearing to both the parties, in
accordance with law, within a period of one month from the date of production of certified copy of
this order.
Order Date :- 3.4.2025 Kalp Nath Singh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116023735/ 10
