Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31
January, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Reserved AFR
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:6868
Case :- Application U/s 482 No.6982 of 2017
Applicant :- Sharad Kumar and another
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and another
Counsel for Applicant :- Gopesh Tripathi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate
Hon'ble Brij Raj Singh, J.
1. The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed seeking quashing of the entire
proceedings of Criminal Case No.5450 of 2016, State Vs. Sharad Kumar and another, arising out of
Case Crime No.135 of 2016, under Section 306 IPC, Police Station Maheshganj, District Pratapgarh
as well as the cognizance order dated 06.12.2016 passed by the Judicial Magistrate, Pratapgarh.
2. Facts, in brief, are that Shishir Kumar, elder brother of the applicants, consumed Sulphas on
27.05.2016 and he succumbed. Smt. Kanti Srivastava, wife of Shishir Kumar, informed the police
about the said incident, which is entered vide Report No.26 of 27.05.2016 at 15.30 hrs. that her
husband committed suicide by consuming Sulphas and inquest was also prepared on the same day.
Thereafter, post-mortem was conducted on 28.05.2016. Opposite party no.2, brother-in-law of the
deceased, lodged an FIR on 02.06.2016 making allegation that applicants abetted the deceased to
commit suicide for the reason that the loan, which was advanced by the bank to the deceased, was to
be repaid by the applicants and the deceased, who are real brothers, but the applicants refused to
repay the loan and also they did not give the share of the property, therefore, the deceased Shishir
Kumar committed suicide. The FIR further indicates that father of the applicants had assured the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 1
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
deceased that his brothers will also help him in repaying the loan.
3. Learned counsel for the applicants has submitted that all the three sons i.e. applicants and the
deceased were residing separately and deceased Shishir Kumar had no issue. The deceased had
purchased a Tractor by taking a loan, but could not repay the amount of loan, that is why a recovery
notice was issued against him. The deceased was taken to Swaroop Rani Hospital, Allahabad for
treatment by the applicants themselves, however, deceased could not be saved. Statement of father
of the applicants was also recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., in which he categorically stated that it
is opposite party no.2, who was responsible for abetment to suicide because he wanted that the
deceased should adopt his son, so that he could claim the property of the deceased. Counsel for the
applicants has further submitted that name of the deceased was recorded in the revenue record as
co-tenure holder along with the applicants and he took the loan by mortgaging his land, which was
recorded in his name. He has also submitted that there is no act of abetment by the applicants in
commission of crime. It is further submitted that there is no ingredient of Section 106 IPC against
the applicants as there is no evidence of any kind of active act committed by the applicants. Charge
sheet has been filed on the wrong presumption that applicants abetted the deceased to commit
suicide without there being any evidence. Learned counsel has further submitted that vague and
bald allegations have been levelled against the applicants that too without supporting of any
evidence and the applicants have been charge sheeted on surmises and conjunctures.
4. In support of his contention, counsel for the applicants has placed reliance upon the following
cases:-
1. Mariano Anto Bruno and another Vs. The Inspector of Police, 2022 Livelaw (SC)
834: 2022 SCC Online SC 1387;
2. Criminal Appeal No.3578 of 2023, Mohit Singhal and another Vs. The State of
Uttarakhand and others, decided on 01.12.2023;
3. Swamy Prahaladdas Vs. State of M.P. and another, 1995 Supp (3) SCC 438; and
4. Application U/s 482 No.24303 of 2016, Ambesh Mani Tripathi Vs. State of U.P.
and another, decided on 01.12.2023.
5. On the other hand, learned AGA has submitted that evidence has been collected by
the Investigating Officer, in which it has been found that applicants were involved in
abetment of suicide and the deceased had committed suicide under pressure because
he could not repay the amount of loan. Learned AGA has pointed out the statement of
Smt. Kanti Srivastava, wife of the deceased, who stated that the loan was taken by her
husband with the help of her father-in-law and he assured that the loan amount will
be repaid by all the three brothers i.e. applicants and the deceased. She further stated
that the loan amount was not repaid by the applicants, that is why her husband
committed suicide. He has, therefore, submitted that this application is liable to be
rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 2
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
6. Despite of service of notice, no one has put in appearance on behalf of opposite
party no.2.
7. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
8. After going through the record, I find that there is no active act on the part of the
applicants, which could establish that they were involved in abetting the deceased to
commit suicide. An important fact has also come out that the deceased was having
his own agricultural property, on which loan was sanctioned in his name, therefore,
he was responsible to repay the loan amount. In case he could not repay the loan
amount and under pressure he committed suicide, then how the applicants are
responsible in any manner. It is not worth to presume that applicants being brothers,
had to repay the loan amount, which was advanced to the deceased by the bank. The
evidence on record does not indicate that applicants abetted the deceased in any
manner to instigate him to commit suicide.
9. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Swamy Prahaladdas (supra) has considered
the issue of abetment of suicide in paragraph-3 of the judgement, which reads as
under:-
"3. At the time of framing of charge, the trial court thought it appropriate to associate
the appellant herein as an accused because of the words he uttered to the deceased.
We think that just on the basis of that utterance the Court of Session was in error in
summoning the appellant to face trial. In the first place it is difficult, in the facts and
circumstances, to come to even a prima facie view that what was uttered by the
appellant was enough to instigate the deceased to commit suicide. Those words are
casual in nature which are often employed in the heat of the moment between
quarrelling people. Nothing serious is expected to follow thereafter. The said act does
not reflect the requisite mens rea on the assumption that these words would be
carried out in all events. Besides the deceased had plenty of time to weigh the pros
and cons of the act by which he ultimately ended his life. It cannot be said that the
suicide by the deceased was the direct result of the words uttered by the appellant.
For these reasons, the error is apparent requiring rectification. The appeal is
accordingly allowed. The orders of the High Court and that of the Court of Sessions
are thus upset. The appellant need not face the charge."
10. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohit Singhal (supra) has held that instigation on the part
of the accused is the pivotal thing which is to be seen and there must be instigation in some form on
the part of the accused to cause the deceased to commit suicide. Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the said
judgement are quoted herein-below:-
"9. In the facts of the case, secondly and thirdly in Section 107, will have no
application. Hence, the question is whether the appellants instigated the deceased to
commit suicide. To attract the first clause, there must be instigation in some form on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 3
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
the part of the accused to cause the deceased to commit suicide. Hence, the accused
must have mens rea to instigate the deceased to commit suicide. The act of
instigation must be of such intensity that it is intended to push the deceased to such a
position under which he or she has no choice but to commit suicide. Such instigation
must be in close proximity to the act of committing suicide.
10. In the present case, taking the complaint of the third respondent and the contents
of the suicide note as correct, it is impossible to conclude that the appellants
instigated the deceased to commit suicide by demanding the payment of the amount
borrowed by the third respondent from her husband by using abusive language and
by assaulting him by a belt for that purpose. The said incident allegedly happened
more than two weeks before the date of suicide. There is no allegation that any act
was done by the appellants in the close proximity to the date of suicide. By no stretch
of the imagination, the alleged acts of the appellants can amount to instigation to
commit suicide. The deceased has blamed the third respondent for landing in trouble
due to her bad habits."
11. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Geo Verghese Vs. State of Rajasthan and another, 2021
SCC OnLine SC 873, has held that while suicide in itself is not an offence as a person committing
suicide goes beyond the reach of law, but an attempt to suicide is considered to be an offence under
section 309 IPC. Paragraphs 13, 14, 15 and 16 of the said judgement are extracted herein-below:-
"13. In our country, while suicide in itself is not an offence as a person committing
suicide goes beyond the reach of law but an attempt to suicide is considered to be an
offence under Section 309 IPC. The abetment of suicide by anybody is also an offence
under Section 306 IPC. It would be relevant to set out Section 306 of the IPC which
reads as under :-
"306. Abetment of suicide.--If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine."
14. Though, the IPC does not define the word 'Suicide' but the ordinary dictionary meaning of
suicide is 'self-killing'. The word is derived from a modern latin word 'suicidium', 'sui' means
'oneself' and 'cidium' means 'killing'. Thus, the word suicide implies an act of 'self-killing'. In other
words, act of death must be committed by the deceased himself, irrespective of the means adopted
by him in achieving the object of killing himself.
15. Section 306 of IPC makes abetment of suicide a criminal offence and prescribes punishment for
the same.
16. The ordinary dictionary meaning of the word 'instigate' is to bring about or initiate, incite
someone to do something. This Court in the case of Ramesh Kumar Vs. State of Chhattisgarh, 2021
SCC OnLine SC 873 has defined the word 'instigate' as under :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 4
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
"Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to do an act."
12. In the case of M. Arjunan Vs. State, represented by its Inspector of Police, (2019) 3 SCC 315,
Hon'ble Supreme Court has further dealt with the ingredients of Section 306 IPC extensively. The
relevant paragraph of the said judgement is quoted herein-below:-
"The essential ingredients of the offence under Section 306 I.P.C. are: (i) the
abetment; (ii) the intention of the accused to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to
commit suicide. The act of the accused, however, insulting the deceased by using
abusive language will not, by itself, constitute the abetment of suicide. There should
be evidence capable of suggesting that the accused intended by such act to instigate
the deceased to commit suicide. Unless the ingredients of instigation/abetment to
commit suicide are satisfied, accused cannot be convicted under Section 306 I.P.C."
13. The scope and ambit of Section 107 IPC and its co-relation with Section 306 IPC has been
discussed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S.S. Cheena Vs. Vijay Kumar Mahajan and
another, (2010) 12 SCC 190. The relevant paragraph of the said judgement reads as under:-
"Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a
person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused to
instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. The intention
of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by the Supreme Court is clear that
in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear mens rea to
commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which led the deceased
to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have been intended to push the
deceased into such a position that he committed suicide."
14. In the case of Ude Singh and others Vs. State of Haryana, (2019) 17 SCC 301, Hon'ble Supreme
Court while discussing the question that state of mind to commit suicide is to be seen, which is
mentioned under Section 306 IPC, held as under:-
"16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be a proof of direct or indirect
act/s of incitement to the commission of suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the
question of cause of a suicide, particularly in the context of an offence of abetment of
suicide, remains a vexed one, involving multifaceted and complex attributes of
human behavior and responses/reactions. In the case of accusation for abetment of
suicide, the Court would be looking for cogent and convincing proof of the act/s of
incitement to the commission of suicide. In the case of suicide, mere allegation of
harassment of the deceased by another person would not suffice unless there be such
action on the part of the accused which compels the person to commit suicide; and
such an offending action ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a
person has abetted in the commission of suicide by another or not, could only be
gathered from the facts and circumstances of each case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 5
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
16.1. For the purpose of finding out if a person has abetted commission of suicide by
another; the consideration would be if the accused is guilty of the act of instigation of
the act of suicide. As explained and reiterated by this Court in the decisions
above-referred, instigation means to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage
to do an act. If the persons who committed suicide had been hypersensitive and the
action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily expected to induce a similarly
circumstanced person to commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused guilty
of abetment of suicide. But, on the other hand, if the accused by his acts and by his
continuous course of conduct creates a situation which leads the deceased perceiving
no other option except to commit suicide, the case may fall within the four-corners of
Section 306 IPC. If the accused plays an active role in tarnishing the self-esteem and
self-respect of the victim, which eventually draws the victim to commit suicide, the
accused may be held guilty of abetment of suicide. The question of mens rea on the
part of the accused in such cases would be examined with reference to the actual acts
and deeds of the accused and if the acts and deeds are only of such nature where the
accused intended nothing more than harassment or snap show of anger, a particular
case may fall short of the offence of abetment of suicide. However, if the accused kept
on irritating or annoying the deceased by words or deeds until the deceased reacted
or was provoked, a particular case may be that of abetment of suicide. Such being the
matter of delicate analysis of human behaviour, each case is required to be examined
on its own facts, while taking note of all the surrounding factors having bearing on
the actions and psyche of the accused and the deceased."
15. In the case of Madan Mohan Singh Vs. State of Gujarat and another, (2010) 8 SCC 628, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has also taken the similar view in paragraphs 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, which read as
under:-
"10. We are convinced that there is absolutely nothing in this suicide note or the FIR
which would even distantly be viewed as an offence much less under Section 306,
IPC. We could not find anything in the FIR or in the so-called suicide note which
could be suggested as abetment to commit suicide. In such matters there must be an
allegation that the accused had instigated the deceased to commit suicide or
secondly, had engaged with some other person in a conspiracy and lastly, that the
accused had in any way aided any act or illegal omission to bring about the suicide.
11. In spite of our best efforts and microscopic examination of the suicide note and
the FIR, all that we find is that the suicide note is a rhetoric document in the nature
of a departmental complaint. It also suggests some mental imbalance on the part of
the deceased which he himself describes as depression. In the so-called suicide note,
it cannot be said that the accused ever intended that the driver under him should
commit suicide or should end his life and did anything in that behalf. Even if it is
accepted that the accused changed the duty of the driver or that the accused asked
him not to take the keys of the car and to keep the keys of the car in the office itself, it
does not mean that the accused intended or knew that the driver should commit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 6
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
suicide because of this.
12. In order to bring out an offence under Section 306, IPC specific abetment as
contemplated by Section 107, IPC on the part of the accused with an intention to
bring out the suicide of the concerned person as a result of that abetment is required.
The intention of the accused to aid or to instigate or to abet the deceased to commit
suicide is a must for this particular offence under Section 306, IPC. We are of the
clear opinion that there is no question of there being any material for offence under
Section 306, IPC either in the FIR or in the so-called suicide note.
13. It is absurd to even think that a superior officer like the appellant would intend to
bring about suicide of his driver and, therefore, abet the offence. In fact, there is no
nexus between the so called suicide (if at all it is one for which also there is no
material on record) and any of the alleged acts on the part of the appellant. There is
no proximity either. In the prosecution under Section 306, IPC, much more material
is required. The Courts have to be extremely careful as the main person is not
available for cross- examination by the appellant/accused. Unless, therefore, there is
specific allegation and material of definite nature (not imaginary or inferential one),
it would be hazardous to ask the appellant/accused to face the trial. A criminal trial is
not exactly a pleasant experience. The person like the appellant in present case who is
serving in a responsible post would certainly suffer great prejudice, were he to face
prosecution on absurd allegations of irrelevant nature. In the similar circumstances,
as reported in Netai Dutta v. State of W.B. 2005 (2) SCC 659, this Court had quashed
the proceedings initiated against the accused.
16. Insofar as Section 294(b) IPC is concerned, we could not find a single word in the FIR or even in
the so-called suicide note. Insofar as Section 306 IPC is concerned, even at the cost of repetition, we
may say that merely because a person had a grudge against his superior officer and committed
suicide on account of that grudge, even honestly feeling that he was wronged, it would still not be a
proper allegation for basing the charge under Section 306 IPC. It will still fall short of a proper
allegation. It would have to be objectively seen whether the allegations made could reasonably be
viewed as proper allegations against the appellant/accused to the effect that he had intended or
engineered the suicide of the concerned person by his acts, words etc. When we put the present FIR
on this test, it falls short.
17. We have already explained that the baseless and irrelevant allegations could not be used as a
basis for prosecution for a serious offence under Section 306 IPC. Similarly, we have already
considered Section 294(b) IPC also. We have not been able to find anything. Under such
circumstances, where the FIR itself does not have any material or is not capable of being viewed as
having material for offence under Sections 306 and 294(b) IPC, as per the law laid down by this
Court in State of Haryana and Ors. v. Bhajan Lal and Ors. 1992 Suppl. 1 SCC 335, it would be only
proper to quash the FIR and the further proceedings."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 7
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
16. Hon'ble Supreme Court has considered the issue of abetment to suicide in the case of State of
Kerala and others Vs. S. Unnikrishnan Nair and others, (2015) 9 SCC 639. Relevant paragraphs of
the said judgement read as under:-
"9. To appreciate the rivalised submissions in the obtaining factual matrix, it is
necessary to understand the concept of abatement as enshrined in Section 107 Indian
Penal Code. The said provision reads as follows:
107. A person abets the doing of a thing, who-
First-Instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly-Engages with one or more other person or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in
pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or Thirdly-Intentionally aids,
by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.-A person who, by willful misrepresentation, or by willful concealment of a material
fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a
thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing.
Explanation 2-Whoever, either prior to or at the time of commission of an act, does anything in
order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said
to aid the doing of that act.
10. The aforesaid provision was interpreted in Kishori Lal v. State of M.P. (2007) 10 SCC 797 by a
two-Judge Bench and the discussion therein is to the following effect:
Section 107 Indian Penal Code defines abetment of a thing. The offence of abetment
is a separate and distinct offence provided in Indian Penal Code. A person, abets the
doing of a thing when (1) he instigates any person to do that thing; or (2) engages
with one or more other persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing; or (3)
intentionally aids, by act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing. These things are
essential to complete abetment as a crime. The word "instigate" literally means to
provoke, incite, urge on or bring about by persuasion to do any thing. The abetment
may be by instigation, conspiracy or intentional aid, as provided in the three clauses
of Section 107. Section 109 provides that if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of abetment and there is no provision for the punishment of such
abetment, then the offender is to be punished with the punishment provided for the
original offence. "Abetted" in Section 109 means the specific offence abetted.
Therefore, the offence for the abetment of which a person is charged with the
abetment is normally linked with the proved offence.
11. In Amalendu Pal v. State of West Bengal (2010) 1 SCC 707 dealing with expression of abetment
the Court observed:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 8
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
The expression "abetment" has been defined Under Section 107 Indian Penal Code
which we have already extracted above. A person is said to abet the commission of
suicide when a person instigates any person to do that thing as stated in clause Firstly
or to do anything as stated in clauses Secondly or Thirdly of Section 107 Indian Penal
Code. Section 109 Indian Penal Code provides that if the act abetted is committed
pursuant to and in consequence of abetment then the offender is to be punished with
the punishment provided for the original offence. Learned Counsel for the
Respondent State, however, clearly stated before us that it would be a case where
clause Thirdly of Section 107 Indian Penal Code only would be attracted. According
to him, a case of abetment of suicide is made out as provided for Under Section 107
Indian Penal Code.
12. As we find from the narration of facts and the material brought on record in the case at hand, it
is the suicide note which forms the fulcrum of the allegations and for proper appreciation of the
same, we have reproduced it hereinbefore. On a plain reading of the same, it is difficult to hold that
there has been any abetment by the Respondents. The note, except saying that the Respondents
compelled him to do everything and cheated him and put him in deep trouble, contains nothing else.
The Respondents were inferior in rank and it is surprising that such a thing could happen. That
apart, the allegation is really vague. It also baffles reason, for the department had made him the
head of the investigating team and the High Court had reposed complete faith in him and granted
him the liberty to move the court, in such a situation, there was no warrant to feel cheated and to be
put in trouble by the officers belonging to the lower rank. That apart, he has also put the blame on
the Chief Judicial Magistrate by stating that he had put pressure on him. He has also made the
allegation against the Advocate.
13. In Netai Dutta (supra), a two-Judge Bench, while dealing with the concept of abetment Under
Section 107 Indian Penal Code and, especially, in the context of suicide note, had to say this:
In the suicide note, except referring to the name of the Appellant at two places, there
is no reference of any act or incidence whereby the Appellant herein is alleged to have
committed any wilful act or omission or intentionally aided or instigated the
deceased Pranab Kumar Nag in committing the act of suicide. There is no case that
the Appellant has played any part or any role in any conspiracy, which ultimately
instigated or resulted in the commission of suicide by deceased Pranab Kumar Nag.
Apart from the suicide note, there is no allegation made by the complainant that the
Appellant herein in any way was harassing his brother, Pranab Kumar Nag. The case
registered against the Appellant is without any factual foundation. The contents of
the alleged suicide note do not in any way make out the offence against the Appellant.
The prosecution initiated against the Appellant would only result in sheer
harassment to the Appellant without any fruitful result. In our opinion, the learned
Single Judge seriously erred in holding that the First Information Report against the
Appellant disclosed the elements of a cognizable offence. There was absolutely no
ground to proceed against the Appellant herein. We find that this is a fit case where
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 9
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
the extraordinary power Under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to
be invoked. We quash the criminal proceedings initiated against the Appellant and
accordingly allow the appeal.
14. In M. Mohan (supra), while dealing with the abatement, the Court has observed thus:
Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a
person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused to
instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained.
The intention of the Legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this Court are
clear that in order to convict a person Under Section 306 Indian Penal Code there has
to be a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct
act which led the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and this act must have
been intended to push the deceased into such a position that he/she committed
suicide.
15. As far as Praveen Pradhan (supra), is concerned, Mr. Rao, has emphatically relied on it for the
purpose that the Court had declined to quash the F.I.R. as there was a suicide note. Mr. Rao has
drawn out attention to paragraph 10 of the judgment, wherein the suicide note has been reproduced.
The Court in the said case has referred to certain authorities with regard to Section 107 Indian Penal
Code and opined as under:
"18. In fact, from the above discussion it is apparent that instigation has to be
gathered from the circumstances of a particular case. No straight-jacket formula can
be laid down to find out as to whether in a particular case there has been instigation
which force the person to commit suicide. In a particular case, there may not be
direct evidence in regard to instigation which may have direct nexus to suicide.
Therefore, in such a case, an inference has to be drawn from the circumstances and it
is to be determined whether circumstances had been such which in fact had created
the situation that a person felt totally frustrated and committed suicide. More so,
while dealing with an application for quashing of the proceedings, a court cannot
form a firm opinion, rather a tentative view that would evoke the presumption
referred to Under Section 228 Code of Criminal Procedure.
19. Thus, the case is required to be considered in the light of aforesaid settled legal
propositions. In the instant case, alleged harassment had not been a casual feature,
rather remained a matter of persistent harassment. It is not a case of a driver; or a
man having an illicit relationship with a married woman, knowing that she also had
another paramour; and therefore, cannot be compared to the situation of the
deceased in the instant case, who was a qualified graduate engineer and still suffered
persistent harassment and humiliation and additionally, also had to endure
continuous illegal demands made by the Appellant, upon non-fulfillment of which, he
would be mercilessly harassed by the Appellant for a prolonged period of time. He
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 10
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
had also been forced to work continuously for a long durations in the factory,
vis-à-vis other employees which often even entered to 16-17 hours at a stretch. Such
harassment, coupled with the utterance of words to the effect, that, "had there been
any other person in his place, he would have certainly committed suicide" is what
makes the present case distinct from the aforementioned cases considering the facts
and circumstances of the present case, we do not think it is a case which requires any
interference by this Court as regards the impugned judgment and order of the High
Court.
16. We have quoted in extenso from the said judgment and we have no hesitation in stating that the
suicide note therein was quite different, and the Court did think it appropriate to quash the
proceedings because of the tenor and nature of the suicide note. Thus, the said decision is
distinguishable regard being had to the factual score exposited therein.
17. Coming to the case at hand, as we have stated earlier, the suicide note really does not state about
any continuous conduct of harassment and, in any case, the facts and circumstances are quite
different. In such a situation, we are disposed to think that the High Court is justified in quashing
the proceeding, for it is an accepted position in law that where no prima facie case is made out
against the accused, then the High Court is obliged in law to exercise the jurisdiction under Section
482 of the Code and quash the proceedings."
17. Similar issue has been dealt with by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No.1022 of
2021, Kanchan Sharma Vs. State of U.P. and another, decided on 17.09.2021. Relevant paragraphs
of the said judgement are quoted herein below:-
"9. Having heard learned counsel on both sides, we have perused the impugned order
and other material placed on record. Except the self−serving statements of the
complainant and other witnesses stating that deceased was in love with the appellant,
there is no other material to show that appellant was maintaining any relation with
the deceased. From the material placed on record it is clear that on the date of
incident on 04.05.2018 deceased went to the house of the appellant and consumed
poison by taking out from a small bottle which he has carried in his pocket. Merely
because he consumed poison in front of the house of the appellant, that itself will not
indicate any relation of the appellant with the deceased. 'Abetment' involves mental
process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing.
Without positive act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in committing
suicide, no one can be convicted for offence under Section 306, IPC. To proceed
against any person for the offence under Section 306 IPC it requires an active act or
direct act which led the deceased to commit suicide, seeing no option and that act
must have been intended to push the deceased into such a position that he committed
suicide. There is nothing on record to show that appellant was maintaining relation
with the deceased and further there is absolutely no material to allege that appellant
abetted for suicide of the deceased within the meaning of Section 306, IPC. Even with
regard to offence alleged under Section 3(2)(v) of the Act it is to be noticed that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 11
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
except vague and bald statement that the appellant and other family members abused
deceased by uttering casteist words but there is nothing on record to show to attract
any of the ingredients for the alleged offence also.
This Court in the case of Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)
(2009) 16 SCC 605 had an occasion to deal with the aspect of abetment. In the said
case this Court has opined that there should be an intention to provoke, incite or
encourage the doing of an act by the accused. Besides, the judgment also observed
that each person's suicidability pattern is different from the other and each person
has his own idea of self−esteem and self−respect. In the said judgment it is held that
it is impossible to lay down any straightjacket formula dealing with the cases of
suicide and each case has to be decided on the basis of its own facts and
circumstances. In the case of Amalendu Pal @ Jhantu v. State of West Bengal (2010)
1 SCC 707 in order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306, IPC this Court
has held as under :
"12. Thus, this Court has consistently taken the view that before holding an accused
guilty of an offence under Section 306 IPC, the court must scrupulously examine the
facts and circumstances of the case and also assess the evidence adduced before it in
order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to the victim had left
the victim with no other alternative but to put an end to her life. It is also to be borne
in mind that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or
indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
13. In order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 IPC there must be a
case of suicide and in the commission of the said offence, the person who is said to
have abetted the commission of suicide must have played an active role by an act of
instigation or by doing certain act to facilitate the commission of suicide. Therefore,
the act of abetment by the person charged with the said offence must be proved and
established by the prosecution before he could be convicted under Section 306 IPC."
In the judgment in the case of S.S. Chheena v. Vijay Kumar Mahajan & Anr. (2010) 12 SCC 190 this
Court reiterated the ingredients of offence of Section 306 IPC. Paragraph 25 of the judgment reads
as under :
"25. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally
aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused
to instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. The
intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this Court is clear
that in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear mens
rea to commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which led the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 12
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have been intended to
push the deceased into such a position that he committed suicide."
In the judgment in the case of Rajiv Thapar & Ors. v. Madan Lal Kapur (2013) 3 SCC 330 this Court
has considered the scope of the provision under Section 482, Cr.PC and has laid down the steps
which should be followed by the High Court to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing of
proceedings in exercise of power under Section 482, Cr.PC. Paragraph 30 containing the four steps
read as under :
"30. Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate
the following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashment raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 CrPC:
30.1.Step one: whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable,
and indubitable i.e. the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
30.2.Step two: whether the material relied upon by the accused would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused i.e. the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint i.e.
the material is such as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false?
30.3.Step three: whether the material relied upon by the accused has not been
refuted by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is such that it cannot be
justifiably refuted by the prosecution/complainant?
30.4.Step four: whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process
of the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?
30.5. If the answer to all the steps is in the affirmative, the judicial conscience of the
High Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings in exercise of
power vested in it under Section 482 CrPC. Such exercise of power, besides doing
justice to the accused, would save precious court time, which would otherwise be
wasted in holding such a trial (as well as proceedings arising therefrom) specially
when it is clear that the same would not conclude in the conviction of the accused."
10. By applying the aforesaid ratio decided by this Court, we have carefully scrutinized the material
on record and examined the facts of the case on hand. Except the statement that the deceased was in
relation with the appellant, there is no material at all to show that appellant was maintaining any
relation with the deceased. In fact, at earlier point of time when the deceased was stalking the
appellant, the appellant along with her father went to the police station complained about the calls
which were being made by the deceased to the appellant. Same is evident from the statement of S.I.
Manoj Kumar recorded on 05.07.2018. In his statement recorded he has clearly deposed that the
father along with the appellant went to the police post and complained against the deceased who
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 13
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
was continuously calling the appellant and proposing that she should marry him with a threat that
he will die otherwise. Having regard to such material placed on record and in absence of any
material within the meaning of Section 107 of IPC, there is absolutely no basis to proceed against the
appellant for the alleged offence under Section 306 IPC and Section 3(2)(v) of the Act. It would be
travesty of justice to compel the appellant to face a criminal trial without any credible material
whatsoever.
11. In view of the same, we are of the view that the High Court has committed error in rejecting the
application filed by the appellant by merely recording a finding that in view of the factual disputes
same cannot be decided in a petition under Section 482, Cr.PC.
.......................
23. Section 107 I.P.C. read with Section 306 I.P.C. is very much clear for abetment of a thing.
Instigation is the first condition, second condition is engagement of one or more persons in any
conspiracy and further an act or illegal omission in pursuance of conspiracy and the third thing is
intention to do by any act or illegal omission. All these legal ingredients are fully missing in this
case. In fact, only denial of marriage not coupled with any other fact does not come within the
purview of abetment as defined in Section 107 I.P.C., therefore, it would not be an offence under
Section 306 I.P.C."
18. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M. Vijayakumar Vs. State of Tamilnadu, (2024) 4 SCC 633
while considering the question of mens rea in committing the crime under Section 306 IPC held as
under:-
"19. In the contextual situation, in view of the analysis of the provisions under section 306 IPC and
the decisions referred to supra, we will also have to consider what is mens rea? 'Mens rea' means a
guilty mind. As a general rule, every crime requires a mental element, the nature of which, will
depend upon definition of the particular crime in question. Although it is impossible to ascribe any
particular meaning to the term 'mens rea' as the circumstance to determine the existence of mens
rea depends upon the ingredients constituting the particular offence and the expression used in the
definition of the particular offence to constitute such offence. It is only appropriate to refer to
Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn., Vol-11, Para-10), going by the same:
"...it is impossible to ascribe any particular meaning to the term 'mens rea', concepts
such as those of intention, recklessness and knowledge which commonly used as the
basis for criminal liability and in some respects, it may be said to be fundamental to
it. Generally, subject to both qualification and exception, a person is not to be made
criminally liable for serious crimes unless he intends to cause or foresees that he will
probably cause or at the lowest he may cause the elements which constitute a crime
in question."
20. In the decision in Director of Enforcement v. MCTM Corp. Pvt. Ltd, it was observed that mens
rea is a state of mind and held that under the criminal law mens rea is considered as the "guilty
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 14
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
intention" and unless it is found that the 'accused' had the guilty intention to commit the crime, he
could not be held guilty of committing the crime."
19. Recently, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No.221 of 2025, Mahendra Awase Vs. The
State of Madhya Pradesh, decided on 17.01.2025 after considering the earlier judgements in regard
to abetment to suicide and its impact, held as under:-
"14. In Madan Mhan Singh Vs. State of Gujarat and another, (2010) 8 SCC 628, this
Court held that in order to bring out an offence under Section 306 IPC specific
abetment as contemplated by Section 107 IPC on the part of the accused with an
intention to bring about the suicide of the person concerned as a result of that
abetment is required. It was further held that the intention of the accused to aid or to
instigate or to abet the deceased to commit suicide is a must for attracting Section
306.
15.In Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu Vs. State of West Bengal, (2010) 1 SCC 707, this
Court held as under:-
"12. Thus, this Court has consistently taken the view that before holding an accused
guilty of an offence under Section 306 PC, the court must scrupulously examine the
facts and circumstances of the case and also assess the evidence adduced before it in
order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to the victim had left
the victim with no other alternative but to put an end to her life. It is also to be borne
in mind that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or
indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
[Emphasis supplied]
16. In order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 IPC there must be a
case of suicide and in the commission of the said offence, the person who is said to
have abetted the commission of suicide must have played an active role by an act of
instigation or by doing certain act to facilitate the commission of suicide. Therefore,
the act of abetment by the person charged with the said offence must be proved and
established by the prosecution before he could be convicted under Section 306 IPC.
17. M. Mohan vs. State, (2011) 3 SCC 626 followed Ramesh Kumar vs. State of
Chhattisgarh, (2001) 9 SCC 618, wherein it was held as under:-
"41. This Court in SCC para 20 of Ramesh Kumar has examined different shades of
the meaning of "instigation". Para 20 reads as under: (SCC p. 629) "20. Instigation is
to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to do 'an act'. To satisfy the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 15
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
requirement of instigation though it is not necessary that actual words must be used
to that effect or what constitutes instigation must necessarily and specifically be
suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite the consequence
must be capable of being spelt out. The present one is not a case where the accused
had by his acts or omission or by a continued course of conduct created such
circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option except to commit
suicide in which case an instigation may have been inferred. A word uttered in the fit
of anger or emotion without intending the consequences to actually follow cannot be
said to be instigation."
In the said case this Court came to the conclusion that there is no evidence and material available on
record wherefrom an inference of the appellant- accused having abetted commission of suicide by
Seema (the appellant's wife therein) may necessarily be drawn."
Thereafter, this Court in Mohan (supra) held:
"45. The intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this Court
are clear that in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a
clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which
led the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and this act must have been
intended to push the deceased into such a position that he/she committed suicide."
[Emphasis supplied]
18. As has been held hereinabove, to satisfy the requirement of instigation the
accused by his act or omission or by a continued course of conduct should have
created such circumstances that the deceased was left with no other option except to
commit suicide. It was also held that a word uttered in a fit of anger and emotion
without intending the consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be
instigation.
19. Applying the above principle to the facts of the present case, we are convinced
that there are no grounds to frame charges under Section 306 IPC against the
appellant. This is so even if we take the prosecution's case on a demurrer and at its
highest. A reading of the suicide note reveals that the appellant was asking the
deceased to repay the loan guaranteed by the deceased and advanced to Ritesh
Malakar. It could not be said that the appellant by performing his duty of realising
outstanding loans at the behest of his employer can be said to have instigated the
deceased to commit suicide. Equally so, with the transcripts, including the portions
emphasised hereinabove. Even taken literally, it could not be said that the appellant
intended to instigate the commission of suicide. It could certainly not be said that the
appellant by his acts created circumstances which left the deceased with no other
option except to commit suicide. Viewed from the armchair of the appellant, the
exchanges with the deceased, albeit heated, are not with intent to leave the deceased
with no other option but to commit suicide. This is the conclusion we draw taking a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 16
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
realistic approach, keeping the context and the situation in mind.
Strangely, the FIR has also been lodged after a delay of two months and twenty days.
20. This Court has, over the last several decades, repeatedly reiterated the higher
threshold, mandated by law for Section 306 IPC [Now Section 108 read with Section
45 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023] to be attracted. They however seem to have
followed more in the breach. Section 306 IPC appears to be casually and too readily
resorted to by the police. While the persons involved in genuine cases where the
threshold is met should not be spared, the provision should not be deployed against
individuals, only to assuage the immediate feelings of the distraught family of the
deceased. The conduct of the proposed accused and the deceased, their interactions
and conversations preceding the unfortunate death of the deceased should be
approached from a practical point of view and not divorced from day-to-day realities
of life. Hyperboles employed in exchanges should not, without anything more, be
glorified as an instigation to commit suicide. It is time the investigating agencies are
sensitised to the law laid down by this Court under Section 306 so that persons are
not subjected to the abuse of process of a totally untenable prosecution. The trial
courts also should exercise great caution and circumspection and should not adopt a
play it safe syndrome by mechanically framing charges, even if the investigating
agencies in a given case have shown utter disregard for the ingredients of Section
306."
20. In the present case, while considering the case in view of Sections 107 and 306 IPC, I find that
there is no evidence in the case of alleged abetment of suicide because there is no active act shown
on the part of the applicants in any manner so that the deceased was compelled to commit suicide. It
is apparent on the face of record that the loan was sanctioned in the name of the deceased, who
could not repay the same, then how the applicants being brothers, could have been held responsible
for abetment in commission of suicide by the deceased. There is no evidence or any adverse material
between the applicants and the deceased, which could establish that applicants were responsible to
repay the loan amount which was advanced in the name of the deceased. The question of mens rea
on the part of the accused in such cases would be examined with reference to the actual acts and
deeds of the accused, but in the present case, no evidence is available to establish that applicants
were having mens rea in abetment of commission of suicide. Therefore, continuance of the present
criminal proceedings against the applicants is nothing but an abuse of process of law.
21. Application is accordingly allowed and the entire proceedings of Criminal Case No.56450 of
2016, State Vs. Sharad Kumar and another, arising out of Case Crime No.135 of 2016, under Section
306 IPC, Police Station Maheshganj, District Pratapgarh pending in the court of Judicial Magistrate,
Pratapgarh against the applicants, are hereby quashed.
.
(Brij Raj Singh, J.) Order Date :- January 31st , 2025 Rao/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 17
Sharad Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145239944/ 18
