Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco
on 13 December, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.9156 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 13-12-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.9156 of 2015
And
MP Nos.2 and 3 of 2015
Sharadhambika Paper and Boards Mill (P) Limited,
Represented by its Director,
Sellakumarapalayam,
Polavakalipalayam Post,
Gobi – 638 453. .. Petitioner
vs.
1.The TANGEDCO,
Represented by its Chairman,
No.800, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002.
2.The Superintending Engineer,
Gobi Electricity Distribution Circle,
Gobi – 638 452.
3.Central Electricity Authority,
Represented by its Chairperson,
6th Floor, Sewa Bhawan,
R.K.Puram,
New Delhi – 110 086. .. Respondents
1/38
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 1
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
(cid:12) WP No.9156 of 2015
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus,
calling for the records of the second respondent in issuing Lr. No.SE/GEDC
/AEE.GL/FA.F.Harmonics/D.No.743/15 dated 11.03.2015 and quash the
same as being arbitrary and illegal and consequently forbear the first and
second respondents, their men, officers, agents, servants, representatives
and/or any one claiming through or under them and/or or any other person
from in any manner levying, demanding and/or collecting harmonic
compensation charges for harmonics dumping from the petitioner for their
HT SC No.63 either through the monthly High Tension Bills or in any other
manner, till such time that the Hon'ble Central Electricity Regulatory
Commission (CERC) clarifies the issue in Miscellaneous Application
No.126 of 2014 pending before it.
For Petitioner : Mr.Rahul Balaji
For Respondents-1 and 2 : Mr.L.Jaivenkatesh,
Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO.
For Respondent-3 : No Appearance
ORDER
The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner challenging the levy of harmonics
compensation charges at 15% of the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis respective tariff from the
High Tension Industrial Consumers (HT-I) and High Tension Commercial Consumers (HT-III),
who operate at a voltage level of below 33 kv, namely, 11kv/22kv supply lines.
2. Mr.Rahul Balaji, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in the present writ petition,
submitted that the action of the Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation Limited
(TANGEDCO) under the guise of enforcing the Central Electricity Authority (Technical Standards
for Connectivity to the Grid) Regulations, 2007 (in short “CEA Regulations, 2007”) and the Tariff
Order of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission (TNERC), directing all the HT
Consumers in the State of Tamil Nadu to install harmonic controls and imposing penalties in the
form of 15% surcharge on the CC bills, irrespective of the supply line capacity they are connected to,
are beyond the jurisdiction of the powers vested with them, as they do not have the authority of law.
It is further contended that the impugned levy of harmonics charges on 11KV/22KV consumers are
clearly not leviable in view the clarification issued by the CEA / Appellate Authority that it cannot be
made applicable to consumers who are not bulk https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis consumers i.e.
connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines. Explaining further, it is stated that the CEA is the competent
authority to declare the harmonic distortion level for consumers connected with 11kv/22kv supply
lines, therefore, the impugned levy of harmonics charges on 11kv/22kv consumers are untenable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 2
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
3. Referring to paragraph 10.1.2 of the Tariff Order No.1, dealing with the harmonics, it is argued
that as specified in the Supply Code, when the consumer fails to provide adequate harmonic
suppression equipment to avoid dumping of harmonics beyond the limits as specified by the CEA
Regulations into Lincensee's distribution system, he is liable to pay the compensation at 15% of the
respective tariff and it further says that as and when the consumer brings down the harmonics level
within the limit, the compensation chargeable shall be withdrawn, therefore, the measurement of
harmonics shall be done by the Distribution Licensee using standard meters/ equipments in the
presence of consumers or their representatives and this compensation provision is applicable to
HT-I and HT-III category of consumers. Again, this paragraph makes it clear that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis TANGEDCO shall give three months notice to all the consumers
under these categories stating that they shall pay 15% compensation charges, if the harmonics
introduced by their load are not within the limit set by the CEA. Thus, it is clear that the
TANGEDCO is only the implementing agency in respect of compensation payable by the consumers,
who failed to provide adequate harmonic suppression equipment to avoid dumping of harmonics
beyond the limits as specified by the CEA Regulations into Lincesee's distribution system, by giving
three months notice to all the consumers and then it also brought to the notice of the TANGEDCO to
withdraw from the compensation charges as and when the consumer brings down the harmonics
level within the limit. However, till date, the CEA has not fixed what is the permissible limits of
harmonics within which the consumers can have the harmonics limits. Therefore, when the
distortion level for 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers was not specified clearly, the impugned action
of the TANGEDCO directing all the HT consumers to install harmonic control equipments and also
imposing penalties at the rate of 15% on the monthly CC bills is wholly misconceived, hence, the
same is liable to be set aside.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4. Explaining further, the learned counsel for the petitioner, by referring to Section 50 of the
Electricity Act, took a stand that Section 50 allows specification of charges for electricity, but, in
respect of tampering, distress or damage to electrical plant or electrical line or meter, entry of
distribution licensee or any person acting on his behalf for disconnecting supply or removing the
meter, entry for replacing, altering or maintaining electric lines. However, such power does not
allow them for setting of standards for harmonics. The Chief Engineer (Legal), CEA, Ministry of
Power, New Delhi, has clarified by his letter dated 10.08.2015, addressed to the learned Additional
Solicitor General of India that any consumer, who is connected to below 33 KV to the Distribution
System, is not governed by the Grid Standards for connectivity to the Grid. Therefore, when the CEA
has made it clear that the CEA Regulations, 2007, with respect to compensation on account of
harmonic distortion, is applicable only to those consumers, who are connected at 33 KV or above,
admittedly, the petitioner herein, who is receiving supply through 11KV / 22 KV supply lines, does
not have potential to pollute the grid supply and does not have substantial
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis adverse impact upon the equipments of other consumers.
Therefore, 11KV/22KV consumers are placed outside the scope and purview of Part IV of the
Regulations, 2007, and hence, there is no distortion level on harmonics provided and made
applicable to them and they are not obligated in any manner to comply with harmonic controls. This
apart, in Tamil Nadu, HT consumers are connected with 11 kv or 22kv or 33kv or 110 kv supply lines
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 3
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
and when these consumers connected with 11kv and 22 kv supply lines are not not subjected to
harmonic control norms, only 33 kv and above supply lines are alone liable to comply with harmonic
control norms as per Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007.
5. Again, justifying that the petitioner is only consumer, not user nor requester, learned counsel for
the petitioner referred to Regulations 2(34) and 2(25) of the CEA Regulations, 2007, to show who
are users and requesters. A conjoint reading of Regulations 2(34) and 2(25) i.e. User and
Requesters, say that a person such as, Generating Company including captive generating plant or
Transmission Licensee or Distribution Licensee or Bulk Consumer, whose electrical plant is
connected to the grid at voltage https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis level 33 kv and above. Therefore,
in view of Regulations 2(34) and 2(25), either User or Requester, whose electrical plant is connected
to the grid at voltage level 33 kv and above, are the persons liable for installation of harmonic
control equipments and any violation thereof, penalty can be imposed at the rate of 15% surcharge
on the monthly CC bills if it is proved that the harmonics level are going beyond the permissible
limits fixed by the CEA. Therefore, it is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
TANGEDCO, without fixing harmonics limits to be adopted by them, cannot take any action against
the petitioner to levy the penalty at the rate of 15%.
6. Drawing the attention of this Court to Clause 3 of Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007, learned
counsel for the petitioner contented that the total harmonic distortion for voltage at the connection
point shall not exceed 5% with no individual harmonic higher than 3% and that the total harmonic
distortion for current drawn from the transmission system at the connection point shall not exceed
8%. These two limits are to be implemented in a phased manner so as to achieve complete
compliance not https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis later than five years from the date of publication
of these regulations in the official gazette. Thus, if the respondent is of the view that the limits
prescribed in Clause 3 are to be implemented to achieve the balance, they should do it in a phased
manner not later than five years from the date of publication of these regulations in the official
gazette, but, till date, no such official gazette has been published. In addition thereto, Clause 4 of
Part IV says that the voltage unbalance at 33 kv and above shall not exceed 3.0%. Therefore, it is
contended that when there is no any limit prescribed for consumers connected to 11kv/22kv supply
line, they cannot enforce the levels of harmonics prescribed for the Bulk Consumers namely 33 kv
and above, for, the Chief Engineer (Legal), CEA, New Delhi, in his letter dated 10.08.2015, has
clarified that any consumer, who is connected to below 33kv to the Distribution System, shall not be
covered under Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007.
7. In an effort to show that the TANGEDCO has no authority or power to issue the impugned CC Bill,
learned counsel for the petitioner, by referring to Section 34 of the Electricity Act, 2003, dealing
with Grid https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Standards, submitted that every transmission licensee
shall comply with such technical standards of operation and maintenance of transmission lines in
accordance with the Grid Standards as may be specified by the Authority. While-so, Section 2(6) of
the Electricity Act, 2003, defines 'Authority' as the Central Electricity Authority referred to
sub-section (1) of Section 70. Therefore, the CEA is the only authority established under Section 70
and whose functions are set forth in Section 73 has the exclusive powers under Section 73(d) to
specify the Grid Standards for operation and maintenance of transmission lines, which includes the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 4
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
harmonic levels too. However, the TNERC has no power to deal with the levels of harmonics. On the
other hand, the TNERC is empowered under the Act and Regulations only to provide the
charges/penalty when the levels of harmonics as provided by the CEA are not complied with.
Similarly, the TANGEDCO, being a licensee to generate and distribute electricity, cannot choose to
enforce additional standard independently in the absence of any standards set by the appropriate
authority, namely, CEA.
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that at https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
present, there is no provision under the CEA Regulations, 2007, to make the obligation of harmonic
controls for 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers and further submitted that the respondents do not
have power to enforce the harmonic control norms to 11kv/22kv supply line consumers, when the
Chief Engineer (Legal), CEA, New Delhi, in his letter dated 10.08.2015, has clarified that any
consumer, who is drawing power below 33 kv supply line, shall not be covered under Part IV of the
CEA Regulations, 2007. Moreover, till date, neither the CEA nor any other authority has set forth
the level of harmonics for the consumers connected to 11kv/22kv in the manner known to law,
therefore, the impugned CC bills issued by the TANGEDCO levying surcharges for not providing
harmonic controls from the petitioner who is connected with 11kv and 22kv supply lines are liable to
be set aside.
9. Per contra, Mr.L.Jai Venkatesh, learned Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of the
TANGEDCO, taking support from Sections 50 and 181 of the Electricity Act, 2002, CEA Regulations,
2007, Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil nadu Electricity Supply Code, Regulations 9(1) and 13(4) of
the Tamil Nadu Electricity Distribution Code, Tamil Nadu https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Electricity Regulatory Commission's tariff order dated 30.03.2012, 20.06.2013 and the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Regulatory Commission's Grid Connectivity and Intra-State Open Access Regulations,
2004, submitted that the levy of harmonics compensation charges at 15% of the respective tariff
from the High Tension-1 and High Tension-III consumers who avail supply and operate at voltage
level of below 33 KV i.e. 11 KV and 22 KV are a legitimate one.
10. Learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO further stated that Section 50 of the Act empowers
the Commission to specify the supply code and provides for measures for preventing tampering,
distress or damage to electrical plant or electrical lines or meter. Again, Section 86 of the Act clearly
gives power to the State Commission to determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission
and wheeling of electricity, and enforce standards with respect to quality, continuity and reliability
of service by licensees. Therefore, in accordance with Sections 50 and 181 of the Act, the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Regulatory Commission had issued the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, wherein the
Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil Nadu https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Electricity Supply Code
deals with imposing of additional charges for harmonics dumping. Explaining further, it is stated
that where any equipment installed by a consumer generates harmonics, the consumer shall provide
adequate harmonic suppression units to avoid dumping of harmonics into Licensee's Distribution
System and the Licensee is at liberty to provide suitable metering equipment to measure the
harmonic level pursuant to such harmonic and even if the consumer fails to provide such units, he
shall be liable to pay compensation at such rates as the Commission may declare from time to time.
Only in exercise of powers conferred by clauses (a)(c)(d) of sub-section (1) of Section 61 and clause
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 5
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
(a) of sub-section (1) of Section 86 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (Central Act 36 of 2003) and after
examining the comments received from the stake holders and after considering the suggestions and
objections received from the public during the public hearings held on 30.01.2012, 02.02.2012,
06.02.2012 and 10.02.2012 as per sub-section (3) of Section 64 of the Act, the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Regulatory Commission has passed the order for Generation and Distribution Tariff, vide
order No.1 of 2012, dated 20.03.2012. Relevant paragraph, namely 10.2.2, dealing with the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Harmonics answers the issue raised by the petitioner stating that
when the consumer fails to provide adequate harmonic filtering equipment to avoid dumping of
harmonics into Licensee's network beyond the permissible limits as specified by the CEA
Regulation, the consumer is liable to pay compensation at 15% of the respective tariff. It further
makes clear that as and when the consumer brings down the harmonics within the limit,
compensation charges shall be withdrawn, therefore, when the laudable object sought to be achieved
has been initiated under the impugned action to avoid the dumping of harmonics beyond the
permissible limit, which will in turn help prevention of air pollution, in the larger public interest, the
petitioner cannot question the steps taken by the respondent to purify the atmosphere. Moreover, if
the petitioner, who is a consumer, is able to provide adequate harmonic suppression equipments to
avoid dumping of harmonics beyond the limits as specified by the CEA Regulations, 2007, into the
Licensee's Distribution System, they are not liable to pay the compensation at 15% of the respective
tariff, however, as and when the consumers fail to do so, they will be liable to pay such
compensation. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
11. Justifying the impugned action, learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO further submitted
that by virtue of Sections 50, 86 and 181 of the Electricity Act, 2003, read with, Regulation 4 (1)(iv)
of Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code and Tariff Order 2012, it can be safely construed that the
State has the power to direct the consumers irrespective of their voltage connections to install
harmonic filters and it is mandatory on the part of a consumer to provide adequate harmonic
suppression equipment so as to maintain the quality of supply by the Licensee (TANGEDCO) to all
the consumers. It is further stated by the learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO that when the
State Regulatory Authority's Supply Code forms the basis for providing harmonic filters at the load
points of the consumers, the State Regulatory Authority's Tariff Order dated 31.03.2012 has a
preventive measure to avoid dumping of harmonics into the Licensee's network beyond the
permissible limit, therefore, the State Regulatory Authority has also adopted the same limits as set
out by the Central Electricity Authority in this regard.
12. It is further stated by the learned Standing Counsel for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
TANGEDCO that an Expert Committee formed under the convenorship of the Director
General/CPRI, constituted by the Central Electricity Board, New Delhi, has given its
recommendations to include 11kv and above consumers in the purview of harmonics vide report
dated 19.05.1999. Pursuant to the said report, the consumers connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines
cannot place an argument before this Court that there is no any harmonic level prescribed by the
competent authority for these consumers warranting them to install harmonic filters
13. Continuing his arguments, learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO submitted that when the
CEA has agreed that those, who are connected to transmission grid availing 33kv and above, should
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 6
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
limit 3% of individual voltage harmonic distortion and 8% for total current harmonic distortion, the
argument of the petitioner that no harmonic distortion has been prescribed for 11kv/22kv is not
correct, since part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007 states that these limits apply to both bulk
consumers and Distribution System, which clearly constitutes the petitioner's case as well. It is
further submitted that if the distribution harmonics are to be kept within
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the limits, then, individual consumers of 11kv/22kv, who are
connected to the Distribution System, should limit their harmonics, for, in TANGEDCO, more than
6700 numbers of HT-I and HT-III category of 11kv and 22kv consumers are connected to
Distribution System with a sanctioned demand for more than 6500 MVA. Besides, no technology
exists in the world to design and filter out the huge quantum of harmonics at the distribution grid
location, that are dumped by its thousands of consumers. When 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers
are forming major high capacity into the Licensee's Distribution dumping system, they should avoid
dumping the harmonics, therefore, to keep the harmonics limit in the Distribution System within
the limit prescribed by the CEA, harmonic filters are to be fixed at the place of origin in the
Distribution System, namely, the point of connection to the installation of the consumers where
harmonics are generated.
14. It is further submitted by the learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO that in TANGEDCO, the
demand of the 6700 numbers of HT- I and HT-III category of 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers is
more than 6500 MVA, which is higher than 170 numbers of 33kv and above
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis consumers' load of about 1300 MVA, thus, the impact of
harmonics by these 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers on the grid are also proportionately higher.
Therefore, if 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers are left out of the purview of the harmonic order, as
the Distribution System cannot limit the harmonics levels due to the huge quantum and absence of
technology, the very purpose of CEA Regulations, 2007, aimed at clearing the Nation's Transmission
grid of harmonic pollution and the purpose of the Regulation will be defeated. It is further
submitted that in the matters of suppressing the harmonics, no single class of consumers can seek
exemption from liability and the CEA Regulations cannot be the criteria to negate the purpose of the
TN Electricity Supply Code and Tariff Order. Although the CEA is the authority to specify the
standard as per the Electricity Act, 2003, suppression of harmonics into the main system has to be
precluded and implemented only by the State Commission, therefore, the impugned levy of
harmonics compensation charges is well within the exclusive domain of the State Commission
keeping in mind the safety and security of the respective State Grids, otherwise, the very purpose of
enacting the CEA Regulations, 2007, will be defeated. When the CEA Regulations, 2007, has not
excluded https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the Distribution System and the CEA has also not
specified specific limits for the Distribution System, the applicability of harmonic compensation in
respect of 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers is sustainable in law.
15. By placing on record the queries raised by one Mr.G.Ramachandran, and also the clarification
issued by the CEA to the said queries, it is submitted that to purify the Distribution System, unit
criteria has to be taken to avoid dumping of harmonics into the Licensee's Distribution System,
irrespective of the fact whether they are connected to 11kv or 22kv or 33kv and above. As the
distribution of electricity is under the purview of the State Government, the State Regulatory
Commission has to frame rules for regulating harmonic distortion within the Distribution System in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 7
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
the Sate for the consumers connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines in conformity with the CEA
Regulations, 2007. Therefore, the impugned demands of the respondent passed in conformity with
the CEA Regulations cannot be questioned by the petitioner, as it is the prerogative of the
respondent to demand such charges for dumping of the harmonic into the Licensee's Distribution
System.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. Concluding his arguments, learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO submitted that if the
contention of the petitioner is accepted that any consumer, who is connected to below 33kv to the
Distribution System, is not governed by the Grid Standard and that the CEA Regulations, 2007, with
respect to compensation on account of harmonic distortion only to those consumers, who are
connected at 33kv and above, then, it goes without saying that the consumers of 11kv and 22kv
supply lines are allowed to pollute the system further, which will go against the very object of the
CEA Regulations, 2007. With the aforesaid submissions, he has prayed for dismissal of the present
writ petition.
17. Learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO, by referring to the communication dated 07.09.2015
of the Chief Engineer (Legal), Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi, submitted that the Chief
Engineer has agreed with the case of the respondent stating that the control of pollution of grid
supply has been started from the large high voltage loads, therefore, the regulations for controlling
harmonic voltage/current injection at voltages https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis less than 33kv may
also develop depending upon the types of load coming up in future and it may disturb the
performance of the equipments of other nearby consumers.
18. Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side and perused the materials available on
record.
19. The crux of the issue is, whether the TANGEDCO/TNERC has power to deal with the levels of
harmonics and if so, whether they are empowered under the Act and Regulations to levy the
harmonics compensation charges at 15% of the respective tariff from the High Tension Industrial
Consumers (HT-I) and High Tension Commercial Consumers (HT-III), who avail supply and
operate at a voltage level of below 33kv i.e. 11kv/22kv supply lines.
20. Before dealing with the said issue, it is better to know what is harmonics. Harmonics in electrical
systems means that current and voltage are distorted and deviated from sinusoidal waveforms.
Harmonic https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis currents are caused by non-linear loads connected to
the Distribution System. A load is said to be non-linear when the current it draws does not have the
same waveform as the supply voltage. The flow of harmonic currents through system impedances in
turn creates voltage harmonics, which distort the supply voltage.
21. In view of the above, since the harmonics have several undesirable effects and affects power
quality, on 21.02.2007, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) introduced a new Regulation and
accordingly, its Technical Standards for Connectivity to the Grid Regulations, 2007, came for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 8
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
enforcement. Applicability of the Regulations is provided in Regulation 3, which reads as under:
“3. Applicability of the Regulations – These Regulations shall be applicable to all the
users, requesters, Central Transmission Utility and State Transmission Utility.” It is
clear from the above that the the said Regulation is applicable only to four categories,
namely, Users, Requesters, Central Transmission Utility
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and State Transmission Utility.
22. In this context, let me find out the meaning given under the CEA Regulations, 2007, for Users
and Requesters. Section 2(34) defines the meaning of “User”, which is given as under:-
“2(34)-- User means a person such as, a Generating Company including captive
generating plant or Transmission Licensee (other than the Central Transmission
Utility and State Transmission Utility) or Distribution Licensee or Bulk Consumer,
whose electrical plant is connected to the grid at voltage level 33kv and above.”
Section 2(25) defines the meaning of “Requester”, which is given as under:-
“2(25)-- Requester means a person, such as a Generating Company including captive
generating plant or Transmission Licensee (excluding Central Transmission Utility
and State Transmission Utility) or Distribution Licensee or Bulk Consumer, who is
seeking connection of his new or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis expanded
electrical plant to the Grid at voltage level 33kv and above.” A conjoint reading of the
above said provisions show that a person such as, Generating Company including
captive generating plant or Transmission Licensee or Distribution Licensee or Bulk
Consumer, whose electrical plant is connected to the grid at voltage level 33 kv and
above. Therefore, it is clear that the above said Regulations are applicable to only
those consumers whose electrical plant is connected to the Grid at the voltage level of
33kv and above, hence, the petitioner, who is connected to the Grid at voltage level of
11kv/22kv supply lines, cannot be made applicable under the said Regulations.
23. Again, to be more clear, it is also pertinent to refer to Section 34 of the Electricity Act, 2003,
dealing with the Grid Standards, which is given as under:-
“34. Grid Standards.---- Every transmission licensee shall comply with
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis such technical standards, of operation and maintenance of
transmission lines, in accordance with the Grid Standards, as may be specified by the Authority.” It
is clear from the above that Section 34 of the Electricity Act, 2003, mandates every transmission
licensee to comply with such technical standards of operation and maintenance as may be specified
by the Authority, which means, as per Section 2(6) of the Act, the Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) is the Authority as referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 70. Thus, the CEA, established
under Section 70 and whose functions are set forth in Section 73, has the exclusive powers under
Section 73(d) of the Act. It is also pertinent to extract Section 73(d) of the Act, which is given as
under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 9
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
“(d) specify the Grid Standards for operation and maintenance of transmission lines.”
24. In view of the above legal position, the Central Electricity https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Authority (CEA), being an Apex Body, is the appropriate authority on the issue of Grid Standards
and to ensure both National Grid Code and State Grid Code are consistent and there cannot be any
inconsistencies of different standards at the State level. This is purely for the purpose of ensuring
uniform operation across the country. It is also an admitted fact that the National Grid Code and the
State Grid Code do not have any provision with regard to harmonics.
25. In this context, it is relevant to refer to Clause 3 of Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007, which
is given as under:-
“3. Voltage and Current Harmonics --
(1) The total harmonic distortion for voltage at the connection point shall not exceed
5% with no individual harmonic higher than 3%.
(2) The total harmonic distortion for current drawn from the transmission system at
the connection point shall not exceed 8%.
(3) The limits prescribed in (1) and (2) shall be implemented in a phased
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis manner so as to achieve complete compliance not
later than five years from the date of publication of these regulations in the official
Gazette.” Although Clause 3 of Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007, says that the
total harmonic distortion for voltage at the connection point shall not exceed 5% with
no individual harmonic higher than 3% and that the total harmonic for current
drawn from the transmission system at the connection point shall not exceed 8%, the
limits prescribed as mentioned above shall be implemented in a phased manner so as
to achieve complete compliance not later than five years from the date of publication
of these regulations in the official Gazette.
26. It is an admitted fact that the CEA Regulations came into force in the year 2007, however, even
after a lapse of 9 years, the TANGEDCO has not published any notification in the official Gazette
enforcing the consumers, who are connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines, to install harmonic filers
so as to levy harmonic compensation charges. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
27. Moreover, when this Court directed the learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO to get
instructions as to whether the consumers connected to a Distribution System irrespective of the
capacity of supply they receive including 11kv and 22kv supply lines need to provide harmonic
control equipments, as a reply thereto, the Chief Engineer (Legal), Central Electricity Authority,
Ministry of Power, New Delhi, in his letter dated 10.08.2015, has clarified that the CEA Regulations,
with respect to compensation on account of harmonic distortions, are applicable to only those
consumers, who are connected to 33kv or above, namely, only bulk consumers. For better
appreciation, relevant portion of the said communication is extracted below:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 10
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
“This is reference to your letter dated 07.08.2015 on the above subject. It is to inform
that almost 305 case are filed in the Hon'ble Court by the petitioners having
grievances similar to this case. It is to submit that:
(i) CEA Regulation with respect to compensation on account of harmonic
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis distortions is applicable to only those consumers
who are connected at 33kv or above.
(ii) Further any consumer who is connected below 33kv to the distribution system is
not governed by the Grid Standards for connectivity to the Grid.
(iii) The Grid is defined under Electricity Act, 2003, stating that the Grid is high
voltage backbone system of inter-
connected transmission lines, sub station and generating plants.
Therefore, only systems which can directly affect the Grid are covered under such Standards and as
such the present petition for the consumers connected at 33kv or above which are defined as Bulk
Consumer shall be covered for Harmonic Compensation.”
28. Subsequent to the above said communication, one Mr.P.D.Siwal, Secretary to the Central
Electricity Authority, New Delhi, issued a clarification on 26.08.2015 with regard to applicability of
Part IV https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of CEA Regulations, 2007. Relevant portion of the said
communication is extracted below:
“This has reference to the Part IV of the CEA (Technical Standards for Connectivity to
the Grid) Regulations, 2007. It is clarified that:
(iii) The condition of voltage and current harmonic as prescribed under Part IV is
applicable only to the consumers which are defined as bulk consumers and drawing
power at 33kv and above.
(iv) For the purpose of bulk consumer means a consumer who avails supply at voltage
of 33kv or above.
Therefore, Part IV of CEA Regulations is applicable only to consumers drawing power
at 33kv or above and any consumer who is drawing power below 33kv shall not be
covered under Part IV of CEA (Technical Standards for Connectivity of the Grid)
Regulations, 2007.” From the above said communications of the Chief Engineer
(Legal) as well https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis as the Secretary of the Central
Electricity Authority, New Delhi, it is crystal clear that the consumers connected with
11kv/22kv supply lines are placed outside the scope and purview of the Part IV of the
CEA Regulations, 2007, and that it has further categorically clarified that 11kv/22kv
supply lines consumers are not subjected to harmonic control norms, however, 33kv
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 11
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
and above supply lines consumers are alone directed to comply with harmonic
control norms. Thus, the impugned demand issued by the respondent/ TANGEDCO
directing the petitioner, who is admittedly connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines, is
against the CEA Regulations, 2007.
29. Further, it is also pertinent to note that the CEA, who is the Competent Authority, to declare the
harmonic distortion levels, has not declared harmonic distortion levels to the consumers connected
with 11kv/22kv either through the CEA Regulations, 2007, or by any other relevant provisions.
Therefore, until the CEA prescribes any standard of harmonics for 11kv/22kv supply lines
consumers and makes them also obligatory for harmonic controls, no obligation can be cast upon
the 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers for compliance. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
30. Taking support from Sections 50, 86 and 181 of the Act read with Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the
Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, to sustain the impugned order levying harmonic charges on the
11kv/22kv supply line consumers. In this context, let me extract below the above said provisions:
50. The Electricity Supply Code :-
The State Commission shall specify an Electricity Supply Code to provide for recovery
of electricity charges, intervals for billing of electricity charges, disconnection of
supply of electricity for non-
payment thereof, restoration of supply of electricity, tampering, distress or damage to
electrical plat, electric lines or meter, entry of distribution licensee or any person
acting on his behalf for disconnecting supply and removing the meter, entry for
replacing, altering or maintaining electric lines or electrical plant or meter. “Section
86 - Functions of State Commission.- (1) The State Commission shall discharge the
following functions, namely:--
(a) determine the tariff for generation, supply, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
transmission and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be,
within the State: Provided that where open access has been permitted to a category of
consumers under section 42, the State Commission shall determine only the wheeling
charges and surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of consumers;
(b) regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees
including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating
companies or licensees or from other sources through agreements for purchase of
power for distribution and supply within the State;
(c) facilitate intra-State transmission and wheeling of electricity;
(d) issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission licensees, distribution
licensees and electricity traders with respect to their operations within the State;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 12
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
(e) promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources of
energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of
electricity to any person, and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis also specify, for
purchase of electricity from such sources, a percentage of the total consumption of
electricity in the area of a distribution licensee;
(f) adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees and generating companies and
to refer any dispute for arbitration;
(g) levy fee for the purposes of this Act;
(h) specify State Grid Code consistent with the Grid Code specified under clause (h)
of sub-section (1) of section 79;
(i) specify or enforce standards with respect to quality, continuity and reliability of
service by licensees;
(j) fix the trading margin in the intra-State trading of electricity, if considered,
necessary;
(k) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it under this Act.” Section
50 of the Act dealing with the Electricity Supply Code statutorily provides for the
cases, inter alia, with regard to the tampering of electric lines or meter and method of
collection of electricity charges. Similarly, Section 86 of the Act empowers the State
Commission to determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and
wheeling of electricity, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis wholesale, bulk and retail
within the State. But, till date, it has not provided for setting up of standards for
harmonics charges. Therefore, neither Section 50 nor Section 86 of the Act supports
respondent TANGEDCO in the matter of levying of harmonic charges on the
11kv/22kv supply line consumers.
31. Likewise, Section 181 gives power to the State Commission to make Regulations consistent with
the Act and Rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. By exercising such power, the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Regulatory Commission had issued the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, wherein the
Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, which is extracted below, deals with
additional charges for harmonic dumping.
“4.Charges recoverable by the Licensee – The charges, recoverable by the Licensee from the
consumers are:-
xxxx (1). Tariff related charges, namely, -
(iv). Additional charges for harmonics dumping Where any equipment installed by a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis consumer generates harmonics, the consumer shall
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 13
Sharadhambika Paper And Boards Mill (P) ... vs The Tangedco on 13 December, 2021
provide adequate harmonic suppression units to avoid dumping of harmonics into
Licensee's distribution system and the Licensee is at liberty to provide suitable
metering equipment to measure the harmonic level pursuant to such harmonic.
Where the consumer fails to provide such units, he shall be liable to pay
compensation at such rates as the Commission may declare from time to time.” In
view of Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, although the
State has got power to direct the consumers to install harmonic filters irrespective of
their voltage connection as stated by learned Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO, the
same cannot be sustained in view of non-
specification of any standard of harmonics for 11kv/22kv/supply line consumers by the CEA, who,
being an Apex Body as per Section 73(d) of the Act, has exclusive powers to specify the Grid
Standards for operation and maintenance of transmission lines.
32. Thus, for all the reasons stated above, the impugned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis demand
is quashed. Consequently, the writ petition is allowed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
13-12-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn To
1.The Chairman, TANGEDCO, No.800, Anna Salai, Chennai – 600 002.
2.The Superintending Engineer, Gobi Electricity Distribution Circle, Gobi – 638 452.
3.The Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority, 6th Floor, Sewa Bhawan, R.K.Puram, New Delhi –
110 086.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 9156 of 2015 13-12-2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98149543/ 14
