Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24
February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 537, 2020 (2) AKR 670
Author: K.Somashekar
Bench: K. Somashekar
:1: R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 24TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K. SOMASHEKAR
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1215 OF 2010
BETWEEN
SHIVANANDA BANKOLLI
S/O RUDRAPPA
AGED ABOUT 64 YEARS
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF EXCISE
R/AT CHITHRABAANU ROAD
A & B BLOCK
KUVEMPUNAGAR
MYSORE-570 023.
... APPELLANT
(BY SRI. CHANDRASHEKAR .P, ADVOCATE FOR
SMT. VIJETHA .R NAIK - ADVOCATE)
AND
STATE BY LOKAYUKTA POLICE
MYSORE DISTRICT
BY THE S.P.P.
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI. B.S. PRASAD - SPL. P.P. FOR
LOKAYUKTHA FOR RESPONDENT)
THIS CRL.A. IS FILED UNDER SECTION 374(2) OF
THE CR.P.C PRAYING TO, SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT
OF CONVICTION DATED 29.10.2010 PASSED BY THE
PRL. SESSIONS JUDGE AND SPL. JUDGE, MYSORE IN
SPL. CASE NO.140/2004 - CONVICTING THE
:2:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 1
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
APPELLANT/ ACCUSED FOR THE OFFENCE P/U/S 7,
13(1)(d) R/W 13(2) OF THE PREVENTION OF
CORRUPTION ACT, 1988 AND ETC.,
THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL COMING ON FOR
DICTATING JUDGMENT, THIS DAY, THE COURT
DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
This appeal is filed by the appellant/accused challenging the judgment and order of conviction and
sentence rendered by the Principal Sessions Judge & Special Judge at Mysore in Spl.Case
No.140/2004 dated 29.10.2010, convicting the appellant/accused for the offence punishable under
Sections 7, 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
The accused was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay fine of
Rs.5,000/- for the offence punishable under Section 7 and in default to pay the fine amount, to
undergo imprisonment for six months. For the offence punishable under Section 13(2), the accused
was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period of three years and to pay fine of Rs.15,000/-
and in default to pay the fine amount, to undergo imprisonment for one year. The sentences were
ordered to run concurrently.
2. Heard Sri Chandrashekar.P., learned counsel for Smt.Vijetha R.Naik, learned counsel appearing
for appellant and Sri B.S.Prasad, learned Spl.PP for respondent - Lokayukta.
3. The factual matrix of the appeal is as under:
It is stated in the complaint that on 22.12.2003, accused said to a public servant
working as Deputy Commissioner of Excise, Mysore, demanded Rs.1,50,000/- from
one Muneer Ahamad who is the complainant, as an illegal gratification other than
legal remuneration for showing official favour, that is to issue transport permit for
transporting 1000 Metric Tonnes of Molasses. It is alleged that an amount of
Rs.85,000/- was already paid and the accused was demanding remaining amount of
Rs.65,000/- to issue the remaining permit for three factories or otherwise he will not
issue the permit and because of which they have incurred heavy loss and damages in
their business. The complainant not interested to give the bribe money demanded by
the accused, lodged a complaint before the Inspector General Police, Karnataka
Lokayukta at Bangalore as per Ex.P6. Along with the complaint he also produced the
bribe amount of Rs.65,000/- in the denomination of 36 currency notes of Rs.1,000
and 58 currency notes of Rs.500/-. Subsequent to filing of complaint, the FIR was
recorded as per Ex.P16. Thereafter, the case was handed over to PW.5 - A.N.Rajanna,
who was working as Dy.SP at Lokayukta office of Bangalore by the IGP and he was
instructed to conduct the investigation. Accordingly, he registered the case and sent
FIR to Special Court at Bangalore and laid charge sheet against the accused by
collecting the material evidence. He secured PW.1 - A.N.Ramesh and one Gopal to act
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 2
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
as a panch witnesses. In the presence of those panch witnesses, PW.5 / Investigating
Officer conducted the pre-trap mahazar as per Ex.P2. During the pre-trap mahazar,
PW.2- complainant had produced MO.6 tainted currency notes amounting to
Rs.65,000/-. In their presence the demonstration was held. The sodium carbonate
solution was prepared in the presence of panch witnesses and phenolphthalein
powder was applied on the currency notes. PW.5 briefed those panch witnesses and
the complainant, that if the accused who is said to be the Government servant when
comes into contact with the tainted currency notes, his fingers will be washed with
sodium carbonate solution which turns into pink colour.
Subsequent to drawing of the pre-trap mahazar as per Ex.P2, PW.5 led the team
consisting the other staff members in a police jeep to Mysore where the accused was
working as a Deputy Commissioner of Excise in order to lay the trap. As per the
instructions of Lokayuktha Police and in the presence of PW.1 who is a shadow
witness, the accused received amount from the complainant from his right hand and
exchanged the said amount to his left hand. Again he took the said amount to his
right hand and kept the said amount in his right side pant pocket and thereafter, the
complainant came outside and gave a signal and at that time, the brother of the
complainant was with the accused and immediately, the Lokayuktha Police came and
after introduction with the accused conducted the trap mahazar as per Ex.P3.
Subsequently, PW.5 collected documents as per Exs.P1 to P32 and M.Os.1 to 8. MO1
is the bottle containing solution of right and left hand wash of PW.1, MO.2 is the
solution, MO.3 is the bottle containing solution of right hand wash of accused, MO.4
is the bottle containing solution of left hand wash of accused, MO.5 is the bottle
containing solution of pant pocket wash of accused, MO.6 is the bait money amount
of Rs.65,000/- in the denomination of 36 notes of Rs.1000/- denomination and 58
notes of Rs.500/- denomination, MO.7 is the sample of sodium carbonate solution
and MO.8 is the solution containing right hand of the accused. These are all the
material objects secured by the IO and laid the charge sheet against the accused
before the concerned Court at Bangalore.
Subsequent to laying charge sheet against the accused, the trial Court at Mysore in
Spl.C.No.140/2004 had received the charge sheet which was transferred from Bangalore along with
material documents. Subsequently, the trial Court framed charges against the accused for the
offence punishable under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the P.C.Act. The accused did not
plead guilty but claimed to be tried. Accordingly, the plea of the accused was recorded. In order to
establish the guilt of the accused, prosecution in all examined PWs.1 to 5 and got marked Exs.P1 to
P28.
Subsequent to closure of evidence on the part of the prosecution, accused was examined as required
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. for enabling incriminating statement appearing against him, wherein the
accused denied the truth of the evidence of the prosecution adduced so far. But he did not come
forward to adduce any defense evidence as contemplated under Section 233 of Cr.P.C. On
appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence available on record, the trial Court rendered the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 3
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
impugned judgment, convicting the accused for the aforesaid offence. It is this judgment which is
challenged in this appeal by urging various grounds.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the judgment and order of conviction rendered
by the trial Court is contrary to law and material evidence available on record. He has taken me
through the evidence of PW.1
- A.N.Ramesh who is a shadow witness. He states in his evidence about lodging of complaint by the
complainant and also conducting the pre-trap mahazar as per Ex.P2. It is his evidence that he
accompanied the complainant as per the instructions of PW.5 - IO, in his presence, the accused
received the bribe amount from the complainant and the accused received the said amount from his
right hand and exchanged the said amount to his left hand and again he took the said amount to his
right hand and kept the said amount in his right side pant pocket. Thereafter, the complainant came
outside and gave a signal and at that time, PW.4 - A.S.Mansoor, the brother of the complainant was
with the accused, they introduced themselves with the accused and conducted the trap mahazar as
per Ex.P3. The bait amount was seized and the hands of the accused were subjected to wash in the
sodium carbonate solution, which turned into pink colour and thereafter, the accused gave his
explanation. The currency notes which were recovered from the accused tallied with the numbers
which were earlier noted. He had subscribed his signature in Ex.P2 and Ex.P3 and he also identified
his signature in Ex.P4, the explanation given by the accused.
But this witness was partly treated as hostile and was cross-examined. In the cross-examination, a
suggestion was made that he has made a statement before the police as per Ex.P5 that the accused
demanded the bribe amount to issue the transport permit, to that question, he stated that he do not
remember the same. But he denied the suggestion that inspite of knowing the demand made by the
accused, he is falsely deposing to help the accused.
This witness was further cross-examined by the defense counsel, he states that he do not remember
in whose favour the complaint was given and a suggestion was made that Muneer Ahamad was
introduced to him in the office of Lokayukta and he also came to know that the said Muneer
Ahamad was doing business. Further, it was also elicited that he did not enquire the names of the
persons, who were present. But he stated that the complainant and his brother were introduced in
the office of the Lokayukta. He further deposed that the complainant gave an amount of
Rs.65,000/- to the Lokayukta Police and he checked the note numbers and the another panch
witness - Gopal noted down the currency note numbers and denominations and he cross- checked
whether the note numbers in Ex.P1 was correct or not and he found that the note number in sl.no.6
was not correct and he corrected the same and he signed in respect of correction. It is further
elicited in his evidence that he was with the Lokayukta police from morning 10.30 till they returned
to Bangalore from Mysore and he cannot say how the complainant and his brother came to Mysore,
but he came along with Lokayukta police and met the complainant and his brother around 4.00 to
4.15 p.m. near the office of the accused. He also says that he cannot tell whether the complainant
and his brother came in their personal car and when they were inside the chamber of the accused,
the accused told to be outside for sometime and he took 15 minutes to attend the persons who were
there in his chamber and thereafter, he went along with the complainant and his brother to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 4
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
office of the accused and accused did not enquire about him and Mansoor spoke to the accused and
he cannot tell what he has spoken to the accused.
He further states that he cannot tell the names of the Lokayukta staff who held the hands of the
accused and who prepared the solution for hand wash. But he admits that the seizure mahazar was
prepared on the dictation of PW.5 - IO. He states that the accused kept the money in his right side
pant pocket and alternative pant was provided to the accused and an amount of Rs.65,000/- was in
the right side pocket of the pant and he cannot tell the colour and who stitched the pant. He further
states that he was a witness in two trap cases and was the witness for seizure of the documents in
another case. But however, the learned counsel for the appellant contends that the Trial Court has
wholly relied on the evidence of the said PW-1 who is a stock witness in order to convict the
appellant. The said PW-1's office being situated very next to the office of the respondent police, he
has been used in the case as a prime witness for the prosecution. It is the contention of the learned
counsel that the said witness PW-1 has been made use of by the respondent - police as a trap witness
also in three other cases excluding the present one. This most important aspect has been lost sight of
by the Trial Court and hence it has grossly erred in accepting the evidence of PW-1 in its entirety,
when his evidence is not corroborated by the complainant's evidence. The Trial Court ought to have
rejected the evidence of PW-1 taking into consideration the fact that he is admittedly a regular
witness for the respondent police and also due to the fact that his evidence is not supported by any
other witnesses.
5. It is further contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the Trial Court has failed to
appreciate the fact that the complainant PW-2 himself has denied the fact of he having lodged any
complaint against the appellant - accused. Further, the complainant has also denied that the
appellant had made any demand for illegal gratification, much less the amount of Rs.1,50,000/- as
alleged by the prosecution. PW-2 has further denied handing over any money to the accused and he
had just stated that the money was kept on the table. It is further deposed by PW-2 that his brother
PW-3 has utilized the complainant for the purpose of filing the complaint. It is alleged in his
deposition that PW-4 has not only supported the case of the prosecution but has also deposed
contrary to the case as alleged by the prosecution. Further, it is seen from the evidence of PW-4 /
A.S. Mansoor, brother of the complainant that he has totally turned hostile. In his evidence, he has
deposed that he was not at all aware of lodging of the complaint by his brother PW-2 against the
accused and that he did not even go the office of the Lokayuktha, Bangalore, and he was not even
aware of the trap made against the accused. In his cross-examination as well, he has denied the
suggestion that he used to visit the office of the accused to obtain permit for transporation of
molasses. Further, he has also denied that the accused had demanded Rs.1,50,000/- out of which
Rs.85,000/- was paid and since he was insisting Rs.65,000/-, PW-4 and his brother PW-2 went and
lodged a complaint with the Lokayuktha Police and thereafter the police conducted the trap against
the accused. He also denied about his presence in the Lokayuktha office.
Thus, when both PW-2 complainant and his brother PW-4 who had accompanied him to file the
complaint had totally denied about the accused demanding and accepting bribe in order to issue
permit to PW-2 to transport molasses, the Trial Court has erred in convicting the accused. It is
hence the contention of the learned counsel that the Trial Court ought to have appreciated the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 5
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
evidence of the complainant PW-2 and his brother PW-4 in its right perspective and acquitted the
appellant.
6. It is nextly contended that the Trial Court failed to appreciate the fact that the pant of the accused
/ appellant which was allegedly seized and sent for chemical examination has not been produced
before court. Though it is the case of the prosecution that the money was put into the right side pant
pocket which is also revealed from the chemical examination report, however since the pant was not
produced before court, the case of the prosecution could not have been accepted by the Trial Court.
On the said count alone, the Trial Court ought to have rejected the case of the prosecution.
It is the further contention of the learned counsel that the Trial Court has failed to appreciate the
fact that neither PW-1 / shadow witness nor PW-5 / Investigating Officer are witnesses to the
demand of bribe made by the accused. Hence, their evidence to the allegation of recovery of money
could not have been accepted by the Trial Court. It is the further contention of the learned counsel
that the Trial Court has failed to apply the settled legal principle that corroboration of evidence of
the complainant and the shadow witness is a must. Unless such corroboration is there, it is not safe
to pass an order of conviction. The main contention of the learned counsel is that in the case on
hand, there is not only lack of corroboration in the evidence of PW1 and PW2, but also their
evidence runs contrary to each other. He contends that mere recovery of money from the accused is
not sufficient to prove the demand and acceptance of bribe amount. Hence, the learned counsel
contends that prosecution has not been able to establish the basic ingredients required to make out
an offence under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) read with 13(2) of the PC Act to convict the accused, in spite of
which the Trial Court has erred in convicting the accused and sentencing him as aforesaid.
It is the further contention of the learned counsel that the Trial Court has totally ignored the
evidence to the effect that the company of the complainant M/s. T.T. Feeds Corporation and many
other such companies were all bogus units and molasses obtained by them is being used for
manufacturing illicit liquor and the same is being supplied to distilleries. In view of the fact that the
appellant / accused in his capacity as the Deputy Commissioner of Excise, Mysore, had raised the
said issue with the authorities, as a consequence, the respondents had framed the appellant himself
to have been involved in the case. The same is evidenced by the letter of the Joint Commissioner,
Excise, dated 13.02.2004. The said aspect has also been grossly ignored by the Trial Court while
passing the judgment and order of conviction.
7. The learned counsel has relied on the following judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court in support
of his contentions in the cases of:
i) V. SEJAPPA vs. STATE BY POLICE INSPECTOR LOKAYUKTA, CHITRADURGA
(2016) 12 SCC 150,
ii) B.JAYARAJ vs. STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH (2014) 13 SCC 55) and
iii) MUKHTIAR SINGH (SINCE DECEASED) THROUGH HIS L.R. vs. STATE OF
PUNJAB (S.L.P.(CRIMINAL) No.207 OF 2016).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 6
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
On all these grounds, the learned counsel for the appellant contends that the Trial Court has failed
to establish the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt and hence the judgment and order
of conviction and sentence is liable to be set aside.
8. Per contra, Shri B.S. Prasad, Spl.P.P. for Lokayuktha vehemently contends that the Trial Court,
on a proper appreciation of the evidence as well as the material on record, has rightly convicted the
accused by its impugned judgment dated 29.10.2010 in Spl.Case No.140/2004, which judgment
does not call for interference in this appeal. He contends that though the complainant PW-2 has
turned hostile, he has categorically admitted in his evidence that he had given the bait money of
Rs.65,000/- which was received by the accused in his right hand but that he immediately had kept
the amount on the table. Further, the answers elicited by PW-2 in his cross-examination
corroborated the evidence of PW-1 and though the accused gave explanation in terms of Exhibit P4
that the amount was kept on the table, however the chemical examination report at Exhibit P26
confirmed the trap and seizure of money. Further, the chemical examination report as well
corroborated that the hand wash of the accused turned into pink colour. The further circumstance to
evidence the fact that PW-2 had in fact given the bait money of Rs.65,000/- to the accused is proved
by the fact that PW-2 has categorically admitted that he received an amount of Rs.65,000/- by way
of cheque from the Lokayuktha Police, which amount was given by him to the Lokayuktha Police for
conducting the trap. Hence, the learned Spl. P.P contends that though PW-4, brother of the
complainant turned hostile, since the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 5 corroborated the case of the
prosecution, the Trial Court has rightly convicted the accused.
Though the defence taken by the accused is that the tainted currency notes were kept on the table,
there is no explanation forthcoming from the accused as to how when his hands and pant were
washed with sodium carbonate solution, they had turned pink. The fact that his hands turned pink
cannot be denied. Accused had not given any explanation as to why the notes were there on his table
as well.
In support of the said contention, the learned Spl.P.P. has placed reliance on a judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of VINOD KUMAR vs. STATE OF PUNJAB (AIR 2015 SC 1206), wherein the
Headnote (C) of the said judgment reads thus:
"(C) Prevention of Corruption Act (49 of 1988), Ss. 13, 20 - Bribery case - Demand,
acceptance and recovery of money from accused -
Proved in entirety by testimony of prosecution / trap witness - Further appellant-accused was
caught red handed with currency notes - No explanation given by him as regards recovery of notes -
Thus legitimate presumption can be drawn that accused had received or accepted said currency
notes on his own volition -
Conviction of accused, held was proper." The learned Spl. P.P. has further placed reliance on a
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of HAZARI LAL vs. STATE (DELHI ADMINISTRATION)
((1980) 2 SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 7
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
390), wherein the relevant headnote of the said judgment reads as under:
"Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 -
Sections 4(1), 5(2) and 5(1)(d) - Penal Code, 1860, Section 161 - Evidence Act, 1872,
Section 114, Illustration (a) - Acceptance of illegal gratification
- Passing of money to the possession of the accused can be proved by direct as well as
circumstantial evidence - Circumstances leading to the only inference of acceptance
of money by the accused - Presumption under Section 114, Evidence Act and Section
4(1), Prevention of Corruption Act also raised against the accused - Accused having
failed to rebut the presumption, his conviction under Section 5(2) read with Section
5(1)(d), Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, and Section 161 IPC, upheld."
Hence, the learned Spl.P.P contends that when the recovery of money coupled with other
circumstances leads to the conclusion that the accused received gratification from some person, the
court would certainly be entitled to draw the presumption under section 4(1) of the PC. Act. Hence,
the conviction held by the Trial Court requires no interference in this appeal and hence he contends
that the present appeal be dismissed.
9. On a careful consideration of the contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant /
accused and the learned Spl. P.P. for the respondent and on a perusal of the material on record, it is
seen that the allegation is that on 22.12.2003, the appellant / accused said to a public servant
working as Deputy Commissioner of Excise, Mysore, had demanded Rs.1,50,000/- from one
Muneer Ahamad / complainant, as an illegal gratification for showing official favour, that is to issue
transport permit for transporting 1000 Metric Tonnes of Molasses. It was alleged that an amount of
Rs.85,000/- was already paid by the complainant and the accused was demanding remaining
amount of Rs.65,000/-. The complainant not being interested to give the bribe money demanded by
the accused, is said to have lodged a complaint before the Inspector General Police, Karnataka
Lokayukta at Bangalore as per Ex.P6. Thereafter matter was proceeded for investigation.
But however, as pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant, the Trial Court has wholly
relied on the evidence of the PW-1 who is a stock witness in order to convict the appellant. The said
PW-1's office being situated very next to the office of the respondent police, he has been used in the
case as a prime witness by the prosecution. The said witness PW-1 has been made use of by the
respondent - police as a trap witness also in three other cases excluding the present one. This is a
major flaw in the case of the prosecution which has been ignored by the Trial Court and hence it has
grossly erred in accepting the evidence of PW-1 in its entirety, when his evidence is also not
corroborated by the complainant's evidence. The Trial Court ought to have rejected the evidence of
PW-1 taking into consideration the fact that he is admittedly a regular witness for the respondent
police.
Further, the complainant PW-2 himself has denied the fact of he having lodged any complaint
against the appellant - accused. Further, he has also denied that the appellant had made any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 8
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
demand for illegal gratification or as regards handing over any money to the accused. PW-4 / A.S.
Mansoor, brother of the complainant has in turn totally turned hostile to the case of the prosecution.
He had deposed that he was not at all aware of lodging of the complaint by his brother PW-2 against
the accused and that he did not even go to the office of the Lokayuktha, Bangalore, and he was not
even aware of the trap made against the accused. Thus, when both PW-2 complainant and his
brother PW-4 who had accompanied him to file the complaint had totally denied about the accused
demanding and accepting bribe in order to issue permit to PW-2 to transport molasses, the Trial
Court has erred in convicting the accused.
Further, the pant of the accused / appellant which was allegedly seized and sent for chemical
examination having not been produced before court, is also a flaw in the case of the prosecution.
Further, it is seen that PW-1 / shadow witness or PW-5 / Investigating Officer are not witnesses to
the demand of bribe made by the accused. Hence, their evidence to the allegation of recovery of
money could not have been accepted by the Trial Court. Further, the settled legal principle that
corroboration of evidence of the complainant and the shadow witness is a must, has not been
complied with. Since there is no corroboration, the order of conviction ought to be set aside. As
contended by the learned counsel, mere recovery of money from the accused is not sufficient to
prove the demand and acceptance of bribe amount.
10. The contention as regards demand of illegal gratification being a sine qua non for constituting an
offence under the PC Act is answered in a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of V. SEJAPPA vs.
STATE BY POLICE INSPECTOR LOKAYUKTA, CHITRADURGA (2016) 12 SCC 150, the relevant
portion of which reads as under:
"11. The law on the issue is well settled that demand of illegal gratification is sine qua non for
constituting an offence under the 1988 Act. Mere recovery of tainted money is not sufficient to
convict the accused, when the substantive evidence in the case is not reliable, unless there is
evidence to prove payment of bribe or to show that the money was taken voluntarily as bribe. Mere
receipt of amount by the accused is not sufficient to fasten the guilt, in the absence of any evidence
with regard to demand and acceptance of the amount as illegal gratification, but the burden rests on
the accused to displace the statutory presumption raised under Section 20 of the 1988 Act, by
bringing on record evidence, either direct or circumstantial, to establish with reasonable probability,
that the money was accepted by him, other than as a motive or reward as referred to in Section 7 of
the 1988 Act. While invoking the provisions of Section 20 of the Act, the court is required to
consider the explanation offered by the accused, if any, only on the touchstone of preponderance of
probability and not on the touchstone of proof beyond all reasonable doubt. However, before the
accused is called upon to explain as to how the amount in question was found in his possession, the
foundational facts must be established by the prosecution. The complainant is an interested and
partisan witness concerned with the success of the trap and his evidence must be tested in the same
way as that of any other interested witness and in a proper case the court may look for independent
corroboration before convicting the accused person."
Keeping in view the above judgment, it is seen that in the case on hand as well, demand and
acceptance of illegal gratification by the accused has not been proved by the prosecution beyond all
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 9
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
reasonable doubt. Moreover, just recovery of the money also is not sufficient to fasten the guilt on
the accused.
11. In another judgment of the Apex Court in the case of B.JAYARAJ vs. STATE OF ANDHRA
PRADESH ((2014) 13 SCC 55), as regards the contention that mere possession and recovery of
currency notes without proof of demand would not prove the offence under Section 7 of the PC Act,
it is held thus:
"7. In so far as the offence under Section 7 is concerned, it is a settled position in law
that demand of illegal gratification is sine qua non to constitute the said offence and
mere recovery of currency notes cannot constitute the offence under Section 7 unless
it is proved beyond all reasonable doubt that the accused voluntarily accepted the
money knowing it to be a bribe. The above position has been succinctly laid down in
several judgments of this Court. By way of illustration reference may be made to the
decision in C.M. Sharma Vs. State of A.P.[1] and C.M. Girish Babu Vs. C.B.I.[2]
8. In the present case, the complainant did not support the prosecution case in so far
as demand by the accused is concerned. The prosecution has not examined any other
witness, present at the time when the money was allegedly handed over to the
accused by the complainant, to prove that the same was pursuant to any demand
made by the accused. When the complainant himself had disowned what he had
stated in the initial complaint (Exbt.P-11) before LW-9, and there is no other
evidence to prove that the accused had made any demand, the evidence of PW-1 and
the contents of Exhibit P-11 cannot be relied upon to come to the conclusion that the
above material furnishes proof of the demand allegedly made by the accused. We are,
therefore, inclined to hold that the learned trial court as well as the High Court was
not correct in holding the demand alleged to be made by the accused as proved. The
only other material available is the recovery of the tainted currency notes from the
possession of the accused. In fact such possession is admitted by the accused himself.
Mere possession and recovery of the currency notes from the accused without proof
of demand will not bring home the offence under Section 7. The above also will be
conclusive in so far as the offence under Section 13(1)(d)(i)(ii) is concerned as in the
absence of any proof of demand for illegal gratification, the use of corrupt or illegal
means or abuse of position as a public servant to obtain any valuable thing or
pecuniary advantage cannot be held to be established."
Relating the above decisions to the present case on hand, it is seen that in view of the fact that the
complainant himself has disowned what he had stated in his initial complaint and there being no
proof from the other witnesses to evidence the fact that the accused had demanded illegal
gratification in order to issue permit in favour of the complainant, the Trial Court has erred in
convicting the accused.
12. Further, in a decision of the Apex Court in the case of MUKHTIAR SINGH (SINCE DECEASED)
THROUGH HIS L.R. vs. STATE OF PUNJAB (S.L.P. (CRIMINAL) No.207 OF 2016), it is held that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 10
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
the evidence of a shadow witnesses in isolation cannot constitute demand as enjoined in law. The
relevant portion of the said judgment reads as under:
"25. It would thus be patent from the materials on record that the evidence with
regard to the demand of illegal gratification either of Rs.3,000/- which had been paid
or of Rs.2,000/- as made on the day of trap operation is wholly inadequate to comply
with the pre-requisites to constitute the ingredients of the offence with which the
original accused had been charged. Not only the date or time of first
demand/payment is not forthcoming and the allegation to that effect is rather
omnibus, vague and sweeping, even the person in whose presence Rs.3,000/- at the
first instance is alleged to have been paid i.e. Santosh Singh Lamberdar, has neither
been produced in the investigation nor at the trial. In other words, the bald allegation
of the complainant with regard to the demand and payment of Rs.3,000/- as well as
the demand of Rs.2,000/- has remained uncorroborated. Further to reiterate, his
statement to this effect lacks in material facts and particulars and per se cannot form
the foundation of a decisive conclusion that such demand in fact had been made by
the original accused. Viewed in this perspective, the statement of complainant and
the Inspector Satpal, the shadow witness in isolation that the original accused had
enquired as to whether money had been brought or not, can by no means constitute
demand as enjoined in law as an ingredient of the offence levelled against the original
accused. Such a stray query ipso facto in absence of any other cogent and persuasive
evidence on record cannot amount to a demand to be a constituent of the offence
under Section 7 or 13 of the Act.
I find that in the case on hand as well, the date or time of the first demand / payment
is not forthcoming. Further, the conviction is based on the evidence of the shadow
witness PW-1 along with the I.O. / PW-5, which cannot constitute a demand as
enjoined in law.
13. In view of the above reasons, I find that the prosecution has not been able to put forth positive,
acceptable, cogent, consistent, convincing and satisfactory evidence, to establish the basic
ingredients required to make out an offence under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) read with 13(2) of the PC Act
against the accused. Thus, when the offences alleged have not been proved by the prosecution
beyond all reasonable doubt, benefit of doubt shall accrue in favour of the accused / appellant.
Hence, I find that the impugned judgment requires to be interfered with, if not, certainly it would
lead to a miscarriage of justice.
Consequently, the appeal is hereby allowed. The judgment of conviction and order of sentence
rendered by the Prl. Sessions Judge & Special Judge at Mysore in Spl.Case No.140/2004 by order
dated 29.10.2010 for offences punishable under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the
PC Act is hereby set aside.
The appellant / accused is hereby acquitted of the offences leveled against him.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 11
Shivananda Bankolli vs State By Lokayukta Police on 24 February, 2020
The bail bond if any executed by the appellant stands cancelled. If any fine amount has been
deposited by the appellant, the same shall be refunded to him, on proper identification.
Sd/-
JUDGE DKB/KS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164702036/ 12
