Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August,
2019
Author: Subodh Abhyankar
Bench: Subodh Abhyankar
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH: JABALPUR
SINGLE BENCH: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Subodh Abhyankar
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1721 OF 2015
Shivkumar Gond and another.
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Vivek Shukla, learned counsel for the appellants.
Shri R.P.Prajapati, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent/State.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUDGEMENT
(Delivered on the 14th day of August, 2019) This criminal appeal under Section 374 (2) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure has been preferred by the appellants A/1 Shivkumar Gond and A/2 Sukhlal
Gond being aggrieved of the judgment dated 22/6/2015 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge,
Sidhi in ST No.128/2007, whereby each of the appellants has been convicted respectively under
Sections 306 read with Section 34 and 201 read with Section 34 of IPC and sentenced respectively to
seven years' rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.500/- each and two years' rigorous
imprisonment with fine of Rs.300/- each with default clause.
2. In brief the facts of the case are that on 19.5.2006 complainant Avdesh Singh Gond (PW-12),
cousin of the deceased Vimla lodged a report at Police Station Churhat to the effect that the first
marriage of Vimla Devi daughter of Surajbhan Gond aged 19 years took place with Babulal Singh
Gond at Village Barigawan Police Station Churhat where she stayed for four months and came back
to her matrimonial house. There she be- friended appellant No.1 Shivkumar Gond at Village Sarai
Police Station Laur District Rewa. According to the case of the prosecution, deceased Vimla Devi got
married to A/1 Shivkumar who took her to Mumbai and came back after 15 days and when the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 1
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
complainant went to the house of Shivkumar to bring her, Shivkumar did not send her, hence they
imposed a penalty of Rs.500/-, a buffalo and a goat to be given to Babulal the first husband of Vimla
as she was earlier the wife of Babulal. Thereafter appellant Shivkumar took Vimla to the house of his
brother-in-law Appellant No.2 Sukhlal Gond at Village Mohniya and on 17.5.2007 one Jaganandan
Singh (PW-4) of his Village informed the complainant (PW-12) that Vimla Devi has passed away on
15.5.2007. On this information when they reached Village Gaddhai where Shivkumar and his
brother-in-law A2 Sukhlal were residing and asked about how Vimla Devi died, they informed that
she committed suicide and when they enquired why this information was not given to them to which
they gave no reply. Subsequently when these persons went along with family members to Village
Gaddhai to fetch the ashes of deceased Vimla Devi, as she was also cremated by the appellants, on
seeing them, the appellants fled from the village hence on 19.5.2007 an FIR was lodged at Police
Station Churhat and on the basis of information a marg intimation was registered and on enquiry it
was found that the deceased was being treated with cruelty and was harassed mentally and
physically by her husband and brother-in-law, hence she committed suicide on 15.5.2007. Thus, a
case was registered against the appellant Shivkumar Gond and his brother-in-law Sukhlal Gond
under Sections 306, 201, 120-B read with Section 34 of IPC at Crime No.140/2007. The appellants
have taken a defence that the deceased Vimla had solemnized the marriage with appellant No.1
Shivkumar on her own volition and was residing with him only, which was not approved by her
family members and hence when deceased died due to cholera, a false case has been registered
against the appellants. Appellant No.2 Sukhlal Gond has taken a defence that since appellant
Shivkumar is his brother-in-law, only to falsely implicate him along with Shivkumar, he is also
dragged in the alleged offence as a co-accused.
3. After investigation, the charge sheet was filed before the competent Court and after its committal,
the learned Judge of the trial Court, after recording the evidence, has convicted the appellants as
aforesaid and being aggrieved of the same, the present appeal has been preferred by the appellants.
4. Learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that the appellants have been falsely implicated
in the present case, as it is a case of natural death of the deceased, as she died due to cholera and
only to settle the personal score, the family members of the deceased Vimla Devi have lodged the
FIR and have deposed against them, as they were not ready to allow the deceased Vimla Devi to stay
with A/1 Shivkumar despite the fact that Vimla Devi had solemnized the marriage with A/1
Shivkumar, as she was in love with him. It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the
appellants that the defence witness Maan Bahadur (DW-
1) has also stated that he is well acquainted with the appellants as appellant No.1
Shivkumar used to come to his house along with his wife Vimla Devi and both of
them were working at Mohniya Paath Pahad (hill) on a road construction site.
According to this witness (DW-1), between 12 O'clock to 2 PM during the lunch hour
appellant Shivkumar's wife Vimla Devi suddenly suffered from loose motions and
vomiting and as a result she died.
Its information was given to her family members and since nobody came, hence her body was
cremated.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 2
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
5. Learned counsel for the appellants has further submitted that there is no evidence on record to
connect the present appellants with the offence of suicide and it is only on the basis of conjuncture
and surmises that the learned Judge of the trial Court has come to a conclusion that it might have
been a case of suicide after which she was cremated without any intimation to her parents. It is
further submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that it was neither a case of suicide nor
concealment of evidence, hence it is prayed that the appellants be acquitted.
6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the State has opposed the prayer of the appellant and has
submitted that the death of Vimla Devi took place under suspicion circumstances. It is submitted
that the defence has not produced any document on record to show that deceased Vimla Devi in way
was suffering from cholera and she was cremated by the appellants without giving any intimation to
the family members of deceased Vimla Devi. It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the
State that the learned Judge of the trial Court has rightly drawn an adverse inference against the
appellants under Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 to hold that the deceased had died in
suspicion circumstances and the onus was on the accused persons to prove that she died otherwise.
In such circumstances, it is submitted that no illegality has been committed by the learned Judge of
the trial Court in convicting the present appellants for the aforesaid offences, hence the present
appeal be dismissed.
7. Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. From the record, it is apparent that in support of the prosecution as many as 17 witnesses have
been examined whereas the accused appellants have also examined one witness DW-1 Maan
Bahadur. Although there is no evidence on record, but it appears that the deceased Vimla died on
15.05.2007 and it is alleged that she committed suicide and subsequently, the appellant No.1
Shivkumar Gond and his brother in law appellant No.2 Sukhlal Gond cremated her without any
intimation to the family members of the deceased. However, it is also found that none of the
prosecution witnesses have actually seen the appellants harassing the deceased Vimla in any
manner and none of the witnesses have also seen the deceased to be hanging to prove that she
committed suicide and after that she was cremated. Thus, the conviction of the appellants is solely
based on the circumstantial evidence and has to be tested on the well settled principles of
circumstantial evidence i.e. "there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any
reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show
that in all human probability the act must have been done by the accused", as has been held by the
Apex Court in the case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra reported as 1984(4)SCC
116.
9. Maanwati Gond (PW-1) has stated that deceased Vimla was her daughter, who was earlier
married to one Babulal Gond but when she came back, she had an affair with the appellant No.1
Shivkumar and solemnized a love marriage with him and soon thereafter Shivkumar took her to
Mumbai. She has also stated that the first wife of the Shivkumar had also died in suspicious
circumstances as he had also killed her by burning and this fact was also known to Vimla Devi but
she told her that since Shivkumar is in love with her, hence he would not harm her but later, after
one-two months she informed her that the appellant is troubling her. This witness has also stated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 3
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
that the appellant Sukhlal has killed her daughter on account of dowry, although she has also
admitted that in her in-chief that appellant Sukhlal had also given to Babulal, a buffalo, a goat and
Rupees Five Hundred only towards compensation for marrying Vimla. She has also stated that one
Samarjeet, who is dead now, informed her that after beating the deceased Vimla, the appellants have
burnt her body.
10. All the other witnesses, most of whom are the relatives of deceased Vimla and the residents of
the same village have given the statements on the same line and almost all of them have also stated
that they were angry at appellant No.1 Shivkumar because of the marriage which he solemnized with
the deceased Vimla. However, Jaikaran (PW-10), the Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat Mahoniya for the
year 2004-05 till 2008-09, has certified that he had given the death certificate (Ex.P/3) of Vimla on
20.05.2007 and in his cross examination, he has stated that he knew that Vimla died of cholera and
when the police had asked for the death certificate, at that time also he had informed the police that
Vimla had died of cholera. He has also stated that since Vimla was residing with Shivkumar as his
wife after leaving her first husband, hence the parents and other family members of Vimla were
angry at appellant No.1 Shivkumar. He has also stated that when the parents of Vimla came to the
village, he had also informed them that Vimla had died of cholera but as they were angry, they said
that they would falsely implicate Shivkumar for the same. Surprisingly, this witness has not been
cross examined by the prosecution on any count and thus, being the prosecution witness, his
testimony is binding on the prosecution. B.L. Sharma (PW-13), Investigating Officer, has stated that
the only articles which he seized at the instance of the appellants were the ashes and the bones of the
deceased Vimla, who was cremated by them.
11. It is surprising that no efforts were made by the Investigating Officer to find out the evidence
regarding the mode of suicide viz. the rope or the place where it is alleged that the deceased Vimla
committed suicide by hanging. Panchnama of the place where the alleged suicide took place has also
not been prepared to demonstrate that the deceased could have died there only. The evidence so
produced by the prosecution in support of the case of suicide is absolutely inadequate or rather
missing to come to a conclusion beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased committed suicide by
hanging and, it was on account of harassment meted out to her by the appellants. So far as the
Appellant No.2 Sukhlal is concerned, again, there is simply no evidence on record except the fact
that deceased Vimla was residing with appellant No.1 Shivkumar in the house of Sukhlal and there is
also no overt act attributed to him.
12. Learned Judge of the trial Court has relied upon Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872 which
relates to burden of proving fact specially within knowledge and provides that when any fact is
specially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. It is held
by the learned Judge of the trial Court that since the deceased had died in suspicious circumstances
and if the appellants have come out with a case that she died of cholera, in that case they ought to
have produced some documents on record to show that she died of the disease; however instead of
taking her to any hospital for her treatment, soon after the death, deceased Vimla was straight away
cremated by the appellants without intimation to the family members of the deceased. Thus, in
addition to Section 306 of IPC, the appellants have also been convicted under Section 201 of IPC
which relates to causing disappearance of evidence of offence or giving false information to screen
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 4
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
offender. At this juncture it would be apt to refer to the law laid down by the Apex Court in the case
of Gian Chand v. State of Haryana, reported as (2013) 14 SCC 420, the relevant para of the same
reads as under:-
"21. Additionally, it can also be held that once the possession of the contraband
material with the accused is established, the accused has to establish how he came to
be in possession of the same as it is within his special knowledge and therefore, the
case falls within the ambit of the provisions of Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872
(hereinafter referred to as "the 1872 Act").
22. In State of W.B. v. Mir Mohammad Omar this Court held that if the fact is
specifically in the knowledge of any person, then the burden of proving that fact is
upon him. It is impossible for the prosecution to prove certain facts particularly
within the knowledge of the accused. Section 106 is not intended to relieve the
prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
But the section would apply to cases where the prosecution has succeeded in proving
facts from which a reasonable inference can be drawn regarding the existence of
certain other facts, unless the accused by virtue of his special knowledge regarding
such facts, failed to offer any explanation which might drive the court to draw a
different inference.
"38. ... Section 106 of the Evidence Act is designed to meet certain exceptional cases
in which it would be impossible for the prosecution to establish certain facts which
are particularly within the knowledge of the accused."
(emphasis supplied) Thus, testing on the anvil of the aforesaid dictum of the Apex Court, the
aforesaid finding recorded by the learned Judge of the trial Court suffers from wrong appreciation of
evidence and drawing unwarranted presumption by invoking Section 106 of the Evidence Act. In the
present case, it is alleged that the deceased, a woman in her twenties died on account of suicide and
has been cremated by her the husband without any intimation to her family members, but no
evidence has been led by the prosecution of the neighbors of the appellants or other persons of the
village regarding the suicide and the manner of cremation. Thus, in the absence of any other
evidence on record it cannot be presumed that the appellants had cremated the body of the deceased
only in order to cause disappearance of the evidence of the offence committed by them. Thus, it is
apparent that the presumption under Section 106 of the Evidence Act cannot be used as a tool to
justify a conviction if the accused is not able to discharge his burden, but such conviction has to be
based on the other cogent evidence connecting the accused with the offence and the failure to
explain any circumstance under Section 106 of the Evidence Act can be used only as a missing link
in the chain of evidence and cannot be used as the chain itself. In the case on hand, such
presumption cannot withstand the scrutiny of the law as has been enunciated by the Apex Court in
the case of Gian Chand (supra).
13. In view of the aforesaid discussion, this Court is of the considered opinion that this being a case
of circumstantial evidence, the prosecution has not been able to produce any evidence regarding the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 5
Shivkumar Gond vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 14 August, 2019
ill treatment meted out to the deceased Vimla at the hands of the appellants but on the contrary, the
evidence is regarding the resentment of the family members of the deceased over her love marriage
with the appellant No.1 and there is no evidence either regarding the suicide committed by the
deceased Vimla.
14. In view of the aforesaid discussion, this Court is of the considered opinion that the conviction of
the appellants under Section 306 read with Section 34 of IPC and Section 201 read with Section 34
of IPC cannot be sustained and is liable to be and is hereby set aside and the appellants stand
acquited from the charges levelled against them.
15. As a result, the appeal stands allowed. At present appellant No.1 Shivkumar, who is in jail be
released forthwith, whereas, appellant No.2 Sukhlal has already been released on bail, his bond shall
stand discharged.
(Subodh Abhyankar) Judge 14/08/2019 Date: 2019.08.14 16:10:45 +05'30' Ansari
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13785895/ 6
