Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan vs State Of U.P. on 2
January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:106
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 45850 of 2024
Applicant :- Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Mukti Nath Dwivedi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Mukti Nath Dwivedi, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Pranshu Kumar, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.278 of 2024, Session Trial No.1109 of 2024, under Sections
498-A, 304-B I.P.C. and Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station Kotwali, District
Shahjahanpur, during the pendency of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197528287/ 1
Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The marriage of the son of the applicant was solemnized with the daughter of the informant as per
Hindu Rites on 26.09.2020. The applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected
her to cruelty for demand of Apache vehicle and Rs.2 lakhs as dowry, whereby she is stated to have
set her afire within the precincts of the house of the applicant on 21.06.2024 and succumbed to the
said injuries sustained on 22.06.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
5. The applicant is the father-in-law of the deceased person and has been falsely implicated in the
present case.
6. The applicant, as a bona fide act, had admitted the deceased to the hospital.
7. The dying declaration of the deceased does not indicate that the applicant or any of other family
members had set the deceased afire, rather it indicates that the deceased, out of anger, had set
herself afire and committed suicide.
8. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
9. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 24.06.2024
and is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/INFORMANT:
10. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
11. ?The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
12. ?A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot
be taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197528287/ 2
Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
13. ?Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia vs. Directorate
of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
14. ?Learned A.G.A. could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant
denial of bail to the applicant.
15. ?It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at
the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned A.G.A.
16. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
17. Let the applicant- Shivnandan Verma Alias Shiv Narayan involved in aforementioned case crime
number be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C/351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
18. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
19. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Ravi/-
(Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197528287/ 3
