Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S
Bellad on 13 July, 2020
Author: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
Bench: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
®
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BEN CH
DATED THIS THE 13 T H DAY OF JULY, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.J USTICE N .S . SANJ AY GOWDA
C.P. NO.100014/2019
BETWEEN
SHIVALEELA BELLAD W/O. MALLIKARJUN,
AGED ABOUT 34 YEARS, OCC:HOUSEWIFE,
R/O. NALVAD ONI, GADAG-582101.
..... PETITIONER
(BY SRI C S SHETTAR, ADV.)
AND
MALLIKARJUN BELLAD
S/O. C S BELLAD
AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS, OCC:EMPLOYED,
R/O. NO.232, NANJUDESHWARA NILAYA,
1ST FLOOR, NEAR SHARADHA COLONY BUS STOP,
BASAVESHWARA NAGAR,
BENGALURU-560079.
..... RESPONDENT
(RESPONDENT IS SERVED)
THIS CIVL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 24 OF C.P.C.,
PRAYING TO ALLOW THIS CIVIL PETITION BY TRANSFERRING THE
M.C.NO.6467/2018 PENDING ON THE FILE OF THE II ADDITIONAL
PRINCIPAL JUDGE FAMILY COURT AT BENGALURU TO PRINCIPAL JUDG
FAMILY COURT AT GADAG FOR PROPER ADJUDICATION OF THE
MATTER, IN THE INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY.
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 1
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
THIS PE0TITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION, THIS DAY, THE
COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
1. The office has raised an objection regarding maintainability of this transfer petition, which is
perhaps applicable only to a petition filed for transfer of cases under S. 24 of the CPC.
2. The objection is that the proceedings which are sought to be transferred in this petition are
proceedings which are pending before the II Addl. Prl. Judge, Family Court at Bengaluru, which
would make it a case arising out of Bangalore District and this Permanent Bench at Dharwad, which
can decide cases arising out of only 8 districts, would not possess the jurisdiction to transfer a case
arising out of Bangalore District.
3. In other words, since the proceeding sought to be transferred is a case arising out of Bangalore
District, it is only the Principal Bench of the High Court at Bengaluru, which can transfer the said
proceeding.
4. The consequence created out of such an objection would be that this Permanent Bench at
Dharwad cannot transfer cases arising out of Bengaluru District to any of the Courts subordinate to
it in the 8 districts mentioned in the Presidential Order and the power available to the Permanent
Bench is only to transfer a proceeding only between any of the 8 districts mentioned in the
Presidential Order of 2013.
5. In order to appreciate this controversy, a brief overview of the establishment of a High Court in a
State under the Constitution and the Laws enacted by the Parliament would be necessary.
6. Article 214 of the Constitution mandates that there shall be a High Court for each State.
7. Art 226 (2) of the Constitution states that the High Court shall be entitled to exercise its
jurisdiction under Art 226 (1) in relation to the territories within which the cause of action, wholly,
or in part, arises notwithstanding the fact that the seat of the Government or authority of the
residence of the person against who orders are sought for or issued, are not within its territories.
8. Article 227 of the Constitution stipulates that the High Court shall have the superintendence over
all the Courts and Tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises it
jurisdiction.
9. In short, the High Court of a State is empowered to exercise its jurisdiction to issue orders
throughout the territory of a State and it would possess the powers to issue orders and directions to
Governments, authorities and persons who are residing outside the territories of the State, so long
as, a part of the cause action has arisen within a State. The High Court, by virtue of its constitutional
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 2
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
mandate, exercises its power of superintendence over the entire territory of a State where it is
established.
10. In the year 1956, in order to make provisions for reorganization of States, the Parliament
enacted The States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as 'Reorganisation Act').
11. Part V of the Reorganisation Act relates to the High Courts in the reorganized states. The
deeming provision of S. 49 (1) made the existing High Courts of the States of Bombay, Madhya
Pradesh and Punjab as the High Courts for the new states of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and Punjab.
12. S. 49 (2) of the Reorganisation Act, 1956, established a High Court for the new states of Kerala,
Mysore and Rajasthan.
13. It may be pertinent to state here that even prior to the enactment of the Reorganisation Act, 1956
the Mysore High Court had already been established under the provisions of the Mysore High
Courts Act, 1884.
14. S. 17 of the said 1884 Act, in fact, provided for the High Court to hold its sittings at such places as
the State Government thought it fit to appoint. The said section made it clear that Judges sitting at
various other places would have the power to exercise the jurisdiction and authority in the same
manner as a Judge, sitting in the ordinary place of sitting of the High Court.
15. Thus, even prior to the establishment of the High Court under the Reorganisation Act, 1956, the
Mysore Act provided for the High Court to sit at more than one place and even when it sat at
different places, the Judges sitting there would possess the same authority as those sitting in the
original place of sitting.
16. Coming back to the Reorganisation Act, S. 51 of the said Act provides for establishment of a
Principal seat and other places of sitting of the High Courts for the new states. The principal seat of
the High Court is required to be at the place notified by the President by way of a Presidential Order
as per S. 51 (1) of the Act. For the State of Karnataka the principal seat is undoubtedly at Bengaluru.
17. Sub section 2 of Section 51 provides for establishment of a permanent bench or benches of a
High Court, at one or more places, in the State. These Bench or Benches are required to be
established by way of a notified order, issued by the President, after consultation with the Governor
and the Chief Justice of the State.
18. Sub section 3 of S. 51 of the Reorganisation Act enables the Chief Justice, with the approval of
the Governor, to allow for sitting of Judges and Division Courts of the High Court at such place or
places in the State, as he deems proper, notwithstanding the fact that a Principal Bench and
permanent bench/benches have been established under Sub section 1 and 2 of Section 51.
19. Thus, a High Court can not only have a Principal seat, but, it can also have a permanent bench or
benches at one or more places and in addition, it can also have Judges sitting at any other place or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 3
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
places.
20. In the year 1988, the Hon'ble Chief Justice in exercise of the powers conferred under S. 51 (3) of
the Reorgansiation Act, notified the sittings of the High Court at Dharwad and Gulbarga. This
notification was issued with the prior approval of the Governor and accordingly the sittings of the
High Court took place in Dharwad and Gulbarga from 2008.
21. The notification also stipulated that the Full Court of the High Court had resolved that the
Judges sitting at Dharwad and Gulbarga (Circuit Benches) would deal with the cases arising out of
the Districts stated in the notification. Thus, the full court of the High Court assigned the cases that
were required to be heard by the Judges sitting at Dharwad and Gulbarga and accordingly cases
arising out of the specified districts were heard at Dharwad and Gulbarga.
22. Subsequently in the year 2013, the President of India in exercise of his powers under S. 51 (2) of
the Reorganisation Act, 1956 issued the Presidential order titled 'The High Court of Karnataka
(Establishment of Permanent Benches at Dharwad and Gulbarga), Order 2013'.
23. This Presidential Order was issued by the President, after consultation with Governor of
Karnataka and the Chief Justice of the High Court. By virtue of this Presidential Order, the
permanent benches of the High Court of Karnataka were established at Dharwad and Gulbarga.
24. The Presidential order, which was issued after consultation with the Chief Justice stated that the
Permanent Bench at Dharwad came into operation on 24 t h August 2013 and the Permanent Bench
at Gulbarga came into operation with effect from 31 s t August 2013.
25. The Presidential Order stated that the Chief Justice would nominate the Judges who shall sit at
Dharwad and Gulbarga i.e., the Permanent Benches and it also stated that the judges who would sit
at Dharwad and Gulbarga would exercise the jurisdiction vested in the High Court of Karnataka in
respect of the cases arising out the Districts mentioned therein.
26. Thus, the Presidential Order not only enabled the establishment of the Permanent Benches but
also recognized the absolute right of the Chief Justice to nominate judges to sit and decide cases
arising out of the Districts mentioned therein.
27. It cannot be in dispute that since the Chief Justice is the Master of the Rolls, it would be within
his exclusive domain to assign the matters that would be decided by the Judges sitting in the
Permanent Benches. Since the Presidential Order has been issued after consulting with the Chief
Justice, the assignment of the cases to the Judges sitting at the permanent benches i.e., cases arising
out of the respective Districts specified in the Presidential Order, is in essence, a reflection of the
assignment of cases made by the Chief Justice that were required to be heard by the Judges sitting at
the Permanent Benches.
28. This assignment of cases to be heard in respect of the Districts specified therein cannot be
construed to mean that there were multiple High Courts established which were required to decide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 4
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
cases arising out of only specified Districts. The assignment of cases to be heard is basically an
administrative exercise of the discretion by Chief Justice who is the sole authority to manage the
roster and thereby streamline the working of the Benches.
29. This is clear from Paragraph 4 of the Presidential Order which states that notwithstanding the
assignment of cases made in sub paragraphs (i) and
(ii) of paragraph 4, the Chief Justice would have the absolute discretion to order that any case or
class of cases arising any such district should be heard at Bangalore. Thus, the power of the Chief
Justice to assign the cases to be heard at Bangalore even in respect of the Districts specified for the
two permanent benches conclusively establishes that the establishment of permanent benches
cannot result in the trifurcation of the High Court.
30. The constitutional principle which is discernible from this scheme of things is that irrespective
as to the place of sitting of the High Court, i.e., whether it is either at the principal seat or at the
permanent bench or for that matter any other place or places, the power exercised by the Judges is
the same i.e., the powers exercisable by the High Court of a State.
31. To put it differently, the seat of the High Court does not define the power or jurisdiction of a
High Court and the power and jurisdiction exercisable by a High Court of a State would be the same
irrespective of the place of sitting of the High Court.
32. The necessary consequence of this is that, in a State, all the courts whose decrees, orders,
sentences or proceedings are subject to appeal, reference, revision to the High Court under any law
or those courts which are subject to the jurisdiction of the High Court under Art 226 or 227 of the
Constitution would be Courts which are subordinate to the High Court.
33. In view of the above, for the purposes of this case, it is clear that the Family Court at Bengaluru
would be a Court subordinate to this Permanent Bench of the High Court in the same manner as it
would be subordinate to the Principal Bench at Bengaluru.
34. If it is to be held that only the Courts falling within the jurisdiction of the Districts notified to the
Permanent Benches alone are subordinate to it, then, the constitutional scheme of there being only
one High Court in a State would be defeated.
35. The High Court, which, under a Parliamentary law, can sit at more than one place, would
basically be trifurcated and its exercise of jurisdiction over a state which has been conferred
constitutionally would be restricted only to a few districts in a State. This is, clearly, constitutionally
impermissible.
36. The constitutional mandate is that there shall be one High Court for a State. This constitutional
High Court, by virtue of the provisions of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 can sit at more than
one place. Merely because the High Court sits in more than one place, it can never be said that there
are different High Courts established in a State with a different set of subordinate courts earmarked
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 5
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
for each place at which the High Court sits.
37. This is further made clear from a reading of the Karnataka High Court Rules, 1961, which have
been framed in exercise of the powers under Article 225 of the Constitution and also S. 54 of the
States Reorganisation Act apart from other enactments.
38. Chapter II of the High Court Rules which deals with definitions, defines the 'High Court' and the
'Subordinate Court' as follows:
(a) "High Court", "This Court" or "The Court"
means the High Court of Karnataka established under the Constitution of India and
in accordance with the provisions of sub section (2) of section 49 of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956) for the State of Karnataka
constituted under the said Act:
(b) "Subordinate Court" means any court, Tribunal or Authority whose decrees,
orders, sentences or proceedings are subject to appeal, reference, revision to or by the
High Court under any law for the time being in force, or are subject to the jurisdiction
of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution or to its superintendence
under Article 227 of the Constitution.
39. A reading of the above definition makes it clear that the High Court is the Court established
under the Constitution and in accordance with S. 49 (2) of the Reorganisation Act.
40. Since the Reorganisation Act itself provides for the High Court to sit at a Principal seat and also
at the same time, at one or more places in the State, either permanently or temporarily, in law, the
High Court sitting at all the places including at the Principal seat, would all be collectively the High
Court of a State established under the Constitution.
41. The fact that a subordinate Court has been defined to mean any Court whose orders are subject
to appeal, revision or reference under any law or are subject to the jurisdiction of the High Court
under Articles 226 or 227 of the Constitution, would by itself, make it clear that all the subordinate
Courts in the State would be subordinate not only to the High Court sitting in its Principal seat but
also to the High Courts sitting in other places as provided under S. 51 (2) and S. 51 (3) of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956.
42. It is therefore clear that even the Permanent Benches established as per S. 51 (2) of the States
Reorganisation Act, 1956 would possess jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution and also
have the power of superintendence conferred under Article 227 of the Constitution over all the
subordinate Courts in the State of Karnataka.
43. The necessary consequence of this is that even if the transfer of a proceeding from a civil Court
pending in a District (in respect of which any cases arising can be decided only by the Principal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 6
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
Bench) is sought for before any one of the Permanent Benches, that Permanent Bench would
possess the jurisdiction to invoke the powers under Section 24 of Code of Civil Procedure and
transfer the proceeding from that Court to any Court situate in a District from which cases arise out
of can be decided by it.
44. Yet another anomaly that would arise if the office objection is upheld would be that the
Permanent Benches can order for transfer of cases under S. 24 only between those Courts situated
in the Districts from which it hears cases.
45. As a corollary, the Principal Bench can only transfer cases under S. 24 within the Courts situated
in the Districts from which it hears cases.
46. The cumulative effect of this would be that there would be virtually three different High Courts
operating in the State in respect of separately earmarked Districts and the power to transfer cases
from any place in a State to another place in a State would be rendered nugatory. This would result
in an absurd situation and would be a gross violation of the Constitutional principle of one High
Court for a State.
47. It is for this reason that the Chief Justice, when preparing the roster (sitting list) consciously
assigns the hearing of Transfer petitions to Judges who are at the Permanent Benches also.
48. S. 24 of the CPC enables the High Court to transfer a proceeding from one part of the State to
any other part of the State and when once the Chief Justice assigns a Judge in the Permanent
Benches to decide a Transfer Petition, it is fundamentally to enable that Judge to exercise the
powers of the High Court to transfer a case from one part of the State to any other part of the State
and this exercise of power cannot be diluted or restricted by a misconstruction of the Presidential
Order.
49. In view of the above, it is clear that the office objection regarding maintainability of the transfer
petition is wholly untenable and the same is overruled.
50. Now coming to the facts of this petition:
51. In this case, the petitioner, who is the wife, is seeking for transfer of a proceeding initiated by her
husband, the respondent in M.C. 6467/2018 before the II Addl. Prl. Judge, Family Court,
Bengaluru, to the Court of Prl. Judge, Family Court at Gadag.
52. It is her case that she is residing at Gadag and it would be impossible for her to travel to
Bengaluru, which is situated about 400 km away from Gadag. She also contends that she is looking
after her son who is studying in the 8 t h standard and if she were asked to travel to Bengaluru to
defend herself, it would have an adverse effect on her son's education and also on his upbringing.
She also contends that she has initiated a proceeding under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. for maintenance
in Crl.Misc.No.198/2019 before the Court at Gadag and it would be convenient for her, if the matter
pending before the Court at Bengaluru is transferred to the Court at Gadag.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 7
Shivaleela Bellad W/O. Mallikarjun vs Mallikarjun Bellad S/O. C S Bellad on 13 July, 2020
53. The respondent, though served, has chosen not to appear in these proceedings. Consequently, it
will have to be assumed that he has no objection for the transfer of the petition.
54. In my view, the contentions raised by the petitioner, especially the fact that she has the
responsibility of looking after her son all by herself justifies and validates her request for transfer
and it would therefore be in the interests of justice if the case filed by the respondent at Bengaluru is
transferred to Gadag.
55. As a result, the proceeding pending before the II Addl. Prl. Judge, Family Court at Bengaluru in
M.C.No.6467/218 stands withdrawn and transferred to the Court of Prl. Judge, Family Court at
Gadag.
56. The Prl. Judge, Family Court at Gadag, after notifying the parties, shall deal with the matter in
accordance with law. Petition is allowed accordingly.
Sd/-
JUDGE Naa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97235137/ 8
