Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another
on 4 February, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:7106
Court No. - 28
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 7016 of 2017
Applicant :- Shiv Shankar Verma And Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Umesh Singh,Amarjeet Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate, Radhey Shyam
Hon'ble Brij Raj Singh,J.
1. Supplementary affidavit filed today by the learned counsel for the applicant is taken on record.
2. List revised. None is present on behalf of the private opposite party no. 2.
3. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that he does not want to press this application on
behalf of the applicant, as he wants to file application for discharge through counsel before the court
below.
4. As requested, this application for the applicant no. 5 is dismissed as not pressed and the applicant
no. 5 is permitted to appear before the concerned court within fifteen days from today through
counsel and move an application claiming discharge. The concerned court shall after hearing the
counsel decide the application on merits, in accordance with law, within a period of two months
from today.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 1
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
5. No coercive measure shall be adopted against the applicant no. 5 for a period of two months from
today or till the disposal of the discharge application, whichever is earlier.
6. Heard Sri Umesh Singh, learned counsel for the applicant nos. 1 to 4 and Girijesh Kumar
Dwevedi, learned A.G.A. for the State respondents as well as perused the record.
7. The instant application has been filed seeking quashing of the cognizance/summoning order
dated 29.07.2017 passed by the learned Special C.J.M., (Custom), Lucknow in complaint case no.
3064 of 2015 (Vineeta Verma Vs. Pramod Verma and other) under Sections 498, 323, 504 I.P.C. as
also the entire proceedings of complaint case no. 3064 of 2015 pending before learned Special
C.J.M, (Custom), Lucknow.
8. It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the applicants that marriage of the applicant no.
5 was solemnized with the daughter of the opposite party no. 2, namely, Vineeta as per Hindu Rites
and Rituals on 24.2.2015 thereafter all of sudden on 28.4.2015, the Vineeta (daughter of the
opposite party no. 2) left her in-laws' house but her father lodged an F.I.R. against the in-law's of her
daughter under Section 364 I.P.C. on 29.4.2015.
9. Learned counsel for the applicants further submitted that in the aforesaid F.I.R., in the
police-station itself, a compromise has been arrived at between the mother of the applicant no. 5
(husband) and the opposite party no. 2 (father of Vineeta) and consequent to which a final report
was submitted by the Investigating Officer on 1.5.2015. All the articles, gold ornaments as well as Rs.
One Lakh were returned to the complainant, a copy of the compromise has been annexed along with
the application as Annexure No. 6. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that after
considering the statement recorded under Section 161 of Prem Prakash, the final report was
submitted.
10. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that after compromise she filed a complaint bearing
no. 3064 of 2015 against the applicants before the learned Special Judge, Chief Judicial Magistrate
(Custom), Lucknow on 14.9.2015 on the basis of false and fabricated grounds to mislead the court in
which statements of the complainant under Section 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. were recorded. The general
allegations of demand of dowry were made against the applicant no. 5 and his relatives and on the
basis of such statements, the applicants were summoned, which is under challenge in the present
application. Learned counsel for the applicants relying upon the judgements of the Apex Court in
Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P., (2012) 10 SCC 741, Achin Gupta vs. State of Haryana and Another :
2024 SCC Online SC 759 and Kahkashan Kausar Vs. State of Bihar, (2022) 6 SCC 599, submits that
for want of any specific allegation, merely on general and vague allegations, the prosecution of the
applicants herein is unwanted and is just a malicious prosecution. In support of his submission he
relies upon a judgment of this Court dated 3.10.2024 passed in Application No. 27067 of 2019
(Pranjal Shukla and 2 others Vs. State of U.P. and Another).
11. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that Vineeta has performed a second marriage and
out of her wedlock a child was born and in support of his contention, he has annexed birth
certificate of the child as SA-3 to the supplementary affidavit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 2
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
12. Learned A.G.A. opposed the aforesaid contention of the learned counsel for the applicants and
submitted that general allegations were made against the applicants and once the statement under
Section 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. had been recorded and on the basis of which complaint case has been
entertained and summoning order had been passed then there is no illegality or infirmity in the
impugned summoning order.
13. In case of Geeta Mehrotra (supra), the Apex Court has observed as under:-"
"19. Coming to the facts of this case, when the contents of the FIR is perused, it is
apparent that there are no allegations against Kumari Geeta Mehrotra and Ramji
Mehrotra except casual reference of their names who have been included in the FIR
but mere casual reference of the names of the family members in a matrimonial
dispute without allegation of active involvement in the matter would not justify
taking cognizance against them overlooking the fact borne out of experience that
there is a tendency to involve the entire family members of the household in the
domestic quarrel taking place in a matrimonial dispute specially if it happens soon
after the wedding.
20. It would be relevant at this stage to take note of an apt observation of this Court
recorded in the matter of G.V. Rao v. L.H.V. Prasad, (2000) 3 SCC 693 wherein also
in a matrimonial dispute, this Court had held that the High Court should have
quashed the complaint arising out of a matrimonial dispute wherein all family
members had been roped into the matrimonial litigation which was quashed and set
aside. Their Lordships observed therein with which we entirely agree that:
"there has been an outburst of matrimonial dispute in recent times. Marriage is a
sacred ceremony, main purpose of which is to enable the young couple to settle down
in life and live peacefully. But little matrimonial skirmishes suddenly erupt which
often assume serious proportions resulting in heinous crimes in which elders of the
family are also involved with the result that those who could have counselled and
brought about rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being arrayed as
accused in the criminal case. There are many reasons which need not be mentioned
here for not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the parties may ponder over
their defaults and terminate the disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
fighting it out in a court of law where it takes years and years to conclude and in that
process the parties lose their young days in chasing their cases in different courts."
The view taken by the judges in this matter was that the courts would not encourage such disputes.
21. In yet another case reported in (2003) 4 SCC 675 : AIR 2003 SC 1386 in the matter of B.S. Joshi
v. State of Haryana it was observed that there is no doubt that the object of introducing Chapter
XXA containing Section 498A in the Penal Code, 1860 was to prevent the torture to a woman by her
husband or by relatives of her husband. Section 498A was added with a view to punish the husband
and his relatives who harass or torture the wife to coerce her relatives to satisfy unlawful demands of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 3
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
dowry. But if the proceedings are initiated by the wife under Section 498A against the husband and
his relatives and subsequently she has settled her disputes with her husband and his relatives and
the wife and husband agreed for mutual divorce, refusal to exercise inherent powers by the High
Court would not be proper as it would prevent woman from settling earlier. Thus for the purpose of
securing the ends of justice quashing of FIR becomes necessary, Section 320 Cr. P.C. would not be a
bar to the exercise of power of quashing. It would however be a different matter depending upon the
facts and circumstances of each case whether to exercise or not to exercise such a power."
(Emphasis supplied)
14. In Kahkashan Kausar (supra), the Apex Court has observed as under:
"10. Having perused the relevant facts and contentions made by the appellants and
respondents, in our considered opinion, the foremost issue which requires
determination in the instant case is whether allegations made against the appellant
in-laws are in the nature of general omnibus allegations and therefore liable to be
quashed?
15. In Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P. [Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P., (2012) 10 SCC 741 : (2013) 1
SCC (Civ) 212 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 120] it was observed : (SCC p. 749, para 21) "21. It would be
relevant at this stage to take note of an apt observation of this Court recorded in G.V. Rao v. L.H.V.
Prasad [G.V. Rao v. L.H.V. Prasad, (2000) 3 SCC 693 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 733] wherein also in a
matrimonial dispute, this Court had held that the High Court should have quashed the complaint
arising out of a matrimonial dispute wherein all family members had been roped into the
matrimonial litigation which was quashed and set aside. Their Lordships observed therein with
which we entirely agree that : (SCC p. 698, para 12) '12. ? There has been an outburst of matrimonial
dispute in recent times. Marriage is a sacred ceremony, the main purpose of which is to enable the
young couple to settle down in life and live peacefully. But little matrimonial skirmishes suddenly
erupt which often assume serious proportions resulting in commission of heinous crimes in which
elders of the family are also involved with the result that those who could have counselled and
brought about rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being arrayed as accused in the
criminal case. There are many other reasons which need not be mentioned here for not encouraging
matrimonial litigation so that the parties may ponder over their defaults and terminate their
disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a court of law where it takes
years and years to conclude and in that process the parties lose their "young" days in chasing their
cases in different courts.
16. Recently, in K. Subba Rao v. State of Telangana [K. Subba Rao v. State of Telangana, (2018) 14
SCC 452 : (2019) 1 SCC (Cri) 605] , it was also observed that : (SCC p. 454, para 6) "6. ? The courts
should be careful in proceeding against the distant relatives in crimes pertaining to matrimonial
disputes and dowry deaths. The relatives of the husband should not be roped in on the basis of
omnibus allegations unless specific instances of their involvement in the crime are made out."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 4
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
17. The abovementioned decisions clearly demonstrate that this Court has at numerous instances
expressed concern over the misuse of Section 498-AIPC and the increased tendency of implicating
relatives of the husband in matrimonial disputes, without analysing the long-term ramifications of a
trial on the complainant as well as the accused. It is further manifest from the said judgments that
false implication by way of general omnibus allegations made in the course of matrimonial dispute,
if left unchecked would result in misuse of the process of law. Therefore, this Court by way of its
judgments has warned the courts from proceeding against the relatives and in-laws of the husband
when no prima facie case is made out against them.
18. Coming to the facts of this case, upon a perusal of the contents of the FIR dated 1-4-2019, it is
revealed that general allegations are levelled against the appellants. The complainant alleged that
"all accused harassed her mentally and threatened her of terminating her pregnancy". Furthermore,
no specific and distinct allegations have been made against either of the appellants herein i.e. none
of the appellants have been attributed any specific role in furtherance of the general allegations
made against them. This simply leads to a situation wherein one fails to ascertain the role played by
each accused in furtherance of the offence. The allegations are, therefore, general and omnibus and
can at best be said to have been made out on account of small skirmishes. Insofar as husband is
concerned, since he has not appealed against the order of the High Court, we have not examined the
veracity of allegations made against him. However, as far as the appellants are concerned, the
allegations made against them being general and omnibus, do not warrant prosecution.
21. Therefore, upon consideration of the relevant circumstances and in the absence of any specific
role attributed to the appellant-accused, it would be unjust if the appellants are forced to go through
the tribulations of a trial i.e. general and omnibus allegations cannot manifest in a situation where
the relatives of the complainant's husband are forced to undergo trial. It has been highlighted by this
Court in varied instances, that a criminal trial leading to an eventual acquittal also inflicts severe
scars upon the accused, and such an exercise must, therefore, be discouraged."
(Emphasis supplied)
15. In Achin Gupta (supra), the Apex Court has observed as under:
"25. If a person is made to face a criminal trial on some general and sweeping
allegations without bringing on record any specific instances of criminal conduct, it is
nothing but abuse of the process of the court. The court owes a duty to subject the
allegations levelled in the complaint to a thorough scrutiny to find out, prima facie,
whether there is any grain of truth in the allegations or whether they are made only
with the sole object of involving certain individuals in a criminal charge, more
particularly when a prosecution arises from a matrimonial dispute."
(Emphasis supplied).
16. Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court the instant F.I.R. is nothing but a concocted
story of demand of dowry by making general and vague allegations against the applicants herein.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 5
Shiv Shankar Verma And Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 4 February, 2025
The complaint lodged by the opposite party no. 2 though general in nature but she has tried to
improve version in the statement recorded under Section 200 Cr.P.C. but after perusing the
statement again, what fact comes out before the Court is that she has orally stated that she was
tortured by her in-laws, which is only a sweeping allegation. Therefore, this Court cannot loss its
sight that the final report was filed in the case crime no. 175 of 2015 on the basis of compromise
dated 1.6.2015 which indicates that the articles, gold items and other goods belonging to the dowry
were returned to the opposite party no. 2.
17. The application is allowed and the cognizance/summoning order dated 29.07.2017 passed by the
learned Special C.J.M., (Custom), Lucknow in complaint case no. 3064 of 2015 (Vineeta Verma Vs.
Pramod Verma and other) under Sections 498, 323, 504 I.P.C. as also the entire proceedings of
complaint case no. 3064 of 2015 pending before learned Special C.J.M, (Custom), Lucknow are
hereby quashed in respect of the applicant nos. 1 to 4 only.
[Brij Raj Singh, J.] Order Date : - 4.2.2025 Anuj Singh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149042813/ 6
