Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur
Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
Author: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A. Guneshwar Sharma
reportable
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 500 of 2018
1. Shri Thongam Homendro Singh, aged about 51 years, S/o Th.
Tompok Singh, resident of Khongnang Pheidekpi, P.O. & P.S.
Singjamei and District Imphal West, Manipur, Pin-795008.
2. Shri William Maram, aged about 36 years, S/o Disong, resident
of Taphou Naga Village, P.O., P.S. and District Senapati,
Manipur Pin-795106.
...... Petitioner/s
- Versus -
1. The State of Manipur through the Additional Chief Secretary
(RD & PR.), Government of Manipur, new Secretariat P.O &
P.S. Imphal and District Imphal West, Manipur Pin-795001.
2. The Deputy Commissioner/Executive Director, DRDA,
Senapati, P.O., P.S. and District Senapati, Manipur Pin-
795106.
........Respondent/s
B E F O R E HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA For the petitioners :: Mr. Anjan
Prasad Sahu, Advocate.
For the respondents :: Mr. Shyam Sharma, G.A.
Date of Hearing :: 25.06.2024/17.12.2024
Date of Order :: 27.12.2024
Page 1
JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
[1] Heard Mr. AP. Sahu, learned counsel for the petitioners and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 1
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
Mr. Shyam Sharma, learned G.A. for the respondents.
[2] The case of the petitioners is that they were initially appointed as Assistant Project Officer (APO)
on contract basis in the NREGA Wing of DRDA, Senapati vide order dated 04.01.2010. Vide another
order dated 12.01.2010 issued by the Deputy Commissioner/Chairman, DRDA, Senapati, in partial
modification of the earlier order dated 04.01.2010, engaged the petitioners as APO on contract basis
in DRDA, Senapati. The Deputy Commissioner/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati submitted
details of the officials in DRDA, Senapati to the Joint Secretary (RD & PR), Govt. of Manipur vide
letter dated 17.10.2014. The Joint Secretary (RD & PR) sent a letter to the Executive Director
(DRDA), Senapati on 18.10.2014 wherein it was stated that there was excess number of staff at
various positions under DRDA, Senapati and further requested to fill up the vacant positions
through duly constituted DPC from amongst the existing personnel, if found eligible against the
vacant posts and any excess manpower remaining after taking the above steps to be terminated
forthwith. [3] On 06.04.2016, the Deputy Commissioner/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati sent a
letter to the Principal Secretary (RD & PR), Government of Manipur thereby submitting the
proceeding of DPC for filling up of vacant post of DRDA, Senapati and it was stated in the said letter
that Page 2 after the Committee examined carefully the service records and ACRs of the APOs, the
petitioners (having completed 6 years of service) were fit for promotion to the post of Project officer.
As per the letter dated 07.05.2016 of the Additional Secretary (RD & PR), Government of Manipur
to the Deputy Commissioner/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati, the proceedings of the DPC for
filling up the vacant post of DRDA, Senapati was approved. Consequent upon the said order, the
Deputy Commissioner/Executive Director issued an order dated 09.05.2016, whereby the
petitioners were appointed as Project Officers on promotion on regular basis in DRDA, Senapati.
[4] The Secretary (RD & PR), Government of Manipur issued an order dated 18.11.2016 whereby as
many as 80 direct recruited contract employees of various categories of various DRDA were
absorbed and regularized in RD & PR Department against the posts created. However, the
petitioners were absorbed and regularized to the initial post of APO and not to the promoted higher
post of Project Officer. However, the other similarly promoted incumbents were absorbed and
regularized in their respective promoted posts. Being aggrieved, the petitioners submitted a
common representation dated 26.12.2016 to the DC/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati for
absorption as Project Officer as done in the case of similarly situated incumbents. The DC/Executive
Director, DRDA, Senapati wrote a letter dated 28.12.2016 to the Secretary (RD & PR), Government
of Manipur for absorption of the petitioners to the post of Project Officers in RD & PR, as they had
already been promoted to the post of Project Officer from the Page 3 post of APO by a duly
constituted Committee and further stated that the proceedings of the DPC was approved by the
State Government on 07.05.2015 and accordingly, the appointment orders had been issued for all
the staffs including the petitioners. The representation submitted by the petitioner is still pending
with the authorities.
[5] Respondent No. 5 filed counter affidavit stating that the present petitioners had already joined to
the post of APO on the communication made by the Screening Committee Meeting held on
17.11.2016, they cannot claim for regularising their services to the post of Project Officer by
promotion, as for promotion to the post of Project Officer requires 4 years of regular services in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 2
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
post of APO. It is stated that the experience gained by the petitioners as APO in the DRDA, Senapati
on contract basis cannot be counted as experience for promotion to the post of Project Officer in the
Department of RD & PR. It is also stated that since the petitioners were appointed to the post of
APO in the RD & PR by an order dated 18.11.2016, their appointment by promotion by an order
dated 18.11.2016 were treated as cancelled on the ground of being appointed as APO on regular basis
in the RD & PR, DRDA-Wing by clarification letter dated 21.11.2016 issued by the DC/Executive
Director, DRDA, Senapati.
[6] The petitioners filed rejoinder affidavit stating that the recommendation of the petitioners for
appointment to the post of Project Officer was made duly after holding the proper DPC. Therefore, it
is stated that the letter dated 21.11.2016 and termination order dated 30.11.2016 issued by the DC,
Senapati are in total violation of the established principle Page 4 of law. Further, it is stated that the
letter dated 28.12.2016 issued by the DC, Senapati superseded the earlier orders and clearly
explained that all anomalies/irregularities have been rectified according to the approved staffing
pattern of the DRDA Guidelines thereby the petitioners may be absorbed as Project Officers by
modifying the earlier orders. It is also stated that all the absorbed employees were contract
employees of DRDA Department and as such, all the employees are in the same footing and
therefore, the question of the petitioners being different from other employees does not arise. It is
prayed that the writ petition be allowed. [7] Mr. Anjan Prasad Sahu, learned counsel for the
petitioners submits that except for the petitioners herein, all other employees of the erstwhile
DRDAs have been absorbed in promoted posts. However, the petitioners are treated differently and
they have been absorbed to the lower post even though they were duly promoted to the higher post
of Project Officer. This anomaly was pointed out by the DC/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati to
the Secretary (RD & PR), Govt. of Manipur in its letter dated 28.12.2016 (Annexure-16)
recommending the absorption of the petitioners as Project Officer. It is plea of the learned counsel
for the petitioners that as a model employer, the State respondents ought to have treated all
similarly situated persons while conferring certain service benefits including promotion. It is prayed
that the State respondents be directed to upgrade the absorption of the petitioners from the post of
Assistant Project Officers to the post of Project Officers in parity with other employees.
Page 5 [8] In the written submission of the petitioners, it is relied on the decision of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 6994 of 2021: Dr. G. Sadasivan Nair vs Cochin University of
Science and Technology represented by its registrar & others.
"Para 33. Therefore, we are of the view that if the respondent university sought to
deny the benefit of Rule 25(a), in light of the proviso which was subsequently inserted
thereby limiting the benefit of the Rule, it ought to have done so uniformly. The
proviso could have been made applicable in relation to all employees who retired
from service of the respondent University following the introduction of the proviso,
i.e. after 12th February 1985. However, the action of the respondent University of
selectively applying the proviso to Rule 25(a) in relation to the appellant, while not
applying the said proviso in relation to similarly situated persons, is arbitrary and
therefore illegal, Such discrimination, which is not based any reasonable
classification, is violative of all canons of equality which are enshrined in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 3
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
Constitution of India.
[9] Another decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India and Others vs
Munshi Ram :2022 LiveLaw (SC)891 where the employees working under the same
employer-Railway Board working in different Zones/Divisions are required to be
treated similarly and equally and are entitled to similar benefits and are entitled to
the same treatment.
Para 7. "It cannot be disputed that employees working in different divisions/zones in
the railways are under the very same employer-
Page 6 Railway Board which is under the Ministry of Railways. There are 16 zones
and 68 Divisions in the Railways. Therefore, the employees working under the same
employer-railway Board working in different zones/ divisions are required to be
treated similarly and equally and entitled to similar benefits and are entitled to the
same treatment. As rightly submitted on behalf of the respondents, there cannot be
any discrimination inter-se. Under the circumstances, on the ground of parity, the
Commission Vendors/ Bearers working in the Northern Railway entitled to the same
benefits which are held to be entitled to all similarly situated Commission Vendors/
Bearers working under different Zones/Divisions. There cannot be different criteria/
parameters with respect to similarly situated employees - Commission
Vendors/bearers working in different Zones/Divisions, but working under the same
employer".
Para 8. "The Railways/ UOI/ Railway Board cannot be permitted to repeat the same arguments
which were raised before different Tribunals, High Courts and also before this court. Under the
circumstances, the respondents Commission Vendors/bearers working in the Northern railway shall
also be entitled to the same benefits which the other Commission Vendors/bearers working in
different Zones/Divisions are held to be entitled to. There cannot be discrimination among the
similarly situated Commission Vendors/ Bearers. To deny similar benefits would tantamount to
discrimination and in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Page 7 [10] The petitioner counsel also submitted that The Document dated 09/06/2016 which is a
letter to the Hon'ble Minister (RD&PR) Manipur, by the Direct Recruit District Rural Development
Agency Employees' Union that the respondent counsel has been referring to, wherein the signature
of the Petitioners has also been given is inconsequential as it is a letter praying for absorption. It
does not specify for what post. The petitioners wanted to be absorbed in the post they were
promoted to as Project Officer like all other similarly situated persons.
[11] Mr. Shyam Sharma, learned Government Advocate tries to justify the absorption of the
petitioners to the lower post of Assistant Project Officers in RD & PR, as they did not have requisite
service length for promotion to the Project Officer. It is the contention of the respondents that the
contractual service rendered by the petitioners in DRDA, Senapati cannot be considered. Referring
to the original Govt. file for Absorption of DRDAs staffs in various Line Departments [File No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 4
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
2/92//2007-RD(MC)Pt. submitted to the court], learned GA draws the attention of this Court to a
representation dated 09.06.2016 submitted by Direct recruit District Rural Development Agency
Employees' Association to the Minister (RD & PR), Manipur for absorption of direct recruit contract
staff of DRDAs. It is pointed out that in the List of DPC faced contractual staff of DRDA, Manipur
enclosed with the representation, the designation of the petitioners herein is shown as "APO", ie,
Assistant Project Officer. It is emphasised that the Association itself prays for absorption of the
petitioners as APO. Accordingly, it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed devoid of any merit.
Page 8 [12] This Court peruses the materials on record including the original government file,
considers the submissions made at bar and the relevant case laws. The short question involved in
the present petition is whether the petitioners herein are also entitled to be absorbed in the higher
promoted post in RD & PR as done in the case of other similarly situated employees of DRDA.
[13] The admitted facts necessary for consideration in the present case are: (i) the petitioners and
others were initially appointed in various levels of post in DRDA; (ii) vide order dated 09.05.2016
issued by DC/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati, the petitioners were promoted to the post of
Project Officer from the post of Assistant Project Officer in DRDA, Senapati on regular basis on the
recommendation of a duly constituted DPC; (iii) the recommendation of the DPC was accepted by
the State Government; (iv) vide order dated 18.11.2016 issued by the Secretary (RD & PR), Govt. of
Manipur, 80 direct recruit contract employees of various categories of DRDAs including the
petitioners were absorbed in RD & PR; (v) except the petitioners herein, all staff of DRDA were
absorbed in the promoted post and the petitioners were absorbed in the lower post of Assistant
Project Officer even after their promotion to the post of Project Officer; (vi) vide another order dated
24.12.2016 issued by the Secretary (RD & PR), Govt. of Manipur, 249 staff of various categories of 9
DRDAs were absorbed and regularised in RD & PR at the same posts held by them; (vii) only the
petitioners were absorbed to and regularised at the lower posts and this anomaly was explained by
DC/Executive Director, DRDA, Senapati to the Page 9 Secretary (RD & PR) vide letter dated
28.12.2016 (Annexure A-16) for absorption as Project Officer.
[14] The State respondents try to justify the absorption of the petitioners to the lower posts mainly
on the ground that they were not eligible as per RR, the contractual service in DRDA could not be
counted for calculating minimum service tenure for promotion, and the Association itself prayed for
their absorption as Assistant Project Officer. Surprisingly, such scrutiny was not made in case of
other staff of various DRDAs who were regularised along with the petitioners and afterwards. This
Court has perused the representation dated 09.06.2016 submitted by the Association to the
concerned Minister for their absorption in line department as regular employees. In the list of "List
of the DPC faced contractual staff of DRDA, Manipur", against the names of the petitioners, "APO"
was mentioned. Learned GA presumes that the request was for absorption as "APO". This Court is of
the opinion that such presumption is preposterous and without any substance. The list is nothing
but name of those contractual staff who appeared in the DPC. It is an admitted fact some of the staff
who appeared in the DPC were subsequently promoted. The petitioners were also promoted from
the post of Assistant Project Officer to the post of Project Officer in pursuance to the
recommendation of the DPC. The submission of learned GA in this regard is rejected without any
force. [15] At the expenses of repetitions, it may be emphasised that similarly placed persons are to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 5
Shri Thongam Homendro Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 27 December, 2024
be treated equally. In a recent decision passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of The State
of Madhya Pradesh v.
Page 10 Shyam Kumar [Order dated 22.07.2024; SLP(C) No.25609/2018]:
MANU/SCOR/87335/2024 @ Para 5, it has been held that benefits must be extended
to all those who fall within the parameter of a policy. Para 5 is reproduced below:
"5. It is true that an employee engaged on daily wages has no legally vested right to
seek regularisation of his services. However, if the competent authority takes a policy
decision within the permissible framework, its benefit must be extended to all those
who fall within the parameters of such a policy. Authorities cannot be permitted to
pick and choose in such circumstances."
[16] This Court is of the view that the ratio of the above-cited case is exactly applicable to the facts of
the present case. Here also, by making a comprehensible scheme, staff of the various DRDAs in
Manipur have been absorbed in RD & PR on regular basis. Except for the petitioners, all other
similarly situated staff were absorbed and regularised to their promoted post. However, the
petitioners were absorbed and regularised to the lower post of Assistant Project Officer, even after
their promotion to the post of Project Officer on regular basis on the recommendation of a duly
constituted DPC. The anomaly was explained in Annexure A-16 by the DC/Executive Director,
DRDA, Senapati. There is no reason to deny the petitioners from their absorption as Project Officer
in RD & PR. Singling out the petitioners cannot be sustained.
[17] Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed. The designation of the petitioners as shown in column
III at serial number 26 and 27 in the Page 11 absorption order dated 18.11.2016 (Annexure A-13)
issued by the Secretary (RD & PR), Govt. of Manipur is to be treated and read as "Project Officer" in
place of "Assistant Project Officer" for all purposes. The petitioners will be entitled to the
appropriate pay and allowances attached to the post of Project Officer with all consequential service
benefits wef 18.11.2016. If vacant posts were not available on the relevant date, State respondents
are at liberty to create supernumerary posts to adjust the petitioners, if so required. With these
directions and observations, the writ petition is disposed of. Interim orders, if any, merge with this
final order. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
[18] Return government file.
JUDGE FR/NFR Kh. Joshua Maring Page 12
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83931036/ 6
