Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur
Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
[1]
SHOUGRAK Digitally signed by IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
SHOUGRAKPAM
PAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAND SINGH AT IMPHAL
Date: 2023.05.16
A SINGH 13:13:59 +05'30'
W.P. (C) No. 388 of 2021
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh, aged about 57 years, S/o
M. Apabi Singh of Ngaikhong Khullen Bazar Mayai, P.O. & P.S.
Bishnupur, Bishnupur District, Manipur - 795126.
... Petitioner
-Versus-
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Commissioner
(Education/S), Government of Manipur, Imphal - 795001.
2. The Director of Education (School), Government of Manipur,
Imphal-795004.
3. Shri Yanglem Prem Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Late
Yanglem Mohendro Singh of Bishnupur Ward No. IV, P.O. & P.S.
Bishnupur, Bishnupur District, Manipur-795126.
... Respondents
With
WP(C) No. 389 of 2021
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh, aged about 57 years, S/o
M. Apabi Singh of Ngaikhong Khullen Bazar Mayai, P.O. & P.S.
Bishnupur, Bishnupur District, Manipur - 795126.
... Petitioner
-Versus-
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Commissioner
(Education/S), Government of Manipur, Imphal - 795001.
2. The Director of Education (School), Government of Manipur,
Imphal-795004.
3. Shri Yanglem Prem Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Late
Yanglem Mohendro Singh of Bishnupur Ward No. IV, P.O. &
P.S. Bishnupur, Bishnupur District, Manipur-795126.
... Respondents
[2]
B E F O R E
HON'BLEMR. JUSTICE AHANTHEMBIMOL SINGH
For the Petitioner :: Mr. T. Rajendra, Sr. Advocate asstd. by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40625884/ 1
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
Shakir Khan, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. A. Vashum, GA
Date of Hearing :: 20-04-2023
Date of Judgment :: 16-05-2023
J U D G M E N T
[1] Heard Mr. T. Rajendra, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. Shakir Khan, leaned counsel
appearing for the petitioner and Mr. A. Vashum, learned GA appearing for the respondents.
[2] WP(C) No. 388 of 2021 had been filed challenging the order dated 13-01-2021 issued by the
Director of Education (S), Manipur effecting transfer and posting of the petitioner from Ngaikhong
High School to Ngaikhong Junior High School. WP(C) No. 389 of 2021 had been filed challenging
the order dated 13-01-2021 issued by the Director of Education (S), Manipur appointing the
respondent No. 3 as Headmaster-in-charge of Ngaikhong High School as a stopgap arrangement till
a regular Headmaster/ Mistress is posted at the school. As the parties in the two writ petitions are
the same and the issues involved in the two writ petitions are interrelated, the present two writ
petitions are disposed of by this common order.
[3] The case of the petitioner is that he was initially appointed as Assistant Science Graduate
Teacher on 02-12-1987 in the Department of Education (S), Government of Manipur and he was
posted at Sumkhohen Junior High School, Churachandpur District. After serving for about thirteen
years in the said school, the petitioner was transferred to Thinungei Phubala High School in
Bishnupur District. Thereafter, the petitioner was again transferred to Ngaikhong High School in
Bishnupur District on 28-12-2013. After serving for about seven years in Ngaikhong High School,
the petitioner was again transferred to Ngaikhong Junior High School in Bishnupur District on
13-01-2021 vide order dated 13-01-2021 issued by the Director of Education (S), Manipur. On the
same day of issuing the last transfer order of the petitioner, the Director of Education (S), Manipur
issued another order dated 13-01-2021 appointing the respondent No. 3 as Headmaster-in-charge of
Ngaikhong High School at his Grade Pay without any extra remuneration and as a stopgap
arrangement till a regular Headmaster/ Mistress is posted at the school. Having been aggrieved by
the said two orders, the petitioner assailed the same by filing the present two writ petitions.
[4] Mr. T. Rajendra, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the previous
Headmistress of the Ngaikhong High School retired from service on 30-12-2020 and on her
retirement, the Ngaikhong High School was without a Headmaster and that in the absence of a
regular Headmaster and if a temporary arrangement is to be made, the seniority position of the
employees who are to be considered is very much required to be examined. It has also been
submitted that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3, however by neglecting the seniority
position of the petitioner, the Director of Education (S) issued the impugned order dated 13-01-2021
appointing the respondent No. 3 as the Headmaster-in- charge of the said school. According to the
learned senior counsel, the said appointment is in violation of the State Government's Guidelines
contained in its Office Memorandum dated 03-10-2020 for appointing the senior most person
amongst the cadre/ officials belonging to the feeder post of the said particular post. The learned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40625884/ 2
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
senior counsel vehemently submitted that only to escape from their arbitrary, malafide act of
appointing the respondent No. 3 instead of the petitioner as the in-charge Headmaster of Ngaikhong
High School, the authorities resorted to the most unfair, unjust and unexpected action and
transferred the petitioner to Ngaikhong Junior High School. It has also been submitted that the
impugned transfer order has not been issued in public interest but only to appoint the respondent
No. 3 as Headmaster-in-charge of Ngaikhong High School and to prevent and shut the mouth of the
petitioner from raising any claim in such appointment. According to the learned senior counsel,
such action of the authorities is mala fide, discriminatory and arbitrary and as such, both the
impugned transfer order and impugned in-charge arrangement order are liable to be quash and set
aside.
[5] Mr A. Vashum, learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents submitted that
before issuance of the impugned transfer order dated 13-01-2021, the petitioner was posted at
Ngaikhong High School by an order dated 28-12-2013. After serving for about seven years in said
Ngaikhong High School, the petitioner was transferred and posted at Ngaikhong Junior High
School, which is situated near the locality of the Ngaikhong High School, by the impugned transfer
order dated 13-01-2021. The learned Government Advocate further submitted that the transfer and
posting of the petitioner from Ngaikhong High School to Ngaikhong Junior High School had been
effected as a general transfer and posting of teachers in the Department of Education (S) and the
same had been carried out in the exigency of service and in public interest without any ulterior
motive or without any malafide intention. The learned Government Advocate also submitted that
the petitioner had failed to point out any arbitrariness in the State action or that the impugned
transfer order issued by the competent authority has violated any of his legal rights. It is also
pointed out by the learned Government Advocate that after the petitioner had been transferred to
another school vide impugned transfer order dated 13-01-2021, he is no longer the senior most
Graduate Teacher in Ngaikhong High School and hence, the question of the petitioner being the
senior most Graduate Teacher in Ngaikhong High School does not arise at all and that there is no
ground for interfering with the impugned order dated 13-01-2021 appointing the respondent No. 3
as Headmaster-in- charge of Ngaikhong High School as a stopgap arrangement till a regular
Headmaster/Mistress is posted at the said school. The learned Government Advocate lastly
submitted that the present writ petitions had been filed on the basis of misconceived facts and law
and accordingly, the same are liable to be dismissed as being devoid of merit.
[6] I have heard the rival contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties at length and
also carefully examined the relevant materials available on record. The admitted facts in the present
cases is that, before issuance of the impugned orders dated 13-01-2021, the petitioner was posted at
Ngaikhong High School by an order dated 28-12-2013 issued by the Director of Education (S),
Government of Manipur. After serving for about seven years in the said Ngaikhong High School, the
Director of Education (S) issued the impugned order dated 13-01-2021 thereby transferring and
posting the petitioner to Ngaikhong Junior High School, which according to the learned
Government Advocate is located in the vicinity of Ngaikhong High School. There is also no dispute
with regard to the fact that the impugned transfer order had been issued by a competent authority
and that the transfer order did not violate any statutory rules or executive instructions or orders
issued by the Government.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40625884/ 3
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
The petitioner challenge the transfer order dated 13-01-2021 only on the ground of malafide by
contending that he is the senior most Graduate Teacher in Ngaikhong High School and that he had
been transferred out from Ngaikhong High School in order to appoint the respondent No. 3 as
Headmaster-in-charge of Ngaikhong High School. On the other hand, the stand taken by the official
respondents is that the impugned transfer order had been issued as a general transfer and posting of
teachers serving in the Department of Education (S) and that the transfer order had been issued in
the exigency of service and for administrative reasons and purely in public interest. It is also the
stand of the respondents that the impugned transfer order did not violate any mandatory statutory
rules or executive instructions or orders issued by the Government and that the transfer order did
not violate any of the petitioner's legal rights.
[7] In the case of "Rajendra Singh & ors. Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & ors." reported in (2009)15 SCC
178, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under:-
"8. A Government servant has no vested right to remain posted at a place of his
choice nor can he insist that he must be posted at one place or the other. He is liable
to be transferred in the administrative exigencies from one place to the other.
Transfer of an employee is not only an incident inherent in the terms of appointment
but also implicit as an essential condition of service in the absence of any specific
indication to the contrary. No Government can function if the government servant
insists that once appointed or posted in a particular place or position, he should
continue in such place or position as long as he desires (see State of U.P. V.
Gobardhan Lal, SCC p. 406, para
7)."
"9. The courts are always reluctant in interfering with the transfer of an employee
unless such transfer is vitiated by violation of some statutory provisions or suffers
from mala fide. In Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar this Court held: (SCC p. 661, para 4)
"4. In our opinion, the courts should not interfere with a transfer order which is made
in public interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made
in violation of any mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide. A
Government servant holding a transferrable post has no vested right to remain
posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the
other. Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his
legal rights. Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or
orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party
should approach the higher authorities in the department. If the courts continue to
interfere with day-to-day transfer orders issued by the government and its
subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the administration which
would not be conducive to public interest. The High Court overlooked these aspects
in interfering with the transfer orders."
"10. In N.K. Singh V. Union of India this Court reiterated that: (SCC p.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40625884/ 4
Shri Moirangthem Kunjahari Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 16 May, 2023
103, para 6) "6. ... the scope of judicial review in matters of transfer of a government
servant to an equivalent post without any adverse consequence on the service or
career prospects is very limited being confined only to the grounds of mala fides and
violation of any specific provision...."
[8] Keeping in view the above well settled principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court and
also keeping in view the undisputed facts and circumstances of the present case, this Court is to
examine whether the petitioner had been able to make out any case for interfering with the
impugned transfer order. As stated hereinabove, the petitioner assailed his transfer order only on
ground of malafide action. It is a well settled principle of law that the onus of proving malafide
action lies to the person who makes such allegation and that any allegation of malafide action needs
to be specifically pleaded and proved by placing or producing sufficient credible and reliable
evidence. In the present case except for the bald statement made by the petitioner that he is the
senior most Graduate Teacher in Ngaikhong High School and that he had been transferred out from
the said school to appoint the respondent No. 3 as Headmaster-in-charge, there is no other material
available on record to substantiate the allegation that the authorities issued the transfer order with
malafide intent. Accordingly, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the impugned transfer order
only on the basis of the allegation raised by the petitioner that the said transfer order had been
issued by the authorities with malafide intent. Consequently, this Court is also not inclined to
entertain the plea made by the petitioner that the impugned order dated 13-01-2021, appointing the
respondent No. 3 as Headmaster-in-charge of Ngaikhong High School as a stopgap arrangement till
a regular Headmaster/ Mistress is posted at the school, is liable to be quashed and set aside for the
reason that the petitioner is deemed to be no longer a teacher serving in Ngaikhong High School
after issuance of the transfer and posting order dated 13-01-2021. In the result, the writ petitions
fails and the same are accordingly dismissed as being devoid of merit. Earlier interim order stands
vacated. In view of the facts and circumstances of the present case, there will be no order as to cost.
JUDGE FR / NFR Devananda
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/40625884/ 5
