Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July,
2024
KHOIROM Digitally
KHOIROM
signed by IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
BIPINCHAN BIPINCHANDRA
AT IMPHAL
SINGH
Date: 2024.07.23
DRA SINGH 12:38:39 +05'30'
CRIL. PETN. NO. 39 OF 2024
1. Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh, aged about 48 years, S/o
Shri Thongam Kumar Singh, a resident of Thongju
Ningomthong, P.O. Singjamei, P.S. Irilbung, District
Imphal East, Manipur- 795003.
2. Mrs. Thongam (O) Junreiwon, aged about 31 years, W/o
Thongam (O) Junreiwon Singh, a resident of Thongju
Ningomthong, P.O. Singjamei, P.S. Irilbung, District
Imphal East, Manipur- 795003.
3. Mrs. Rebeeca Sorokhaibam, aged about 33 years, D/o
Mrs. Adiki, a resident of Nagamapal Singjubung Leirak,
P.O. & P.S. Imphal, District Imphal, District Imphal West,
Manipur, Pin No. 795001.
.... Petitioners
- Versus -
State of Manipur, represented by the
Commissioner/Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur,
Secretariat Block, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West
District, Manipur-795001.
.... Respondent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 1
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
P a g e 1 | 11
BEFORE
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU
For the Petitioners : Mr. HS Paonam, Senior Advocate
assisted by Mr. S. Gunabanta,
Advocate
For the Respondent : Mr. SamarjitHawaibam, PP
Date of Hearing : 27.06.2024
Date of Judgment &Order : 23.07.2024
JUDGMENT & ORDER
(CAV)
[1] Heard Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel
assisted by Mr. S. Gunabanta, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners and Mr. Samarjit Hawaibam, learned PP appearing for
the respondent.
[2] The present petition has been instituted under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973 with the
following prayers:
(i) To admit this petition and call for records;
(ii) To quash and set aside the impugned
proceedings of the Special Trial No. 2 of 2022:
(iii) To pass any appropriate orders/directions
which the Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case as the ends of justice may call for.
P a g e 2 | 11
[3] The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 2
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
1 is the sitting Member of Manipur Legislative Assembly from 5-
Thongju Assembly Constituency. At present, he is conferred as a
cabinet Minister of the present Government and assigned the
portfolios of Power Department, Forest, Environment & Climate
Change Department, Agriculture Department and Science &
Technology Department. In the previous Government, he was
assigned the portfolios of Public Works Department, Power,
RD&PR, Information & Public Relations, Administrative Reforms &
State Academy of Training, Textiles, Commerce & Industries,
Manipur and the Petitioner No. 2 is wife of the Petitioner No. 1.
The Petitioner No. 3 is the complainant in Special Trial No. 2 of
2022 which is pending for disposal before the Ld. Special Court for
MP/MLA No. 1, Manipur at Lamphel Court Complex.
[4] The petitioner No. 3,in the Special Trial No. 2 of
2022, contended that she married the petitioner no. 1 on 31-1-
2018 in a ceremony (LOUKHATPA) and have been living together
till 26-11-2019 as husband and wife.
She filed a complaint case before the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Imphal West, Manipur thereby alleging that the
petitioners No. 1 & 2 have committed voluntarily causing grievous
hurt, attempt to commit offences punishable with imprisonment
for life or other punishments which are punishable under Section
P a g e 3 | 11
307, 313, 325, 354, 378, 498(A), 511 and 34 IPC arising out of
their domestic dispute.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 3
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
[5] The petitioners crave the leave of this Hon'ble High
Court to produce the complete documents enclosed in the said
Special Trial No. 2 of 2020 at the time of hearing.
The stage of the case is for consideration of charge
as well as consideration of application filed by the petitioner No. 1
for discharging him under Section 277 of CrPC, 1973 from the
Special Trial No. 2 of 2020 which is pending for disposal before the
Speical Judge No. 1 (MPs / MLAs), Manipur. It has also been
mentioned that neither the petitioner No. 3 in her pleadings nor
none of her witnesses made any specific allegations against the
petitioner No. 1 to substantiate the charges levelled against him.
In the meanwhile, vide agreement dated 31.05.2024,
the petitioners have come to a settlement in presence of their
family members/well wishers (Annexure - A/2) and the same is
extracted herein below:
"DEED OF AGREEMENT
This Deed is Agreement is made on this 31st day
of May, 2024, BETWEEN REBECCA SOROKHAIBAM, wife
of Thongam Biswajit Singh, resident Nagamapal
Singjubung Leirak, P.O. Imphal & P.S. Lamphel, Imphal
West District, Manipur (here-in-after called the FIRST
PARTY which expression shall include her heirs,
successors-in-interest, executors, administrators and
assigns) of the ONE PART and THONGAM BISWAJIT
SINGH, son of Thongam Kumar Singh, resident of
Thongju Ningomthong, P.O. Singjamei & P.S. Irilbung,
P a g e 4 | 11
Imphal East District, Manipur (here-in-after called the
SECOND PARTY which expression shall include the his
heirs, successors-in-interest, executors, administrators
and assigns) of the OTHER PART.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 4
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
.............................................................................................
.............................................................................................
.............................................................................................
............................................................................................. IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties
hereto after knowing the contents of this deed as read over and explained to them in their sound
state of mind put their signatures hereunto by way of execution of this deed in presence of witness
on the day, month and year appearing at the outset of this deed and this Deed is made in duplicate
and both the parties shall keep the originals with each other.
Witnesses Signature of FIRST PARTY
Sd/- Sd/-
(Th. Manihar Meitei) (Rebecca Sorokhaibam)
Sd- Sd/-
(Sorokhaibam Margaret) (Th. Biswajit)"
[6] The petitioners, out of affection, have
voluntarily/mutually agreed that they shall co-operate with each other in withdrawing all the cases
by filing necessary application before the appropriate Court and they, further, agreed that in case of
necessity, they would move the higher Courts for quashing of all other non-compoundable cases
pending against each other.
On or after signing the said agreement, they do not have any grievance left against each other and
they shall not level any allegations against each other or each other's parents/relatives or act in any
manner so as to harm and tarnish the reputation and image of the parties, in the family or the P a g
e 5 | 11 society at large. They have duly and peacefully settled their disputes to the best of their
satisfaction. [7] The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that the criminal
proceedings initiated in the form of Special Trial No. 2 of 2022 and the orders passed in the
aforesaid trial would amount to abuse of the process of law and quashing of the proceedings would
serve the ends of justice, as all the parties in the present trial comes to a settlement outside the
Court. Accordingly, the proceedings of the said Special Trial No. 2 of 2022 may be quashed and set
aside.
[8] In this regard, the learned senior counsel referred to Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code
(CrPC) and the same is extracted herein below:
"482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court.
- Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the
High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under
this Code, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 5
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
ends of justice."
Further, the learned senior counsel submitted that Section 482 of the CrPC empowers the High
Court to quash criminal proceedings in certain circumstances. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
catena of judgments, has concretized the grounds and circumstances in which a complaint can be
quashed under the said Section of CrPC.
P a g e 6 | 11 A. Lack of prima facie case : If the allegations made in the complaint, even if taken at
face value, do not disclose the commission of an offence.
B. Settlement between the parties: If the parties involved in the dispute have amicably settled their
differences and continuing with the criminal proceedings would serve no purpose. C. Abuse of
process of law: If the continuation of the criminal proceedings would result in an abuse of the
process of Court, such as when the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, or filed with malafide
intentions.
D. No possibility of conviction: If it is manifestly clear that there is no prospect of securing a
conviction based on the material available on record.
E. Interference with matrimonial harmony:
In cases involving matrimonial disputes, where the continuation of the criminal
proceedings would perpetuate discord and disharmony between the parties.
P a g e 7 | 11 F. In the interest of justice: If quashing the complaint is necessary to
prevent injustice or to secure the legitimate rights of the parties involved.
The instant case comes under the provision of Section 482 (B) and (F).
[9] In the circumstances, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners
submitted that since a settlement has been reached between the parties and
continuing with the criminal proceedings would serve no purpose, as there exists no
possibility of conviction based on the material available on record, the present
petition may be allowed. In case the Special Trial No. 2 of 2020 is allowed to proceed
inspite of settlement between the parties, the same would perpetuate discord and
disharmony between the parties.
[10] Furthermore, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners preferred
the Hon'ble Supreme Court's judgment passed in Jitendra Raghuvanshi & Ors. v.
Babita Raghuvanshi & Anr. [(2013) 4 SCC 58].The relevant portions of the judgment
are extracted herein below:
"14. The inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are wide
and unfettered. In B.S. Joshi, this Court has upheld the powers of the High Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 6
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
under Section 482 to quash criminal proceedings where dispute is of a private nature
and a compromise is P a g e 8 | 11 entered into between the parties who are willing to
settle their differences amicably. We are satisfied that the said decision is directly
applicable to the case on hand and the High Court ought to have quashed the
criminal proceedings by accepting the settlement arrived at.
15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to encourage genuine settlements of
matrimonial disputes, particularly, when the same are on considerable increase. Even
if the offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes and the
Court is satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably and without any
pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the
Code would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
subsequent criminal proceedings.
16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in recent times. The
institution of marriage occupies an important place and it has an important role to
play in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made in the interest of the
individuals in order to enable them to settle down in life and live peacefully. If the
parties ponder over their defaults and terminate f their disputes amicably by mutual
agreement instead of fighting it out in a court of law, in order to do complete justice
in the matrimonial matters, the courts should be less hesitant in exercising their
extraordinary jurisdiction. Itis trite to state that the power under Section 482 should
be exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when the Court is convinced, on
the basis of material on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue would 9 be
an abuse of process of court or that the ends of justice require that the proceedings
ought to be quashed. We also make it clear that exercise of such power would depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case and it has to be exercised in
appropriate cases in order to do real and substantial justice for the administration of
which alone the courts exist. It is the duty of the courts to encourage genuine
settlements of matrimonial disputes and Section 482 of the Code enables the High
Court and Article 142 of the Constitution enables this Court to pass such orders.
17. In the light of the above discussion, we hold that the High Court in exercise of its
inherent powers can quash the criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint in
appropriate cases in order to meet the ends of justice and Section 320 of the Code
does not limit or affect the powers of the High Court under Section 482 of the Code.
Under these circumstances, we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court
dated 4-7-2012 passed in P a g e 9 | 11 Rajendra Singh Raghuvanshi v. Aarkshi
Kendra Police Mahila Thana and quash the proceedings in Criminal Case No. 4166 of
2011 pending on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Class I, Indore."
[11] Heard both the learned counsel for the parties and perused the deed of agreement of the
petitioners filed herein and its contents and perused the cited Hon'ble Supreme Court's order
extracted above. It is evident that the case pending before the Ld. Special Judge No. 1 (MPs/MLAs)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 7
Shri Thongam Biswajit Singh vs State Of Manipur on 23 July, 2024
being Special Trial No. 2 of 2020 is of non-compoundable offence but, the issue involved in the case
pertains to matrimonial/family dispute between the parties and it is an admitted position of the fact
that this case was filed by the petitioner No. 3 against the petitioner No. 1 and 2. This fact is not
disputed/contested by the learned counsel for the State respondent.
[12] On perusal of the deed of agreement executed between the parties, I am satisfied that the
parties have settled the disputes amicably and without any pressure. On top of that, the present
petition is filed jointly by the disputing parties in the said case before the Ld. Special Court No. 1
(MPs & MLAs) and also satisfied that the said deed of agreement was made/executed in presence of
their family members/well wishers. [13] In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court's order relied upon by the petitioners P a g e 10 | 11 and the same
reproduced earlier the present case is squarely covered.
[14] In the light of the discussion made above, I am satisfied that this Court, in exercise of its
inherent powers, can quash criminal proceedings or FIR in the present case, in order to meet the
ends of justice.
Under these circumstances, this Court quashes the proceedings in Special Trial No. 2 of 2020 which
is pending on the file of the Ld. Special Court No. 1 (MPs & MLAs). [15] The petition is allowed and
disposed of. [16] Send an extract copy of this order to the Ld. Special Court No. 1 (MPs & MLAs).
JUDGE FR/NFR Thoiba/Bipin P a g e 11 | 11
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30525558/ 8
