Shri Udaya Kumar Jena vs Director Of Secondary Education on 20 January, 2021
Shri Udaya Kumar Jena vs Director Of Secondary Education on
20 January, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 120
Author: Biswanath Rath
Bench: Biswanath Rath
HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.2004 of 2002
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India.
-----------
Shri Udaya Kumar Jena .... Petitioner
Versus
Director of Secondary Education, Odisha
and others .... Opp. parties
For Petitioner ... M/s. J.K. Rath, Mr. S.N. Rath,
Mr. P.K.Rout, Mr. S. Mishra,
Mr. C.K. Rajguru and
Mr. D.N. Dash.
For Opposite ... Mr. B. Sapathy,
Party Nos.1 & 2 learned Standing Counsel for
School and Mass Education
Department.
For Opposite ... None
Party No.3
JUDGMENT
PRESENT:
THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH Date of Hearing and Judgment :
20.01.2021 Biswanath Rath, J. This writ petition involves a challenge to the order of
disengagement dated 04.12.2002 appearing at Annexure-6 brought by way of
amendment to the writ petition.
2. Sri Rath, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner taking this Court to the reference of the
Resolution of the Managing Committee dated 15.10.1994 submitted that the Resolution was the
reason of termination of the petitioner on the earlier occasion. Taking this Court through the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172770521/ 1
Shri Udaya Kumar Jena vs Director Of Secondary Education on 20 January, 2021
pleadings and the developments through Annexure-1, Sri Rath contended that the order of
termination of the Managing Committee was set aside by the Appellate Authority and for the
remittance of the matter to the Managing Committee for fresh consideration of the case involving
the petitioner however, providing opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, there was fresh
submission of charge-sheet on the petitioner through Annexure-4. It is pursuant to submission of
charge-sheet and asking for explanation through the show-cause notice, vide Annexure- 4, it
appears petitioner has already submitted his explanation vide Annexure-5 of the brief.
3. It is in this situation of the matter and once the termination order passed by the Managing
Committee in the year 1994 was set aside, Sri Rath, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner taking
this Court to the reason involving the impugned order at Annexure-6 submitted that there is no
question of again referring to the Resolution of the Managing Committee, which was not in
existence as per law. Further Sri Rath also contended that there is also a glaring defect in the
impugned order, inasmuch as, when the order of termination was passed on 04.12.2002, there
cannot be retrospective termination of an employee, which is also contrary to law. It is in the
circumstance, Sri Rath, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submitted that this Court
interfering in the impugned order ought to set aside the same and grant appropriate relief to the
petitioner.
4. In spite of appearance of a set of counsels for opposite party no.3-Management, nobody is
attending in the case. However, Sri Satpathy, learned Standing Counsel for the School and Mass
Education Department submitting his objection to the claim of the petitioner submitted that once
there is an order of termination, the same is appellable, but he however did not dispute to the
proposition advanced by Sri Rath, learned Senior counsel for the petitioner that there is wrong
application of non- existing of the Managing Committee again there cannot be also retrospective
termination involving an employee. He, however, submitted that for the development taken place in
the meantime that the vacancy caused for the termination of the petitioner, there has been an
appointment of a person, who has been paid all through. Sri Satpathy therefore contended that there
may be further complication in the event there is a positive direction in favour of the petitioner
herein, keeping in view the fact that no stay order on the impugned order has been granted while
entertaining the writ petition.
5. Considering the rival contentions of the parties and on perusal of the objection of Sri Satpathy
that the impugned order is appellable, this Court observes that the writ petition was entertained in
the year 2002 having the cause of action and kept pending in this Court for no fault of the petitioner
for last 18 years. It is in this view of the matter, this Court finds no worth directing the petitioner to
go for appeal instead this Court proceeding for deciding the matter on merit.
6. Now coming to the other aspect involved in the writ petition and looking to the contention raised
by Sri Rath, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the Resolution of the Managing
Committee terminating the petitioner dated 15.10.1994 since not being in existence for the order
involving Annexure-1 passed by the Appellate Authority, this Court on perusal of the order involving
Appeal Case no.16 of 1999 through Annexure-1, finds the concluding part of the Appellate Order
appearing at Page-16 and 17 reads as follows :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172770521/ 2
Shri Udaya Kumar Jena vs Director Of Secondary Education on 20 January, 2021
"When admittedly the applicant was terminated from service, the Managing
Committee has not produced any cogent evidence to have followed the principles of
natural justice by rendering opportunities to submit any show cause to the appellant.
The termination of the appellant is, therefore, set aside. The Managing Committee
should afford proper opportunity to the appellant on the charges against him and to
take a decision within 2 months from receipt of this order.
The appeal is allowed subject to aforesaid direction."
7. A bare reading of the aforesaid direction of the Appellate Authority, this Court finds the
submission of Sri Rath in claiming that the Resolution of the Managing Committee dated 15.10.1994
is no more in existence is justified. It is keeping this in view and now examining order at
Annexure-6, this Court finds for the impugned order taking support of a non-existing resolution and
declaration of such resolution being invalid by a competent Court of law, there was no occasion on
the part of the Managing Committee to again relying on such non-existing resolution in passing the
impugned order. Taking into account the allegation of Sri Rath that there cannot be again an order
of termination with retrospective effect, this Court also finds force in the said submission of Sri
Rath.
It is in the above scenario, this Court finds the impugned order at Annexure-6 dated 04.12.2002 is
not sustainable in the eye of law, which is hereby interfered with and sets aside. For the interference
in the order at Annexure-6, this Court in disposal of the writ petition in favour of the petitioner
directs the Managing Committee to work out the benefit in favour of the petitioner in accordance
with law.
With the above direction, the writ petition thus succeeds. There shall however be no order as to cost.
............................................. BISWANATH RATH, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
Dated 20th January, 2021/Uks, PA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172770521/ 3
