Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July,
2024
Author: A. Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh, A. Guneshwar Sharma
[1]
SHOUGRAKPAM Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DEVANANDA DEVANANDA SINGH
Date: 2024.07.26 12:54:39
SINGH +05'30' AT IMPHAL
WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024
Shri Harshal Desai, aged about 54 years, S/o Late Praful Desai,
a permanent resident of A-801, Suncity Apartment, near Bhulka
Bhavan/ Surya Flats Adajan, Surat, Gujarat - 395009 at present
under detention at Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa, P.O. - Lamlong,
P.S. Imphal East, District: Imphal East, Manipur - 795010.
... Petitioner
-Versus-
1. The Joint Secretary (PITNDPS), Government of India, Ministry
of Finance, Department of Revenue, Room No. 202, 2nd Floor
Jeevan Tara Building, Parliament Street, New Delhi - 110001.
2. The Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi - 110001.
3. The Superintendent, Manipur Central Jail, P.O. Lamlong, P.S.
Imphal East, District: Imphal East, Manipur - 795010.
... Respondents
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA
For the petitioner :: Mr. PN Lakhani, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. B.R. Sharma, CGSC &
Mr. Th. Vashum, GA
Date of hearing :: 23-07-2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 1
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
Date of judgment & order :: 26-07-2024
WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
[2]
JUDGMENT & ORDER
A. Bimol Singh, J.
[1] Heard Mr. PN Lakhani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. B.R. Sharma, learned
CGSC appearing for the respondents No. 1 and 2 and Mr. Th. Vashum, learned GA appearing for the
respondent No. 3.
The present petition has been filed challenging the order dated 28-02-2024 passed by the Joint
Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue (PITNDPS
UNIT) in exercise of the power conferred by Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1988 directing to detain the petitioner and kept in
Sajiwa Central Jail, Manipur, as well as the order dated 14-05-2024 passed by the Deputy Secretary
to the Government of India confirming the order of the petitioner's detention and ordering for
detaining the petitioner for a period of one year w.e.f. 29-02-2024. [2] The facts of the present case,
in a nutshell, are that the petitioner was arrested by a combined team of Narcotic Crime Bureau,
Imphal and Narcotic Crime Bureau, Guwahati on 05-08-2023 from his residence in connection with
a case being NCB Crime No. 02/NCB/Imp/2023 u/s 8(c) and 9(a) read with Section 21(c), 25A and
29 of the ND & PS Act, 1985 registered by the Narcotic Crime Bureau at Imphal, Manipur. The said
case was registered in connection with seizure of a commercial quantity of pseudoephedrine tablets.
Subsequent to his arrest, the petitioner was produced before the Special Judge, ND & PS Court on
09-08-2023, which WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
remanded him to police custody and thereafter to judicial custody and the petitioner is still kept in
Sajiwa Central Jail, Manipur. [3] While the petitioner was under judicial custody, the petitioner filed
a bail application before the Special Judge, ND & PS, Manipur, for releasing him on bail, however,
the same was rejected by the said court by an order dated 30-11-2023. Thereafter, the petitioner
again filed another bail application before this court for releasing him on bail and the said bail
application is still pending. While the petitioner was still in judicial custody in connection with the
above mentioned criminal case, the respondent No. 1 passed the Detention Order dated 28-02-2024
directing for detaining the petitioner in Sajiwa Central Jail, Manipur, in exercise of the power
conferred by Section 3(1) of the PITND & PS Act, 1988.
After rejecting all the representation submitted by the petitioner against his detention order and
after obtaining the report from the Advisory Board constituted under section 9 of the PIT ND&PS
Act, 1988, the Central Government confirmed the detention order passed against the petitioner by
issuing the order dated 14-05-2024 and ordering for detention of the petitioner for a period of one
year w.e.f. 29-02-2024. Having been aggrieved, the petitioner assailed his detention orders by filing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 2
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
the present petition.
[4] Mr. PN Lakhani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner raised only one ground in assailing
the impugned detention orders. The learned counsel submitted that the detaining authority has
knowledge that the petitioner was in judicial custody in connection with a criminal case WP(Cril.)
No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
involving seizure of a commercial quantity of contraband drugs, however, while passing the
impugned detention order, nothing has been mentioned or indicated in the said detention order as
well as in the grounds of detention that the petitioner was likely to be released on bail. It has also
been submitted that there was no cogent material before the detaining authority to arrive at its
subjective satisfaction that there was / is a real possibility of the petitioner being released on bail, in
the face of the provisions of Section 37 of the ND & PS Act, 1985. The learned counsel strenuously
submitted that there was total non-application of mind on the part of the detaining authority and
the impugned detention order had been passed in a mechanical manner and as such, the same is
liable to be quashed and set aside.
[5] Mr. B.R. Sharma, learned CGSC appearing for the respondents No. 1 and 2 submitted that even
though nothing has been mentioned in the impugned detention order that the petitioner was likely
to be released on bail, the detaining authority was aware that the application of the petitioner for
granting bail is pending before this court and all such facts have been clearly mentioned at para No.
1.1(cc) and para No. 3 of the grounds of detention dated 28-02-2024. It has also been submitted by
the learned counsel that the impugned detention orders have been issued by the detaining authority
after duly complying with all the constitutional, statutory and procedural safeguards and after due
application of mind and on the basis of the material facts available on record and after careful
consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of activities, materials collected,
the propensity and potentiality of the WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
petitioner to indulge in such activities. The learned counsel, accordingly, submitted that there is no
merit in the present petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
[6] It is trite law that detention of a person under the preventive detention laws is not by way of
punishment for committing an offence but to prevent the person from committing offences. If a
person is already arrested and kept in custody for committing an offence, there is no possibility of
committing any further offence by him while he is still in custody, therefore, there will be no need
for passing a detention order for detaining him under the preventive detention laws. However, there
is an exception to this rule, i.e. if the detaining authority arrived at his subjective satisfaction, based
on cogent materials, that there is a real possibility of releasing the person on bail and that the person
is likely to commit an offence while on bail, a detention order can be passed against the said person
under the preventive detention laws in order to prevent the said person from committing any
further offences.
[7] In the present case, the petitioner was already arrested and kept in judicial custody in connection
with the seizure of a commercial quantity of narcotic drugs and therefore, Section 37 of the Narcotic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 3
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 would have application and grant of bail would be
subject to the stringent conditions provided thereunder. Nothing is mentioned in the impugned
detention order that the detaining authority has arrived at his subjective satisfaction that the
petitioner is likely to be released on bail. Only in the grounds of detention, the detaining authority
WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
merely referred to the fact that a bail application had been filed without deciding whether there was
a likelihood of the petitioner being released on bail, notwithstanding the applicability of Section 37
of the ND & PS Act, 1985 and passed the impugned detention order. Accordingly, we are of the
considered view that the detaining authority passed the impugned detention order without
application of mind and in a mechanical manner and on this ground alone, the impugned detention
orders are liable to be quashed and set aside.
[8] We have arrived at the above conclusion taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of
the present case and the judgment rendered by the Honble Apex Court in the case of "Sayed Abul
Ala Vs. Union of India & ors." reported in (2007) 15 SCC 208, wherein it has been held as under:-
"19. An application for bail is required to be filed and considered by the appropriate
court in terms of Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure but in cases
involving the provisions of the NDPS Act, the detaining authority was required to
take into consideration the restrictions imposed on the power of the court to grant
bail having regard to the provisions of Section 37 thereof.
20. Section 37 reads as under:
"37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for offences under Section 19 or
Section 24 or Section 27-A and also for offences involving commercial quantity shall
be released on bail or on his own bond unless
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for
such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that
there are reasonable WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any
offence while on bail"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 4
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
The statute, thus, puts limitation on the jurisdiction of the court in the matter of
grant of bail. They cannot be ignored by any court of law, Several decisions of this
Court and of the High Court operate in the field."
"21. Proper application of mind on the part of the detaining authority must, therefore,
be borne out from the order of detention. In cases where the detenu is in custody, the
detaining authority not only should be aware of the said fact but there should be
some material on record to justify that he may be released on bail having regard to
the restriction imposed on the power of the court as it may not arrive at the
conclusion that there existed reasonable grounds for belleving that he was not guilty
of such offence and that the detenu could not indulge in similar activity, if set at
liberty,"
"22. The detaining authority furthermore is required to bear in mind that There
exists a distinction between the "likelihood of his moving an application for bail" and
"likelihood to be released on bail", While arriving at his subjective satisfaction that
there is likelihood of the detenu being released on bail, recording of the satisfaction
on the part of the detaining authority that merely because an application for grant of
bail had been filed, would not be enough. It would also not be sufficient compliance
with the legal obligation that the detaining authority had informed himself that the
detenu has retracted from his earlier confession."
"26. No doubt antecedents of the detenu would be a relevant factor but the same by
itself may not be sufficient to press an order of detention inasmuch as the principles
which govern the field so as to enable the court to arrive at a decision that the order
of detention can be validly passed despite the detenu being in custody are:
(1) if the authority passing the order is aware of the fact that he is actually in custody:
(2) if he had a reason to believe on the basis of reliable material
(a) That there is a real possibility of his being released on bail, and
(b) that on being released, he would in all probability indulge in prejudicial activities;
and (3) it is felt essential to detain him to prevent him from so doing."
WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
[9] Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the present case
and for the findings and reasons given hereinabove, we are of the considered view
that the detention orders passed against the petitioner cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the impugned Detention Order dated 28-02-2024 and the impugned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 5
Shri Harshal Desai vs The Joint Secretary (Pitndps) on 26 July, 2024
Confirmation Order dated 14-05-2024 are hereby quashed and set aside. Further, the
petitioner, presently incarcerated in the Sajiwa Central Jail, Manipur, shall be set at
liberty forthwith unless his continued detention is validly required in connection with
any other cases. With the aforesaid direction, the present petition is allowed. Parties
are to bear their own costs.
JUDGE JUDGE
FR / NFR
Devananda
WP(Cril.) No. 11 of 2024 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110201848/ 6
