Shri Nongthombam Premjit Singh vs The Special Secretary (Home) on 25 January, 2023
Shri Nongthombam Premjit Singh vs The Special Secretary
(Home) on 25 January, 2023
Bench: Sanjay Kumar, M.V. Muralidaran
DB Item No. 7
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
W.P. (Crl.) No. 46 of 2022
Shri Nongthombam Premjit Singh, aged about 45 years,
S/o (L) N. Biren Singh of Terakhongsangbi Wahengbam Leikai,
at present lodged in Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa.
...Petitioner
- Versus -
1. The Special Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur,
Secretariat, Imphal West, Imphal - 795001.
2. The State of Manipur, represented by the Chief Secretary,
Govt. of Manipur, Secretariat, Imphal West, Imphal - 795001.
3. The Superintendent of Jail, Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa,
Government of Manipur.
...Respondents
B EF O R E
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SANJAY KUMAR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN
For the petitioner : Mr. S. Rajeetchandra, Advocate
For the respondents : Mr. S. Nepolean, GA
Date of order : 25-01-2023
ORDER
Sanjay Kumar (C.J.), [1] Challenge in this writ petition is to the order dated 02-09-2022 of the
Special Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur, whereby the petitioner was subjected to
preventive detention in exercise of power under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988. He seeks a consequential writ of habeas
corpus to set him at liberty forthwith.
[2] Heard Mr. S. Rajeetchandra, learned counsel for the petitioner; and Mr. S. Nepolean, learned
Government Advocate, appearing for the respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103100680/ 1
Shri Nongthombam Premjit Singh vs The Special Secretary (Home) on 25 January, 2023
[3] The primary ground of attack urged by Mr. S. Rajeetchandra, learned counsel, is that the
authorities failed to comply with the procedural requirement of informing the petitioner of the
grounds of his detention despite being aware that he was completely illiterate. He would further
state that one of the documents relied upon by the authorities was not even furnished to the
petitioner.
[4] Perusal of the documents furnished to the petitioner along with the Grounds of Detention dated
06-09-2022 reflects that the 'History Sheet' was one of those documents. Para 12 of the said History
Sheet clearly recorded that the petitioner was completely illiterate and could not read or write. The
Deputy Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur, stated in his affidavit-in- opposition that the jail
authority had submitted parawise comments, vide letter dated 21-12-2022, to the effect that the
Office of the Superintendent, Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa, had translated the contents of the
Grounds of Detention into Manipuri for the benefit of the petitioner.
He further stated that apart from the statement of the petitioner recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.,
the statement of the co-accused, namely, Satminlen Kipgen, clearly revealed the petitioner's
involvement in the case. As rightly pointed out by Mr. S. Rajeetchandra, learned counsel, a copy of
the said statement of the co-accused was not even furnished to the petitioner.
[5] The file of the detaining authority produced by Mr. S. Nepolean, learned Government Advocate,
reflects that the left thumb impression of the petitioner was obtained on 06-09-2022 at 9.30 p.m. on
the Grounds of Detention dated 06-09-2022, in proof of his receiving the same. However, no
endorsement was made thereon to the effect that the contents of the said Grounds of Detention were
translated into Manipuri and explained to him. Further, the letter dated 20-12-2022 of the
Superintendent of Police, Bishnupur, furnishing the parawise comments does not contain a
statement to the effect that the Grounds of Detention were translated and explained to the
petitioner. However, the parawise comments furnished to the learned Government Advocate by Dr.
Mayengbam Veto Singh, Deputy Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur, stated so and recorded
that the Grounds of Detention had been served through the Superintendent, Manipur Central Jail,
Sajiwa, on the same day after translating the contents of the Grounds of Detention in the language
known to him - Manipuri (as given in the parawise comments submitted by the jail authority).
However, no separate parawise comments furnished by the jail authority aare vailable in the file. It
is not known as to how Dr. Mayengbam Veto Singh included this statement in his parawise
comments given to the learned Government Advocate. [6] Reference may now be made to the
Constitution Bench judgment in Harikisan vs. State of Maharashtra and others [AIR 1962 SC 911],
wherein it was observed that mere communication of the grounds of detention in English would not
necessarily be sufficient compliance with the requirement of Article 22(5) of the Constitution. This
observation was made in the context of a detenu who is not conversion with English language and
the Supreme Court held that in order to satisfy the Constitutional requirement in his case, the
detenu must be given the grounds in a language in which he could understand them, if he could
read. The Supreme Court further observed that, where the grounds are several, an oral translation
or explanation given by the police officer to the detenu would not amount to communicating the
grounds. Communication, per the Bench, would mean bringing home to the detenu effective
knowledge of the facts and circumstances on which the order of detention was based. [7] In the case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103100680/ 2
Shri Nongthombam Premjit Singh vs The Special Secretary (Home) on 25 January, 2023
on hand, it is an admitted fact that the petitioner did not even make a representation against his
detention. Mr. S. Rajeetchandra, learned counsel, would state that he was not aware of the
Constitutional right afforded to him to do so, as he was not allowed to meet anyone until
confirmation of his detention order. In effect, the petitioner was never apprised of either his right to
make a representation or the contents of the grounds of detention so as to satisfy the legal
requirement. In such circumstances, the order of detention cannot be sustained. [8] The order of
detention dated 02.09.2022 issued by the Special Secretary (Home), Government of Manipur, is
accordingly set aside. All consequential proceedings based thereon shall also stand set aside. The
petitioner, Nongthombam Premjit Singh, presently incarcerated in Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa,
shall be set at liberty forthwith unless his continued incarceration is validly required in connection
with any other case.
WP (Cril.) No. 46 of 2022 is accordingly allowed.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
Victoria
NINGOM Digitally signed
by NINGOMBAM
BAM VICTORIA
Date: 2023.01.25
VICTORIA 17:40:06 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/103100680/ 3
