Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The
Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
[1]
SHOUGRA Digitally
by
signed
KPAM SHOUGRAKPAM
DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DA SINGH Date: 2022.07.04
09:52:40 +01'00'
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & anr. ... Petitioners
Vs.
The Office of the Lokayukta Manipur & ors. ... Respondents
With
WP(C) No. 168 of 2022;
WP(C) No. 171 of 2022 &
WP(C) No. 225 of 2022
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the Petitioners :: Mr. N. Ibotombi, Sr. Advocate asstd. by
Mr. A. Rommel, Advocate;
Mr. H.S. Paonam, Sr. Advocate asstd.
by Mr. Niraj Paonam, Advocate;
Mr. Vinay Navare, Sr. Advocate asstd.
by Mr. Abdulrahiman Tamboli, Advocate
Mr. H. Ishwarlal, Senior Advocate asstd.
by Mr. Sh. Poireiton Meitei, Advocate &
Mr. N. Jotendro, Senior Advocate asstd.
by Mr. Murtaza Ahmed, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. M. Rarry, Advocate &
Mr. H. Debendra, Govt. Advocate
Date of Hearing :: 21-05-2022, 01-06-2022
02-06-2022, 06-06-2022 &
08-06-2022
Date of Order :: 04-07-2022
O R D E R
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 1
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
[1] Heard Mr. Vinay Navare, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Abdulrahiman Tamboli,
learned Advocate, Mr. H. Ishwarlal, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Sh. Poireiton, learned
Advocate, Mr. N. Jotendro, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Murtaza Ahmed, learned
Advocate appearing for the petitioners in WP(C) No. 161 of 2022.
Issue notice, returnable within four weeks.
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Mr. M. Rarry, learned Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondent No. 1 and Mr. H.
Debendra, learned Government Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondents No. 2 to 4,
hence no formal notice is called for in respect of the said respondents.
Petitioners are to take steps for service of notice upon the respondents No. 5 to 14 by speed post
within one week. [2] Heard also, Mr. H.S. Paonam, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Niraj
Paonam, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner in WP(C) No. 168 of 2022 and WP(C) No.
225 of 2022.
Issue notice, returnable within four weeks.
Mr. M. Rarry, learned Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondent No. 1 and Mr. H.
Debendra, learned Government Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondents No. 4 to 6,
hence no formal notice is called for in respect of the said respondents.
Petitioner is to take steps for service of notice upon the respondents No. 2, 3 and 7 to 17 by speed
post within one week. [3] Heard also, Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. A.
Rommel, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioners in WP(C) No. 171 of 2022.
Issue notice, returnable within four weeks.
Mr. M. Rarry, learned Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondent No. 1 and Mr. H.
Debendra, learned Government Advocate accepts notice on behalf of the respondent No. 3, hence no
formal notice is called for in respect of the said respondents.
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Petitioners are to take steps for service of notice upon respondent No. 2 by speed post within one
week.
[4] The aforesaid four writ petitions have been filed assailing the judgment and order dated
07-02-2022 and orders dated 10-03-2022 and 21-03-2022 passed by the Manipur Lokayukta in
Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020. As the facts and issues involved in the above noted four writ petitions
are common, the said four writ petitions are taken up and heard jointly for consideration of the
prayer made by the petitioners for passing an interim order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 2
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
[5] Before considering the merits of the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel
appearing for the parties, the facts and circumstances which led to the filing of the present writ
petitions are stated briefly hereunder -
One Shri Th. Nirosh Singh filed a complaint dated 25-09-2020 in the Office of the Manipur
Lokayukta alleging, inter alia, that the contract work for construction of 2x1 MVA 33/11 KV
Sub-Station Chakpikarong along with the associated 33 KV line and related civil works on Turn-Key
basis under NLCPR was executed by M/S Shyama Power (India) Pvt. Ltd. under Work Order dated
25-09-2009 with total contract amount of Rs. 9,45,80,605/- (Rupees nine crore forty five lakh
eighty thousand six hundred and five) only during the period from December, 2009 to December,
2015 and that the said firm failed to supply two Transformers to the Power Department though the
Department installed the Transformers somehow or rather without supplying the said articles and
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
thus, the company and the concerned officials of the Department colluded intentionally and wilfully
to mislead the general public by manipulating the public fund in their pocket. In the said complaint,
it was also alleged that the company executed only 4 kms. LILO (2+2) as against 45 kms. for which
sanctioned had been made by the Government of India under NLCPR and therefore, a balance
amount of Rs. 5,18,98,440/- seems to have been misappropriated.
[6] On receiving the said complaint and as provided under Section 20(1)(a) of the Manipur
Lokayukta Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred to as "the Lokayukta Act", for short), the Manipur
Lokayukta ordered for holding a Preliminary Enquiry into the allegations made in the said
complaint. After holding a Preliminary Enquiry, the Enquiry Officer, i.e., Dy. S.P., Manipur
Lokayukta submitted a 68 pages Preliminary Enquiry Report to the effect that a prima facie
evidence is well established against the officials of the MSPCL and the Turn-Key firm for committing
offences punishable under Section 7(b)/13 PC Act and Section 120-B/34 of the IPC.
[7] After considering the said Preliminary Enquiry Report as well as the comments of the concerned
public servants and the competent authorities of the Government and after giving an opportunity of
being heard to the public servants, including the present petitioners, the Manipur Lokayukta passed
the impugned judgment and order dated 07-02-2022 in Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020 holding that
there is a prima facie evidence against the present petitioners for committing offences WP(C) No.
161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
under Section 7(B)/13 PC Act and Section 120-B/34 of the IPC and that there is a prima facie case
against the petitioners for investigation. Accordingly, the Manipur Lokayukta passed the following
orders by invoking its jurisdiction under Section 20(3), 28 and 32 of the Lokayukta Act, which reads
as under:-
"[25] In the foregoing discussion, we have already made our considered view that
there are enough materials for coming to the decision that there exists prima facie
case for investigation. Accordingly, we pass the following orders by invoking our
jurisdiction under Sections 20(3), 28 and 32 of the Manipur Lokayukta Act, 2014:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 3
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
A) To utilise the service of Shri Shrey Vats, IPS (2017(RR) at present SP, Kakching to
investigate the present case. Shri Shrey Vats, IPS is directed to investigate the present
case by exercising all the power conferred under the Manipur Lokayukta Act, 2014
and relevant Statutes taking the Preliminary Inquiry report of the Inquiry Officer
who conducted the Preliminary Inquiry as an Ejahar for the purpose of registration of
the case. For registration of the case, we have decided, for convenience, that the case
should be registered at the Crime Branch Police Station, Imphal for the purpose of
registration of the present case.
The Investigating Officer, Shri Shrey Vats, IPS while conducting the investigation will not be under
the supervision of his senior officer of his department or the station where the present case is to be
registered. It is also made clear that the Investigating Officer shall conduct the investigation with
full co-ordination with the Director (Inquiry), Manipur Lokayukta. Entrusting the investigation of
the present case to Shri ShreyVats, IPS will be in addition to his normal duty wherever he is posted
without disturbing his posting and as such entrustment of the present case for investigation will not
amount to new transfer and posting.
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
B) The Investigating Officer, Shri Shrey Vats, IPS shall take necessary action to complete the
investigation of the present case within 6 (six) months from the date of registration of the case at the
Crime Branch Police Station, Imphal. It is also made clear that the Investigating Officer while
investigating the present case will not be under the supervision of his senior officer of his
department or the station where the present case is to be registered, and it is for the purpose of
maintaining the sanctity of Manipur Lokayukta and for not interfering with the proceeding of the
case before the Manipur Lokayukta and inquiry and investigation are parts of the proceeding of the
case filed before Manipur Lokayukta.
C) The Director General of Police, Manipur shall ensure the registration of the case at the Crime
Branch Police Station, Imphal for the matter indicated above and registration of the present case as
indicated above in the Crime Branch Police Station will be done immediately upon receipt of this
order; and for registration of the case at the Crime Branch Police Station, Imphal under our order
further approval of any authority of the police department or Government of Manipur will not be
required. We are passing this order in discharging our statutory duties. The Investigating Officer,
Shri Shrey Vats, IPS shall report the registration of the present case at the Crime Branch Police
Station to the Manipur Lokayukta through the Director (Inquiry), Manipur Lokayukta without any
delay.
D) In the present case, there is a report of the Inquiry Officer that many documents in relation with
the present project i.e. installation of 2x1 MVA, 33 kV Sub-Station along with the associated 33 kV
line and related works at Chakpikarong in Chandel, Manipur executed under the work order dated
25.09.2009 are suspected to be manufactured and recently created ones, many of the important
documents like Measurement Books (MBs) are missing and also many of the officers under the
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 4
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
Respondent No. 2, Shri N. Sarat Singh, Managing Director, MSPCL are suspected to be involved in
concealing/misplacing and destroying or manufacturing important documents. In such
circumstances, we, for proper investigation and also in the larger interest of public and also for
maintaining transparency in the administration by the Government recommend to the State
Government not to allow the Respondent No. 2, Shri N. Sarat Singh, Managing Director, Manipur
State Power Company Limited (MSPCL) to function as Managing Director, Manipur State Power
Company Limited (MSPCL) and entrust the function and duties of the Managing Director, Manipur
State Power Company Limited (MSPCL) to an official deem appropriate by the State Government till
the completion of the investigation. Further, Respondent No. 3, Shri Thockhom Kaminimohon
Singh, General Manager, Manipur State Power Company Limited (MSPCL) and Respondent No. 4,
Shri Manoharmayum Budhachandra Sharma, General Manager, Manipur State Power Company
Limited (MSPCL) should be taken out / transferred from their present posting till the completion of
the investigation of this case. These recommendations and directions are for larger interest of the
State Government and public at large and shall be implemented as soon as possible for unhindered
investigation of the present case as per our direction.
E) The Respondent No. 2, Shri N. Sarat Singh, Managing Director, MSPCL; Respondent No.3, Shri
Thockhom Kaminimohon Singh, General Manager, MSPCL and Respondent No. 4, Shri
Manoharmayum Budhachandra Sharma, General Manager, MSPCL are not directly involved in the
election duty of the ensuing 12th State Assembly Election, 2022 and therefore, their removal from
their present postings will not interfere with the election process. The above three officers i.e.
Respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 had already retired from their respective service WP(C) No. 161 of 2022
& ors. Contd.../-
on superannuation but they are now continuing on re- engagement.
F) Chief Secretary, Government of Manipur and Director General of Police, Manipur shall ensure
that the place of posting of the assigned Investigating Officer of this case may not be disturbed
without the prior notice to the Manipur Lokayukta."
"[26] Deputy Registrar, Manipur Lokayukta is directed to send a copy of this order
to:
i) the Chief Secretary, Government of Manipur;
ii) the Director General of Police, Manipur;
iii) the S.P., Crime Branch, Government of Manipur;
iv) Shri Shrey Vats, IPS 2017(RR) SP, Kakching; for information and necessary
prompt action and to the
v) Parties of the present case for information."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 5
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
"[27] Await investigation report."
Having been aggrieved by the aforesaid recommendations made by the Manipur Lokayukta, the
petitioners assailed the same by filing the present writ petitions for redressing their grievances. [8]
Mr. H. Ishwarlal, learned Senior Advocate, Mr. N. Jotendro, learned Senior Advocate and Mr. Vinay
Navare, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners in WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 submitted
that the Lokayukta is a creature of statute and it can exercise its jurisdiction only within the four
corners of the statutory provisions of the Manipur Lokayukta Act and rules framed thereunder. It
has also been submitted by the learned senior counsels appearing for the petitioners that the
Manipur Lokayukta derives its jurisdiction for ordering an investigation WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 &
ors. Contd.../-
and making appropriate recommendations only on the basis of a valid complaint and that the
Lokayukta has no power and jurisdiction for ordering an investigation and making
recommendations suo motu. It has also been submitted that in the present case, there is no valid
complaint before the Manipur Lokayukta inasmuch as, the signatures appended to the complaint
dated 25-09-2020 filed before the Manipur Lokayukta and on the basis of which, investigation had
been ordered by the Manipur Lokayukta are not the genuine signatures of the complainant and
those signatures have been forged and fabricated by another person other than the complainant.
Accordingly, it has been submitted by the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners that
the Manipur Lokayukta had transgressed its jurisdiction in passing the impugned judgment and
order and that the said impugned judgment and order is not sustainable in the eyes of law and is
liable to be quash and set aside as having been passed without any jurisdiction.
[9] The learned senior counsel further submitted that the present petitioners have already brought
to the notice of the Manipur Lokayukta about the forgery and fabrication of the said complaint dated
25-09-2020 by filing an application under Section 340 of the CrPC, which was registered as Misc.
Case No. 11 of 2021, praying for taking appropriate steps against the persons who fabricated the said
complaint, however, the Manipur Lokayukta deferred the consideration and disposal of the said
application and instead passed the impugned judgment and order. According to the learned senior
counsel, the Manipur Lokayukta should have first considered and disposed of the said Misc. Case
No. 11 of 2021 WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
before passing the impugned judgment and order dated 07-02-2022 and that such failure on the
part of the Manipur Lokayukta vitiated the impugned judgment and order.
It has also been submitted on behalf of the petitioners that on examination of the entire judgment
and order impugned herein, there is no evidence against the petitioners to make out a prima facie
case that the petitioners have committed offences under Section 7(B)/13 of the PC Act and Section
120-B/34 of the IPC as alleged in the impugned judgment and order. Accordingly, a prayer has been
made on behalf of the petitioners for suspending the operation of the impugned judgment and order
during the pendency of the present writ petitions. [10] Mr. H.S. Paonam, learned Senior Advocate
appearing for the petitioner in WP(C) No. 168 of 2022 and WP(C) No. 225 of 2022 submitted that
despite the comments furnished by the competent authorities in connection with the Preliminary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 6
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
Enquiry Report in connection with the allegations made in the said Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020 as
being unfounded and baseless, the Manipur Lokayukta passed the impugned judgment and order
dated 07-02-2022 in the said Complaint Case. According to the learned senior counsel, findings
against the petitioners and on the basis of which further investigation had been ordered are found to
be summarized at paras 6 to 9 of the impugned judgment and order. It has been submitted that a
cursory reading and minute examination of the said findings of the Manipur Lokayukta along with
the comments submitted by the petitioners as well as by the WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
competent authorities and also the clarification given by the Department of Planning, Government
of Manipur, the findings against the petitioner is only the alleged irregularities and not a case of
misappropriation of funds, gratification or otherwise and accordingly, the order for further
investigation under Section 20(3) read with Sections 28 and 32 of the Lokayukta Act is not only
highly misconceived and misplaced but the same was also in transgression of its jurisdiction. [11]
The learned senior counsel also submitted that the ingredients required for commission of the
offences under Section 7(B)/13 PC Act and Section 120-B/34 of the IPC is wholly absent in the
findings given at paras 6 to 9 of the impugned judgment and order and therefore, it has been
submitted that having regard to the provisions contained in Section 50 of the Lokayukta Act and
also the jurisdiction of the Manipur Lokayukta as envisaged under Section 14 of the Lokayukta Act,
the impugned judgment and order dated 07-02-2022 including the recommendations made therein
are liable to be quash and set aside as the same have been passed exceeding the jurisdiction of the
Lokayukta.
The learned senior counsel further submitted that in terms of the impugned judgment and ordered
dated 07-02-2022 passed by the Manipur Lokayukta, one FIR has been registered by the designated
Investigating Officer and investigation is going on with full cooperation from the side of the
petitioner. However, in an unprecedented manner, the Manipur Lokayukta is seeking action taken
report from the concerned authorities/ officials of the State Government not in connection with the
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
stage of the investigation but in connection with its recommendation made in para 25(D) of the
impugned judgment and order for not allowing the present petitioner to function as MD, MSPCL
and transferring out two other officers in the subsequent proceedings of the Manipur Lokayukta in
connection with the Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020. The learned senior counsel vehemently
submitted that the Manipur Lokayukta has no jurisdiction or authority to direct implementation of
its report or recommendation by the constitutional functionaries and accordingly, a prayer has been
made for passing an interim order restraining the Manipur Lokayukta from taking any action for
implementation of its recommendation at para 25(D) of the impugned judgment and order dated
07-02-2022 passed in Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020. In support of his contentions, the learned
senior counsel cited the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ram Kishan Fauji Vs.
State of Haryana & ors., reported in (2017) 5 SCC 533 wherein it has been held that -
"11. In the concurring opinion, Lokur, J. in Chandrashekaraiah case posed the
question whether the Lokayukta is a quasi-judicial authority. The argument on behalf
of the State was that Upa- Lokayukta is essentially required to investigate complaints
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 7
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
and enquire into the grievances brought before it and, therefore, he may be exercising
some quasi-judicial functions, but that does not make him a quasi-judicial authority.
The said submission was advanced to highlight the proposition that when the Upa-
Lokayukta is not a quasi-judicial authority, the opinion of the Chief Justice of the
High Court of Karnataka would not have primacy in the appointment and
consultation process. After adverting to the powers and functions of Upa- Lokayukta,
it has been held that: (SCC pp. 165-66, paras 105 & 107-08).
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
"105. Section 14 of the Act enables the Upa-Lokayukta to prosecute a public servant
and if such an action is taken, sanction to prosecute the public servant shall be
deemed to have been granted by the appropriate authority."
"107. The broad spectrum of functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of the
Upa-Lokayukta, as statutorily prescribed, clearly bring out that not only does he
perform quasi-judicial functions, as contrasted with purely administrative or
executive functions, but that the Upa-Lokayukta is more than an investigator or an
enquiry officer. At the same time, notwithstanding his status, he is not placed on the
pedestal of a judicial authority rendering a binding decision. He is placed somewhere
in between an investigator and a judicial authority, having the elements of both. For
want of a better expression, the office of an Upa-Lokayukta can only be described as a
sui generis quasi-judicial authority."
(iii) Decisions on the subject "108. ..... The final decision rendered by the Upa-Lokayukta, called a
report, may not bear the stamp of a judicial decision, as would that of a court or, to a lesser extent, a
tribunal, but in formulating the report, he is required to consider the point of view of the person
complained against and ensure that the investigation reaches its logical conclusion, one way or the
other, without any interference and without any fear. Notwithstanding this, the report of the
Upa-Lokayukta does not determine the rights of the complainant or the person complained against.
Consequently, the Upa-Lokayukta is neither a court nor a tribunal. Therefore, in my opinion, the
Upa- Lokayukta can best be described as a sui generis quasi- judicial authority."
"14. The aforesaid paragraphs would clearly show that neither the Lokayukta nor has
Upa-Lokayukta any jurisdiction or authority to direct implementation of his report by
the constitutional WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
functionary but when after investigation, it is found that the public servant has
committed any criminal offence, prosecution can be initiated for which prior sanction
of any authority is required under any law for such prosecution and the same shall be
deemed to have been granted."
"16. The maze needs to be immediately cleared. In the instant case, we are really not
concerned with the nature of the post held by Lokayukta or Upa-Lokayukta. We are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 8
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
also not concerned how the recommendation of the said authorities is to be
challenged and what will be the procedure therefor. As has been held by this Court,
neither the Lokayukta nor can Upa-Lokayukta direct implementation of his report,
but it investigates and after investigation, if it is found that a public servant has
committed a criminal offence, prosecution can be initiated."
[12] Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. A. Rommel, learned Advocate
appearing for the petitioners in WP(C) No. 171 of 2022 endorsed the submissions made by Mr. H.S.
Paonam, learned Senior Advocate and further submitted that no allegations have been made against
the petitioner No. 1 in the impugned judgment and order and that the only allegations made against
the petitioner No. 2 as unfolded in para 11 of the impugned judgment and order is that three
Measurement Books (MBs) of the work in question were found missing and that the petitioner No. 2
informed the fact of missing of MBs to the Managing Director. It has also been submitted by the
learned senior counsel that though the Measurement Books were lost, records of the quantity and
materials received so far, details of payments and persons involved while passing the bill can be
obtained from the bill copies of the 1st and 4th Running Account Bills of the scheme, since the
Running Account Bills were prepared in CPWA -26 in which under Column 4, WP(C) No. 161 of
2022 & ors. Contd.../-
entries of quantities executed up-to-date as per Measurement Books were made and under Column
5 and 6, payment details up-to date and since previous bills were made. It has also been submitted
that while passing the bills, the Divisional Auditor will check the bills both in MBs and Running
Account Bills in CPWA-26 and put up before the Executive Engineer for passing the bill and that the
Executive Engineer still based the bills both in Measurement Books and Running Account Bills.
According to the learned senior counsel, the missing of the said Measurement Books cannot be a
ground for alleging that a prima facie case has been made out against the petitioners for committing
offences under Section 7(b)/13 PC Act and Section 120-B/34 of the IPC.
It has been submitted that the present case is a classic example where the Lokayukta have not
appreciated the provisions of the Manipur Lokayukta Act, 2014 which is meant to check corruption
by public functionaries and transgress its jurisdiction by embarking upon a journey of finding fault
as regards irregularity occasioned in the process of implementation of schemes which does not
involve loss of public fund but still insisting to cause further investigation only on the ground of
presence of alleged irregularity which has been condoned and approved by the State Government.
The learned senior counsel, accordingly, made a prayer for passing an interim order suspending the
operation of the impugned judgment and order.
[13] Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 submitted that the petitioners
did not enclosed copies of the Preliminary WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Enquiry Report running into 838 pages in their writ petitions or have concealed the findings given
in the said Preliminary Enquiry Report about commission of irregularities/ offences by twelve
officials/ individuals of the MSPCL (including the present petitioners) and M/S Shyama Power
(India) Pvt. Ltd. By drawing the attention of this court at paras 45 and 46 of the said Preliminary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 9
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
Enquiry Report, it has been submitted by Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel that the Enquiry Officer
gave specific findings about commission of irregularities/ offences by twelve officials/ individuals of
the MSPCL (including the present petitioners) and M/S Shyama Power (India) Pvt. Ltd. and that
such specific findings against the said officials have been concealed by the present petitioners while
filing the present writ petitions. The learned counsel further submitted that the petitioners
concealed material facts while filing their writ petitions and approached this court without clean
hands, clean heart or clean mind and accordingly, the present writ petitions deserves to be rejected
outright on this count alone.
[14] Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 read line by line the entire
judgment and order dated 07-02-2022 passed by the Manipur Lokayukta in Complaint Case No. 2
of 2020 and submitted that the impugned judgment and order had been passed by the Lokayukta
after careful consideration and examination of the Preliminary Report submitted by the Enquiry
Officer, the written comments submitted by the concerned officials of the State Government in
connection with the said Preliminary Enquiry Report, the written comments submitted by the
present petitioners against the said Preliminary Enquiry Report as well as WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 &
ors. Contd.../-
after hearing the petitioners through their counsels. It has also been submitted by the learned
counsel for the respondent No. 1 that after careful examination of the Preliminary Enquiry Report,
the comments submitted by the officials in connection with the Preliminary Enquiry Report and
after careful consideration of the submissions advanced on behalf of the present petitioners, the
Manipur Lokayukta was of the considered view that there is prima facie evidences against the
petitioners for causing an investigation to find out as to whether the present petitioners and other
officials of the MSPCL have committed any offences of corrupt practices. Accordingly, the Manipur
Lokayukta by exercising its jurisdiction under Section 20(3), 28 and 32 of the Lokayukta Act made
the recommendations as contained in para 25 of the impugned judgment and order.
[15] Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel vehemently submitted that the Manipur Lokayukta was within its
power and jurisdiction in recommending for investigation against the officials of the MSPCL
including the present petitioners and the petitioners have not been able to make out any case for
interfering with the impugned judgment and order and that the present writ petitions have been
filed prematurely and accordingly, the present writ petitions are liable to be dismissed as not
maintainable. In support of his contention, Mr. Rarry, relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the case of State of Maharashtra Vs. Som Nath Thapa, reported in (1996) 4 SCC 659
wherein it has been held -
"30. In Antulay's case, Bhagwati, CJ., opined, after noting the difference in the
language of the three pairs of section, that WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
despite the difference there is no scope for doubt that at the stage at which the Court
is required to consider the question of framing of charge, the test of "prima facie"
case has to be applied. According to Shri Jethmalani, a prima facie case can be said to
have been made out when the evidence, unless rebutted, would make the accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 10
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
liable to conviction. In our view, better and clearer statement of law would be that if
there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed the offence, a court
can justifiably say that a prima facie case against him exists, and so, frame a charge
against him for committing that offence".
"31. Let us note the meaning of the word "presume". In Black's Law Dictionary it has
been defined to mean "to believe or accept upon probable evidence". (emphasis ours).
In Shorter Oxford English Dictionary it has been mentioned that in law "presume"
means "to take as proved until evidence to the contrary is forthcoming", Stroud's Legal Dictionary
has quoted in this context a certain judgement according to which "A presumption is a probable
consequence drawn from facts (either certain or proved by direct testimony) as to the truth of a fact
alleged." (emphasis supplied). In Law Lexicon by P. Ramanath Aiyer the same quotation finds place
at p. 1007 of 1987 Edn."
"32. The aforesaid shows that if on the basis of materials on record, a court could
come to the conclusion that commission of the offence is a probable consequence, a
case for framing of charge exists. To put it differently, if the Court were to think that
the accused might have committed the offence it can frame the charge, though for
conviction the conclusion is required to be that the accused has committed the
offence. It is apparent that at the stage of framing of charge, probative value of the
materials on record cannot be gone into; the materials brought on record by the
prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage."
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
[16] Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel also submitted that pursuant to
the recommendations made by the Manipur Lokayukta under the impugned
judgment and order, one FIR had been registered and a criminal investigation is
being carried out against the present petitioners and other officials of the Manipur
State Power Corporation Limited and that in the event of quashing the impugned
judgment and order of the Manipur Lokayukta by this court, the natural
consequences will be that the said criminal proceedings initiated against the
petitioners and other officials of the Manipur State Power Corporation Limited will
also be annulled automatically. In view of such likely consequences, it has been
submitted by the learned counsel that the nature of the present writ petitions are in
the nature of criminal proceedings and if that is so, the rigour of the principles laid
down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in a catena of its judgments with regard to passing
of an interim order for staying further investigation in connection with the pending
criminal cases will be squarely applicable and that in the facts and circumstances of
the present cases, the petitioners have not been able to made out any prima facie case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 11
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
for obtaining an interim order for staying the operation of the impugned judgment
and order of the Manipur Lokayukta and the criminal investigation being carried out
against the petitioners pursuant to the recommendations made by the Manipur
Lokayukta in the impugned judgment and order. In support of his contention, the
learned counsel cited the following judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court -
(i) (2017) 5 SCC 533 "Ram Kishan Fauji vs. State of Haryana & ors." (para. 28 - 31,
45, 51-56 & 61) WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
(ii) 2021 SCC Online SC 315 "Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
Vs. State of Maharashtra & ors." (para. 80) [17] Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel further submitted
that insofar as the recommendation of the Manipur Lokayukta for not allowing the present
petitioners to function as officials of the Manipur State Power Corporation Limited in their
respective capacity till the completion of the investigation as contained in para. 25(D) and (E) of the
impugned judgment and order is concerned, the State Government wrote a letter dated 17-02-2022
through the Secretary (Power), Government of Manipur informing the Office of the Manipur
Lokayukta that the recommendations at para. 25(D) and (E) of the impugned judgment and order
have been examined in the light of the administrative scenario of the Power Department and it was
observed that it was not feasible to accept the recommendations at present due to administrative
reasons. Mr. M. Rarry, submitted that in view of the said letter dated 17-02-2022 of the Secretary
(Power), Government of Manipur, the Manipur Lokayukta had merely requested the authorities of
the State Government for furnishing the reasons for not accepting the recommendations made by it
and that such action of the Manipur Lok Ayukta cannot be construed or termed as an act of insisting
the State Government to implement the recommendations of the Manipur Lokayukta. The learned
counsel, accordingly, submitted that there is no ground or reason for passing any interim order. [18]
After hearing the submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties and on careful
consideration of the points advanced by them, this court is of the considered view that the issues
raised in the WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
present batch of writ petitions will require careful examination and consideration after giving the
parties a reasonable opportunity to exchange their pleadings and at a later stage. At the present
stage, this court is not inclined to decide the issues raised by the learned counsel appearing for the
parties by appreciating the evidences and by giving findings, which may cause prejudice to the
parties in the present litigation. In my considered view, the only point to be considered by this court
at this stage is whether there is any ground or justification for passing an interim order for
suspending the operation of the impugned orders of the Manipur Lokayukta which may result in
curtailing or stalling the criminal investigation being presently carried out against the petitioners
and other officials of the Manipur State Power Corporation Limited.
In my considered opinion, the grievances of the petitioners are basically against only two of the
recommendations made by the Manipur Lokayukta in the impugned judgment and order, i.e., (i) for
conducting a criminal investigation against them; and (ii) for not allowing the petitioners to
continue as officials of the Manipur State Power Corporation Limited in their respective capacity till
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 12
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
the completion of the said investigation. Such recommendations have been made by the Manipur
Lokayukta in exercise of the statutory power conferred to it under Section 20(3)(a) and Section
32(1) of the Lokayukta Act.
After hearing the rival submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties and after careful
examination of the records placed before this court in connection with the present writ petitions,
this WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
court is of the considered view that the Manipur Lokayukta has the power and jurisdiction to made
such recommendations and this court did not find any material or ground to interfere with such
recommendations at this stage of the proceedings of the present writ petitions. Moreover, as the
Manipur Lokayukta had recommended for conducting an investigation strictly in terms of the
relevant provisions of the act and rules, no civil consequences against the petitioners follows from
such action of the Manipur Lokayukta and the petitioners cannot be said to be aggrieved by such
action of the Manipur Lokayukta and accordingly, this court is not inclined to pass any interim order
at this stage.
The parameters which are required to be considered before passing an interim order for staying
further investigation pending the quashing petitions under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and / or Article 226
of the Constitution of India had been clearly laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in a catena of its
judgments. In the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra & ors.,
reported in 2021 SCC Online SC 315, the Hon'ble Apex Court after referring to a number of its
judgments have laid down as under -
"80. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, our final conclusions on
the principal/core issue, whether the High Court would be justified in passing an
interim order of stay of investigation and/or "no coercive steps to be adopted", during
the pendency of the quashing petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C and/ or under Article
226 of the Constitution of India and in what circumstances and whether the High
Court would be justified in passing the order of not to arrest the accused or "no
coercive steps to be adopted" during the investigation or till WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 &
ors. Contd.../-
the final report / chargesheet is filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C., while
dismissing/disposing of/not entertaining/not quashing the criminal
proceedings/complaint/FIR in exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, our final conclusions are as under:
"i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure contained in Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a
cognizable offence;
"ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the cognizable offences;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 13
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
"iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence of any kind is disclosed
in the first information report that the Court will not permit an investigation to go on;
"iv) The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly with circumspection, as it
has been observed, in the 'rarest of rare cases (not to be confused with the formation
in the context of death penalty).
"v) While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is sought, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint;
"vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the initial stage;
"vii) Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an exception rather than an ordinary
rule;
"viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping the jurisdiction of the police,
since the two organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one
ought not to tread over the other sphere;
"ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary, not
overlapping;
"x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference would result in miscarriage of
justice, the Court and the judicial process should not interfere at the stage of
investigation of offences;
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
"xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer an arbitrary
jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice;
"xii) The first information report is not an encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts
and details relating to the offence reported.
Therefore, when the investigation by the police is in progress, the court should not go into the merits
of the allegations in the FIR. Police must be permitted to complete the investigation. It would be
premature to pronounce the conclusion based on hazy facts that the complaint/FIR does not
deserve to be investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law. After investigation, if the
investigating officer finds that there is no substance in the application made by the complainant, the
investigating officer may file an appropriate report/summary before the learned Magistrate which
may be considered by the learned Magistrate in accordance with the known procedure;
"xiii) The power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is very wide, but conferment of wide
power requires the court to be more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 14
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
duty on the court;
"xiv) However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit, regard being had to the
parameters of quashing and the self-restraint imposed by law, more particularly the
parameters laid down by this Court in the cases of R.P. Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal
(supra), has the jurisdiction to quash the FIR/complaint; "xv) When a prayer for
quashing the FIR is made by the alleged accused and the court when it exercises the
power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., only has to consider whether the allegations in the
FIR disclose commission of a cognizable offence or not. The court is not required to
consider on merits whether or not the merits of the allegations make out a cognizable
offence and the court has to permit the investigating agency/police to investigate the
allegations in the FIR; "xvi) The aforesaid parameters would be applicable and/or the
aforesaid aspects are required to be considered by the High Court while passing an
interim order in a quashing petition in WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
However, an interim order of stay of investigation during the pendency of the quashing petition can
be passed with circumspection. Such an interim order should not require to be passed routinely,
casually and/or mechanically. Normally, when the investigation is in progress and the facts are hazy
and the entire evidence/material is not before the High Court, the High Court should restrain itself
from passing the interim order of not to arrest or "no coercive steps to be adopted" and the accused
should be relegated to apply for anticipatory bail under Section 438 Cr.P.C. before the competent
court. The High Court shall not and as such is not justified in passing the order of not to arrest
and/or "no coercive steps" either during the investigation or till the investigation is completed
and/or till the final report/chargesheet is filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C., while
dismissing/disposing of the quashing petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226
of the Constitution of India.
"xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie of the opinion that an
exceptional case is made out for grant of interim stay of further investigation, after
considering the broad parameters while exercising the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India referred to hereinabove,
the High Court has to give brief reasons why such an interim order is warranted
and/or is required to be passed so that it can demonstrate the application of mind by
the Court and the higher forum can consider what was weighed with the High Court
while passing such an interim order.
"xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High Court of "no coercive steps to
be adopted" within the aforesaid parameters, the High Court must clarify what does
it mean by "no coercive steps to be adopted" as the term "no coercive steps to be
adopted" can be said to be too vague and/or broad which can be misunderstood
and/or misapplied."
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 15
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
In view of the above principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd (supra) and taking into consideration the
submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and on
perusal of the records of the present cases, this court did not find any ground or
justification for passing any interim order at this stage which may result in staying
the criminal investigation against the petitioners.
[19] Even though the Manipur Lokayukta has the power and jurisdiction to make recommendation
for not allowing the petitioners to continue as officials of the Manipur State Power Corporation
Limited in their respective capacity till completion of the investigation as provided under Section
32(1) of the Lokayukta Act and even though this court did not find any material or ground for
interfering with such recommendations at this stage, the question still remains as to whether the
Manipur Lokayukta is justified or has the jurisdiction or authority to insist or direct the
implementation of such recommendations. According to Mr. M. Rarry, learned counsel, the
Manipur Lokayukta never insisted or directed the authorities of the State Government to implement
its recommendation for not allowing the petitioners to function as officials of the Manipur State
Power Corporation Limited in their respective capacity but had only sought for furnishing the
reasons for not accepting such recommendations in view of the letter dated 17-02-2022 of the
Secretary (Power), Government of Manipur wherein it has been intimated that it was not feasible to
accept such recommendations.
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Mr. H.S. Paonam, learned Senior Advocate, on the other hand, submitted that the Manipur
Lokayukta passed several orders directing the concerned officials of the State Government to appear
before it personally and insisting them to give reasons or justification for not accepting such
recommendations and pressurizing the State officials to implement such recommendations if they
failed to give reasons and that such factums are clearly reflected in the proceedings of the Manipur
Lokayukta in connection with the Complaint Case No. 2 of 2020 pending before the Manipur
Lokayukta.
Mr. H. Debendra, learned Government Advocate submitted that the recommendations of the
Manipur Lokayukta, for not allowing the petitioners to function as officials of the Manipur State
Power Corporation Limited in their respective capacity till the completion of the investigation, was
placed before the State Cabinet for its consideration, however, the State Cabinet had deferred the
matter in relation to the said recommendations made by the Manipur Lokayukta by stating that the
Power Department should re-submit the matter for consideration of the Cabinet after incorporating
the decisions of this court in the pending writ petitions and accordingly, the State Government is yet
to take a decision with regard to the said recommendation of the Manipur Lokayukta. [20] On
careful consideration of the rival submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties, this
court is of the tentative view that the Manipur Lokayukta was not justified in insisting to furnish the
reasons WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 16
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
for not accepting such recommendations since the State Government is yet to take a decision with
regard to the said recommendation.
In the case of Chandrashekaraiah Vs. Janekere C. Krishna, reported in (2013) 3 SCC 117, the Hon'ble
Apex Court held in para. 41 of its judgment that -
"41. The Governor of the State, acting in his discretion, if accepts the report of the
Lokayukta against the Chief Minister, then he has to resign from the post. So also, if
the Chief Minister accepts such a report against a Minister, then he has to resign
from the post. The Lokayukta or Upa-Lokayukta, however, has no jurisdiction or
power to direct the Governor or the Chief Minister to implement his report or direct
resignation from the office they hold, which depends upon the question whether the
Governor or the Chief Minister, as the case may be, accepts the report or not. But
when the Lokayukta or Upa-Lokayukta, if after the investigation, is satisfied that the
public servant has committed any criminal offence, prosecution can be initiated, for
which prior sanction of any authority required under any law for such prosecution,
shall also be deemed to have been granted."
In the case of Ram Kishan Fauji Vs. State of Haryana & ors., reported in (2017) 5 SCC 533, the
Hon'ble Apex Court held as under -
"14. The aforesaid paragraphs would clearly show that neither the Lokayukta nor has
Upa-Lokayukta any jurisdiction or authority to direct implementation of his report by
the constitutional functionary but when after investigation, it is found that the public
servant has committed any criminal offence, prosecution can be initiated for which
prior sanction of any authority is required under any law for such prosecution and
the same shall be deemed to have been granted."
"16. The maze needs to be immediately cleared. In the instant case, we are really not
concerned with the nature of the post held by WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Lokayukta or Upa-Lokayukta. We are also not concerned how the recommendation of
the said authorities is to be challenged and what will be the procedure therefor. As
has been held by this Court, neither the Lokayukta nor can Upa-Lokayukta direct
implementation of his report, but it investigates and after investigation, if it is found
that a public servant has committed a criminal offence, prosecution can be initiated."
In view of the above quoted decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court and as the State Government is yet
to take a decision with regard to the recommendations of the Manipur Lokayukta for not allowing
the petitioners to continue in their respective official capacity in the Manipur State Power
Corporation Limited till the completion of the investigation, this court hope and trust that the
Manipur Lokayukta will not insist or direct the authorities of the State Government to implement or
carried out such recommendations. It is, however, made clear that the above observations made by
this court should not be construed as an interim order restraining the State Government from taking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 17
Shri Thokchom Kaminimohon Singh & Anr vs The Office Of The Lokayukta Manipur & Ors on 4 July, 2022
a decision as to whether the State Government will accept the aforesaid recommendations of the
Lokayukta as mandated under Section 32(2) of the Lokayukta Act. It is hoped and trust that the
State Government will take a decision with regard to the aforesaid recommendations of the Manipur
Lo kayukta as mandated under Section 32(2) of the Lokayukta Act as early as possible.
List these cases again on 01-08-2022.
JUDGE
Devananda
WP(C) No. 161 of 2022 & ors. Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18890510/ 18
