Shri. K.S. Lenminthang Alias ... vs Chairman on 17 September, 2024
Shri. K.S. Lenminthang Alias ... vs Chairman on 17 September,
2024
SHAMURAILATPAM SUSHIL Digitally signed by SHAMURAILATPAM Page |1
SUSHIL SHARMA
SHARMA Date: 2024.09.20 13:29:20 +05'30' Item No. 113
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 67 of 2024
Shri. K.S. Lenminthang alias Lenminthang Keishing,
aged about 41 years, S/O K.S. Mohan, resident of
Nambashi Kachumram Village, P.O. Yairipok, P.S.
Kasom Khullen, Kasom Khullen Sub-Division,
Kamjong District, Manipur - 795149.
...Petitioner
-Versus-
1. Chairman, Board of Secondary Education, Manipur,
Babupara, P.O & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West District,
Manipur- 795001.
2. State of Manipur, represented by Secretary, Board of
Secondary Education, Manipur, Babupara, P.O. &
P.S. Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur- 795001.
3. Head Master/Head Mistress, Thambaljao High
School, Uripok, Lamphelpat, Imphal West District,
Manipur- 795004.
.... Respondents
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU KABUI
For the Petitioner :: Mr. Tungrei Ngakang
For the Respondents :: Mr. Irom Denning, Advocate
for R-1 and R-2;
Mr. Dayali Elangbam, Advocate for
R-3
Date of Hearing and
Judgment & Order :: 17.09.2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34228773/ 1
Shri. K.S. Lenminthang Alias ... vs Chairman on 17 September, 2024
WP(C) No. 67 of 2024
Page |2
JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(ORAL)
Siddharth Mridul (C.J.),
1. Shri. K.S. Lenminthang alias Lenminthang Keishing (hereinafter referred to as Petitioner) has
approached this Court by way of the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India essentially seeking a direction to the Board of Secondary Education, Manipur (hereinafter
referred to as "the Board") to process his name change application as well as to declare the byelaws
relating to change of name as ultra vires the Constitution.
2. It is the petitioner's asseveration that he was born and brought up at Nambashi Kachumram
Village and he did his initial schooling from Thambaljao High School, Uripok, Imphal West. The
petitioner took admission in the above said school in the year 1993 bearing admission No. 37 Class
V, and his name is recorded as Lenngam Keishing, resident of Nambashi village, Tangkhul Tribe.
The petitioner asserts that his father had named him as "Adriel Yurthan Keishing" but since his
mother belongs to one of the constituent tribes of Kuki-Zomi, she gave him the nickname as "KS
Lenminthang alias Lenminthang Keishing".
3. In view of the foregoing, it is the petitioner's contention that owing to an inadvertent mistake, his
name was originally incorrectly recorded as "Lenngam Keishing" in the school record.
Page |3
4. However; admittedly; subsequently the petitioner's name has been reflected as "KS.
Lenminthang" in his academic records including matriculate Admit Card, Marksheet, High School
Leaving Certificate, etc.
5. The petitioner passed the matriculate examination in the year 1998 from Thambaljao High School
which records his name as "K.S. Lenminthang alias Lenminthang Keishing".
6. The petitioner is desirous of changing his name from "K.S. Lenminthang alias Lenminthang
Keishing" to "Adriel Yurthan Keishing".
7. The petitioner, therefore, filed an application before the Board seeking change of name, which
application the latter did not process, in view of the extant bye-laws, which permit change of name
only before the publication of the results of the application and not otherwise, except upon a
direction issued in this behalf by a Court of law.
8. There is no quarrel with the admitted legal position that the above issue is no longer res integra,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34228773/ 2
Shri. K.S. Lenminthang Alias ... vs Chairman on 17 September, 2024
in view of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jigya Yadav Vs. CBSE (2021) 17 SCC 535,
wherein it has been elaborated as follows :
"Issue 2: whether CBSE Examination Bye-laws imposed reasonable restriction on
exercise of right under Art. 19 of the constitution? "the core existence of an individual
is not exemplified by her outer characteristics but by her inner self-identification and
also about the significance of the acquired identity in the form of name. The identity
of an Page |4 individual is one of the most closely guarded areas of the constitutional
schemes in India.
Identity is an amalgam of various internal and external including acquired
characteristics of an individual and name can be regarded as one of the foremost
indicators of identity. And therefore, an individual must be in complete control of his
or her name and law must enable her to retain as well as to exercise such control
freely "for all times"
which includes the aspiration of the individual to be recognised by different name for a just cause.
Art. 19(1) (a) of the constitution provides for a guaranteed right to freedom of speech and expression
which would include the freedom to lawfully express one's identity in the manner of their liking. In
other word, expression of identity is a protected element of freedom of expression under the
constitution.
The bye-laws permit change only if permission of the court has been obtained prior to the
publication of the result. The provision is problematic on certain counts. First, it is not a mere
restriction on the right it is a complete embargo on the right post publication of result of the
candidate. It failed to take into account the possibility of need for change of name after publication
of result including the uncertainty of time line required to obtain such declaration from the court of
law due to law's delay and upon which the candidates has no control whatsoever. The bye-laws
completely overlook this possibility when it ordains seeking declaration from the court prior to the
publication of result of the examination concerned conducted by it.
To use administrative efficiency to make it practically impossible for a student to alter her identity in
the board certificates, no matter how urgent and important it is, would be highly disproportionate
and can be in no manner be termed as a reasonable restriction.
The court further held that as regards request for "change" the second possibility is when the
request for change is due to the acquired name by choice at the later point of time, such change need
not be backed by public documents pertaining to the candidate. However, such request may be
entertained upon insisting for prior permission/declaration by the court of law in that regard and
publication in the officer Gazette including surrender/return of original certificate issued by CBSE
and upon payment of prescribed fees."
Page |5
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34228773/ 3
Shri. K.S. Lenminthang Alias ... vs Chairman on 17 September, 2024
9. A plain reading of the above extracted paragraphs leaves no manner of doubt that every
individual enjoys the right of unfettered choice in so far it relates inter alia to his or her name and
the law enables such an individual to control freely for all times the freedom to lawfully express their
identity in the manner of their liking. In other words, the extent byelaws cannot preclude the
petitioner from seeking to change his name as he deems- appropriate. The right so to do is
embodied in Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India in terms of the decision in Jigya Yadav and
Others. (supra).
10. In view of the foregoing, the present writ petition is partly allowed. The Board is directed to
process the petitioner's application for change of name from "K.S. Lenminthang alias Lenminthang
Keishing" to "Adriel Yurthan Keishing" expeditiously and preferably within a period of 6 (six) weeks
from today.
11. No further relief is prayed for.
12. With the above direction, the writ petition and the pending application is disposed of.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
FR/NFR
Sushil
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34228773/ 4
