Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati
Devi on 12 September, 2023
Author: M.V. Muralidaran
Bench: M.V. Muralidaran
Digitally signed by
ABUJAM ABUJAM SURJIT SINGH 1
SURJIT SINGH Date: 2023.09.13
12:19:42 +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
MC(El. Pet.) No.7 of 2022
Ref: El. Petn. No.3 of 2022 with
El. Recr. Petn. No.13 of 2022
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh, aged about 57 years, S/o Shri
Sorokhaibam Yaimabi Singh, resident of Salam Keikhu-(A),
Tehsil-Salam, P.O. Langjing, P.S. Patsoi, District-Imphal
West, Manipur -795113.
.... Applicant/Respondent No. 1
- Versus -
Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi, aged about 63 years, W/O
(Late) Wangkheimayum Brajabidhu Singh, resident of
Lamdeng Mayai Leikai, P.O. & P.S. Lamsang, Imphal West
District, Manipur -795146.
... Respondent/Election Petitioner
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN
For the Petitioner : Mr. A. Mohendro, Advocate.
For the Respondents : Mr. HS. Paonam, Sr.Adv.
Date of hearing &
reserving Judgment & Order : 27.06.2023
Date of Judgment and Order : 12.09.2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 1
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 1
2
JUDGMENT & ORDER
(CAV)
This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Order VII, Rule 11
(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 read with Section 86(1) of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 to reject the election petition.
2. The petitioner is the first respondent and first respondent herein is the
election petitioner in the election petition.
3. For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to as per their
array in the election petition.
4. The election petitioner has filed the election petition to set aside the
election of the first respondent as returned candidate from 17-Lamsang Assembly
Constituency for 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2022 and to declare
the election petitioner as returned candidate from 17-Lamsang Assembly
Constituency.
5. Pending election petition, the first respondent has filed the present
petition on the grounds that the election petitioner has failed to mention material
facts which would constitute the cause of action for filing the election petition; the
allegation made against the first respondent does not constitute any corrupt practice;
the election petitioner has already agitated the nomination of the first respondent
before the Returning Officer on the ground of educational qualification and the age
and the same was rejected by the Returning Officer on 9.2.2022 observing that it
does not amount to defect of substantive nature and the election petitioner has
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 2
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
3
made inconsistency plea and the non-compliance of Section 83 of the
Representation of People Act.
6. Resisting this petition, the election petitioner filed affidavit-in-opposition
stating that there is cause of action for filing the election petition; the material facts
which constitute the cause of action has been categorically stated in the election
petition. The non-disclosure of information or incomplete information while filing the
nomination paper along with Form-26 affidavit by the first respondent amounts to
corrupt practice under Section 123 of the Representation of People Act. The first
respondent has admitted that he has filed false affidavits regarding his educational
qualifications, father's name and his age in the past elections while filing his
nominations. He has also admitted that in the election in question, the first
respondent has stated false educational qualification. The question of challenging
the orders of the election authority does not arise and, as such, the very statements
made by the first respondent that the election petitioner has not challenged the
orders of the Returning Officer is highly ill-conceived and the same is without any
basis. All material particulars about the non-disclosure and how the same has
affected the voters have been mentioned in the election petition. All the provisions
of the Representation of People Act have been complied with while filing the election
petition and the correction appeared in para No.4.10 of the election petition was
carried out with the permission of the Court. The grounds stated in the election
petition are in conformity with the provisions of the Representation of People Act.
The votes obtained by the first respondent are under undue influence which
amounts to corrupt practice. As such, the election of the first respondent is liable to
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 3
4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 3
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
the declared as void and the election petitioner may be declared as returned
candidate.
7. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel for the first respondent
submitted that the election petition is liable to be rejected at the threshold under
Order 7, Rule 11(a) CPC read with Section 86(1) of the Representation of People
Act. Arguing further, the learned counsel submitted that the election petitioner has
failed to state material facts which would constitute the cause of action for filing the
election petition and has failed to mention the material facts which if proved would
amount to corrupt practice under Section 123 of the Representation of People Act
allegedly to be committed by the returned candidate.
8. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel would submit that the
allegation mentioned in the election petition does not constitute corrupt practice and
the specific arguments of the learned counsel is that the election petitioner alleged
that the first respondent has mentioned the highest qualification differently in the
earlier elections. The particulars of the educational qualification mentioned in the
affidavits of earlier Manipur Legislative Assembly Election cannot be agitated in the
present election petition and the present election petition must confine to the
affidavit filed for the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2022 and the
contents of the earlier affidavits lost its significance and should have been
challenged at the time when it was valid.
9. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel further submitted that the
election petitioner alleged that the first respondent had misrepresented his father's
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 4
5
name in the 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Elections and that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 4
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
in the 9th and 10th Legislative Assembly Elections, the name of the father of the first
respondent was misrepresented as "S.Nilla Singh" and in the 11th and 12th
Legislative Assembly Elections, the name of the father of the first respondent was
mentioned as "Sorakhaibam Yaimabi Singh". The aforesaid statement does not
constitute ingredients of any corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123 of
the representation of People Act and also does not amount to concealing of material
facts. In the matter of filing of affidavit and the nomination with respect to election,
the information must be the same as those in the electoral roll and the election
petitioner cannot agitate the contents of the affidavits filed in connection with the
earlier term of State Assembly Elections.
10. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel next submitted that the
election petitioner alleged that the first respondent had mentioned his age as 43
years in the 9th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2007; 53 years in the 10 th
Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2012; 52 years in the 11th Manipur
Legislative Assembly Election, 2017 and 57 years in the 12 th Manipur Legislative
Assembly Election, 2022. According to the learned counsel, the aforesaid statement
does not constitute the ingredients of any corrupt practice and the election petitioner
cannot agitate the contents of affidavits filed in connection with the earlier elections.
11. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel then submitted that the
election petitioner alleged that the first respondent had mentioned in the affidavit in
Form-26 that his spouse closing balance is Rs.42,53,095.23 as on 31.1.2022 and in
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 5
6
absence of filing of income tax return by his spouse goes to show that his wife is
having undisclosed source of income and that the vague disclosure of income of his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 5
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
wife being a Manager of Brick Field is not sufficient when a sum of Rs.42,53,095.23
is found in her account as on 31.1.2022. The election petitioner also alleged that the
first respondent mentioned that his other source of income and as that of his wife is
from land compensation. However, no particulars have been given by him in his
affidavit under Form-26 and in the nomination dated 7.2.2022. Further, the brick field
has not been disclosed and, as such, the first respondent failed to disclose the
source of income which he earns from the brick field. The election petitioner filed
the election petition on frivolous grounds without having verified the factual position.
12. Adding further, Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel submitted
that the election petitioner alleged that the first respondent has not disclosed
immovable properties belonging to him and his dependents. The aforesaid
statement does not constitute the ingredients of any corrupt practice. The properties
were already transferred and the first respondent has filed the affidavit and
nomination accordingly and it does not constitute any concealment of property. The
election petitioner agitated the nomination of the first respondent before the
Returning Officer by lodging complaints and said complaints were rejected by the
Returning Officer and the election petitioner failed to challenge the said rejection
order.
13. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel further submitted that by
making inconsistent plea, the election petitioner approached this Court with unclean
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 6
7
hands and that the election petitioner fails to make out any material effect of the
alleged impropriety on election result. While alleging material facts, material
particulars should also be set out by which the result of the election has been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 6
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
compromised and it must specifically be pleaded how the alleged disclosure/non-
disclosure of particulars would have affected the votes secured by the first
respondent and the prejudice caused.
14. Arguing so, Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel for the first
respondent submitted that the election petitioner has not complied with the provision
of Section 83(1) (a) & (b) of the Representation of People Act and, as such, the
election petition deserves to be rejected for non-disclosure of cause of action and
inconformity with the provisions of the Representation of People Act. Moreover, the
election petition is ill-conceived one and since the election petitioner approached this
Court with unclean hands, the election petition is liable to be dismissed at the
threshold. In support of his submissions, the learned counsel for the first respondent
relied upon the following decisions:
(i) Ram Sukh v. Dinesh Aggarwal, (2009) 10 SCC 541.
(ii) ManganiLalMandal v. BishnuDeo Bhandari, (2012) 3
SCC 314.
(iii) AnangaUday Singh Deo v. RangaNath Mishra and
others, (2002) 1 SCC 499.
(iv) Jaipal Singh v. Sumitra Mahajan and another, (2004)
4 SCC 522.
(v) IshwardasRohani v. Alok Mishra and others, (2012) 7
SCC 309.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 7
8
(vi) Order of the Punjab and Haryana High Court dated
26.9.2019 in Civil Miscellaneous No.8 of 2018 in
Execution Petition No.1 of 2017.
(vii) Order of the Allahabad High Court dated 12.9.2022
in Election Petition No.10 of 2017.
(viii) Order of the Madras High Court dated 17.3.2022 in
O.A.No.764 of 2021 in Election Petition No.8 of
2021.
15. Per contra, Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel for the election
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 7
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
petitioner submitted that the M.C.(El. Pet.) No.7 of 2022 is filed without any basis
and that there is a cause of action for filing the election petition. The material facts,
which constitute the cause of action for filing the election petition, have been clearly
averred in the election petition. In fact, the election petitioner in his election petition
categorically stated that the non-disclosure of information or incomplete information
while filing the nomination paper along with Form-26 in respect of the election in
question amounts to corrupt practice under Section 123 of the Representation of
People Act.
16. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel would submit that the first
respondent himself admitted that he had filed false affidavits qua educational
qualification, father's name and his age in the past elections while filing the
nominations and also he has mentioned false educational qualification in the
election in question. According to the learned counsel, filing false affidavit on oath
amounts to perjury and is liable to be prosecuted under the relevant law and the
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 8
9
same also amounts to undue influence to the voters which attracts corrupt practices
under Section 123 of the Representation of People Act.
17. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel further submitted that the
amount of Rs.42,53,095.23 found in his spouse account as on 31.1.2022 and the
source of income has not been disclosed and, as such, the non-disclosure of the
particulars while filing nomination by the first respondent amounts to non-compliance
of Section 100(d)(iv) of the Representation of People Act and it also constitutes
corrupt practice. The brick field in question belongs to the first respondent and he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 8
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
has intentionally failed to disclose the said brick field in the nomination form.
18. The learned senior counsel for the election petitioner submitted that
though the first respondent made a statement that the properties have been
transferred but have not mentioned about the details to whom the properties have
been transferred, the said non-disclosure of the properties while filing the nomination
paper along with Form-26 affidavit amounts to undue influence. In fact, all the
materials particulars about the non-disclosure and how the same has affected the
voters have been clearly mentioned by the election petitioner in the election petition.
Further, all the provisions of the Representation of People Act have been complied
with while filing the election petition and that the election petition is not ill-conceived
as alleged by the first respondent. Thus, a prayer has been made to dismiss the
miscellaneous case.
19. This Court considered the rival submissions and also perused the
materials available on record.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 9
10
20. The grievance of the first respondent is that the election petition is
liable to be rejected on the ground that it does not disclose the cause of action in
terms of the relevant provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure as well as the
provisions of the Representation of People Act.
21. On the other hand, the election petitioner contends that the cause of
action for filing the election petition has been substantially disclosed in the election
petition and he has categorically stated that non-disclosure of information or income
information while filing the nomination paper along with Form-26 affidavit amounts to
corrupt practice under Section 123 of the Representation of People Act as held by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 9
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catena of judgments.
22. The first respondent has filed M.C.(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 under Order
7, Rule 11(a) of CPC praying for rejection of the Election Petition No.3 of 2022. The
election petitioner assails the election of the first respondentfrom 17-Lamsang
Assembly Constituency in the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2022 on
the ground of improper acceptance of the nomination of the first respondent by the
Returning Officer, inasmuch as the first respondent has also filed a false affidavit
filed under Form-26 on 7.2.2022 thereby wrongly stating his highest educational
qualification as B.A. passed in the year 1988 from the Manipur University and also
for not disclosing the details of the brick field namely M/s.SR Construction Materials
located at Thaoroijam Maning Leikai covered by C.S. Dag No.306, Patta No.106/203
belonging to the first respondent so also immovable properties belonging to him and
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 10
11
his dependents and the source of income of himself and his wife at the time of filing
the nomination paper and the affidavit under Form-26.
23. According to the election petitioner, by dint of the improper acceptance
of the nomination by the Returning Officer despite vehement protest from the side of
the election petitioner and the non-compliance of the provisions of applicable laws
by the first respondent at the time of filing of nomination, the election of the first
respondent from 17-Lamsang Legislative Assembly Constituency is to be declared
as void.
24. Resisting the election petition, the first respondent has filed written
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 10
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
statement, inter alia, stating that the material facts pleaded by the election petitioner
in the election petition are frivolous and concocted, and only mentioning the word
materially affected is not sufficient but also extent and manner of the effect should
also be pleaded. The election petitioner cannot establish or make out any illegality
or impropriety in the nomination paper filed in connection with the election of 2022,
nor there is any non-disclosure of information relating to source of income and
assets of the first respondent or his dependents or spouse. The election petitioner
cannot allege any allegation over improper acceptance of nomination of the first
respondent as a ground in the election petition as the same happened prior to the
declaration of the result of election on 10.3.2022.
25. Placing reliance upon the decisions cited supra, Mr. HS. Paonam,
learned senior counsel for the first respondent argued that an election petition is
based on the rights, which are purely the creature of a statute, and if the statute
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 11
12
renders any particular requirement mandatory, the Court cannot exercise dispensing
powers to waive non-compliance and for the purpose of considering a preliminary
objection as to the maintainability of the election petition, the averments in the
election petition should be assumed to be true and the Court has to find out whether
these averments disclose a cause of action or a triable issue as such; that all
material facts, therefore, in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of
People Act have to be set out in the election petition. If the material facts are not
stated in the election petition, it is liable to be dismissed on that ground as the case
would be covered by Section 83(1)(a) (b) of the Representation of People Act read
with Order 7, Rule 11(a) of CPC and that the election petition can be summarily
dismissed, if it does not furnish the cause of action in exercise of the power under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 11
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
26. In Ram Sukh, supra, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
"9. In this backdrop, we may now turn to the procedural
provisions in the Act insofar as they are relevant for our purpose:
―81. Presentation of petitions.--(1) An election petition calling
in question any election may be presented on one or more of the
grounds specified in sub-section (1) of Section 100 and Section
101 to the High Court by any candidate at such election or any
elector within forty-five days from, but not earlier than the date of
election of the returned candidate or if there are more than one
returned candidates at the election and the dates of their election
are different, the later of those two dates.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 12
13
Explanation.--In this sub-section, ‗elector' means a person
who was entitled to vote at the election to which the election
petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not.
***
(3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents
mentioned in the petition, and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own
signature to be a true copy of the petition.
***
83. Contents of petition.--(1) An election petition--
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies;
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full
a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice
and the date and place of the commission of each such practice; and
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings:
Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also
be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of
such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 12
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and
verified in the same manner as the petition.
*** MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 13
86. Trial of election petitions.--(1) The High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does not
comply with the provisions of Section 81 or Section 82 or Section 117.
Explanation.--An order of the High Court dismissing an election petition under this sub-section
shall be deemed to be an order made under clause (a) of Section 98.
(2) As soon as may be after an election petition has been presented to the High Court, it shall be
referred to the Judge or one of the Judges who has or have been assigned by the Chief Justice for the
trial of election petitions under sub-section (2) of Section 80-A. (3) Where more election petitions
than one are presented to the High Court in respect of the same election, all of them shall be
referred for trial to the same Judge who may, in his discretion, try them separately or in one or more
groups.
(4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall, upon application made by him to the High Court
within fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to any order as to
security for costs which may be made by the High Court, be entitled to be joined as a respondent.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section and of Section 97, the trial of a petition shall be
deemed to commence on the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the High Court and
answer the claim or claims made in the petition. (5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to
costs and otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the particulars of any corrupt practice alleged in the
petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as may in its opinion be necessary for ensuring
a fair and effective trial of the petition, but shall not allow any amendment of the petition which will
have the effect of MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 14 introducing particulars of a corrupt practice
not previously alleged in the petition.
(6) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of
justice in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the High
Court finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be
recorded. (7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall
be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date on which the election petition is
presented to the High Court for trial.
87. Procedure before the High Court.--(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made
thereunder, every election petition shall be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in
accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to the
trial of suits:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 13
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, to examine any witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion that the
evidence of such witness or witnesses is not material for the decision of the petition
or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds
or with a view to delay the proceedings.
(2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election
petition.(cid:130) From the aforequoted provisions, it would appear that Section 81 enables a
petitioner to call in question any election on one or more of the grounds specified in
sub-section (1) of Section 100 of the Act.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 15
.....
12. It is evident that the controversy in this appeal lies in a narrow compass. It
revolves around the ambit of Section 83 of the Act. The point for consideration is
whether the election petition lacked ―material facts(cid:130) required to be stated in the
election petition in terms of Section 83(1) of the Act and if so, could it be dismissed
summarily without trial? As already noted, it is mandatory that all ―material facts(cid:130)
are set out in an election petition and it is also trite that if material facts are not
stated in the petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone.
Therefore, the question is as to whether the election petitioner had set out ―material
facts(cid:130) in his petition?
....
18. Undoubtedly, by virtue of Section 87 of the Act, the provisions of the Code apply to the trial of an
election petition and, therefore, in the absence of anything to the contrary in the Act, the court
trying an election petition can act in exercise of its power under the Code, including Order 6 Rule 16
and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code. The object of both the provisions is to ensure that meaningless
litigation, which is otherwise bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted to occupy the judicial
time of the courts. If that is so in matters pertaining to ordinary civil litigation, it must apply with
greater vigour in election matters where the pendency of an election petition is likely to inhibit the
elected representative of the people in the discharge of his public duties for which the electorate
have reposed confidence in him. The submission, therefore, must fail."
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 16
27. In ManganiLalMandal, supra, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 14
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
"10. A reading of the above provision with Section 83 of the 1951 Act leaves no
manner of doubt that where a returned candidate is alleged to be guilty of non-
compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or the 1951 Act or any rules or
orders made thereunder and his election is sought to be declared void on such
ground, it is essential for the election petitioner to aver by pleading material facts
that the result of the election insofar as it concerned the returned candidate has been
materially affected by such breach or non-observance. If the election petition goes to
trial then the election petitioner has also to prove the charge of breach or non-
compliance as well as establish that the result of the election has been materially
affected. It is only on the basis of such pleading and proof that the Court may be in a
position to form opinion and record a finding that breach or non-compliance with the
provisions of the Constitution or the 1951 Act or any rules or orders made thereunder
has materially affected the result of the election before the election of the returned
candidate could be declared void."
28. In Ananga Uday Singh Deo, supra, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
"33. In a recent decision this Court in V. Narayanaswamy v. C.P. Thirunavukkarasu
[(2000) 2 SCC 294] after analysing the entire case-law on the subject has held that
exercise of undue MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 17 influence is also deemed to be a
corrupt practice. Under sub- section (2) of Section 123 ―undue influence(cid:130) means any
direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or
his agent, or of any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election
agent, with the free exercise of any electoral right. ―Material facts(cid:130) and ―material
particulars(cid:130) certainly connote two different things. Material facts are those facts
which constitute the cause of action. In a petition based on the allegation of corrupt
practices the cause of action cannot be equated with the cause of action as is normally
understood because of the consequences that follow in a petition based on the
allegations of corrupt practices. An election petition seeking a challenge to the
election of a candidate on the allegation of corrupt practices is a serious matter; if
proved, not only does the candidate suffer ignominy, he also suffers disqualification
from standing for election for a period that may extend to six years.
34. The Court summed up:
―23. It will be thus seen that an election petition is based on the rights, which are
purely the creature of a statute, and if the statute renders any particular requirement
mandatory, the court cannot exercise dispensing powers to waive non- compliance.
For the purpose of considering a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of
the election petition the averments in the petition should be assumed to be true and
the court has to find out whether these averments disclose a cause of action or a
triable issue as such. Sections 81, 83(1)(c) and 86 read with Rule 94-A of the Rules
and Form 25 are to be read conjointly as an integral scheme. When so read if the
court finds non-compliance it has to uphold the preliminary objection and has no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 15
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
option except to dismiss the MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 18 petition. There is
difference between ‗material facts' and ‗material particulars'. While the failure to
plead material facts is fatal to the election petition the absence of material particulars
can be cured at a later stage by an appropriate amendment. ‗Material facts' mean the
entire bundle of facts, which would constitute a complete cause of action and these
must be concisely stated in the election petition, i.e., clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of Section 83. Then under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 83 the election petition must contain full particulars of any corrupt practice.
These particulars are obviously different from material facts on which the petition is
founded. A petition levelling a charge of corrupt practice is required by law to be
supported by an affidavit and the election petitioner is obliged to disclose his source
of information in respect of the commission of corrupt practice. He must state which
of the allegations are true to his knowledge and which to his belief on information
received and believed by him to be true. It is not the form of the affidavit but its
substance that matters. To plead corrupt practice as contemplated by law it has to be
specifically alleged that the corrupt practices were committed with the consent of the
candidate and that a particular electoral right of a person was affected. It cannot be
left to time, chance or conjecture for the court to draw inference by adopting an
involved process of reasoning. Where the alleged corrupt practice is open to two
equal possible inferences the pleadings of corrupt practice must fail. Where several
paragraphs of the election petition alleging corrupt practices remain unaffirmed
under the verification clause as well as the affidavit, the unsworn allegation could
have no legal existence and the court could not take cognizance thereof.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 19 Charge of corrupt practice being quasi-criminal
in nature the court must always insist on strict compliance with the provisions of law.
In such a case it is equally essential that the particulars of the charge of allegations
are clearly and precisely stated in the petition. It is the violation of the provisions of
Section 81 of the Act which can attract the application of the doctrine of substantial
compliance. The defect of the type provided in Section 83 of the Act on the other
hand can be dealt with under the doctrine of curability, on the principles contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure.
Non-compliance with the provisions of Section 83 may lead to dismissal of the petition if the matter
falls within the scope of Order 6 Rule 16 and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Where
neither the verification in the petition nor the affidavit gives any indication of the sources of
information of the petitioner as to the facts stated in the petition which are not to his knowledge and
the petitioner persists that the verification is correct and the affidavit in the form prescribed does
not suffer from any defect the allegations of corrupt practices cannot be enquired and tried at all. In
such a case the petition has to be rejected on the threshold for non- compliance with the mandatory
provisions of law as to pleadings. It is no part of the duty of the court suomotu even to direct
furnishing of better particulars when objection is raised by the other side. Where the petition does
not disclose any cause of action it has to be rejected. The court, however, cannot dissect the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 16
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
pleadings into several parts and consider whether each one of them discloses a cause of action. The
petition has to be considered as a whole. There cannot be a partial rejection of the petition.(cid:130) MC(El.
Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 20
29. In Jaipal Singh, supra, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
"7. Section 83 deals with contents of petition. It states that an election petition shall
contain a concise statement of material facts, on which the petitioner relies and shall
state full particulars of any corrupt practices which the petitioner alleges and which
shall be signed by him and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure. In the case of SopanSukhdeo Sable v. Asstt. Charity Commr. [(2004) 3
SCC 137 : (2004) 2 Scale 82] it has been held that Order 6 Rule 2(1) CPC deals with
basic rule of pleadings and declares that the pleading has to state material facts and
not the evidence; that there is a distinction between ―material facts(cid:130) and
―particulars(cid:130) and the words ―material facts(cid:130) show that the facts necessary to
formulate a complete cause of action must be stated. Omission of single material fact
leads to an incomplete cause of action and consequently, the plaint becomes bad. The
distinction between ―material facts(cid:130) and ―particulars(cid:130) was brought by Scott, L.J. in
Bruce v. Odhams Press Ltd. [(1936) 1 KB 697 : (1936) 1 All ER 287 (CA)] in the
following passage: (All ER p. 294) ―The cardinal provision in Rule 4 is that the
statement of claim must state the material facts. The word ‗material' means
necessary for the purpose of formulating a complete cause of action; and if any one
‗material' statement is omitted, the statement of claim is bad; it is ‗demurrable' in
the old phraseology and in the new is liable to be ‗struck out' under RSC Order 25
Rule 4 (see Philipps v. Philipps [(1878) 4 QBD 127 : 48 LJQB 135 : 39 LT 556 (CA)] );
or ‗a further and better statement of claim' may be ordered under Rule 7.
The function of ‗particulars' under Rule 6 is quite different. They are not to be used
in order to fill material gaps in a MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 21 demurrable
statement of claim -- gaps which ought to have been filled by appropriate statements
of the various material facts which together constitute the plaintiff's cause of action.
The use of particulars is intended to meet a further and quite separate requirement of
pleading, imposed in fairness and justice to the defendant. Their function is to fill in
the picture of the plaintiff's cause of action with information sufficiently detailed to
put the defendant on his guard as to the case he had to meet and to enable him to
prepare for trial.(cid:130) .......
9. As to what is the material fact has to be decided in the present case, in the context
of the election petition under the said Act. An election petition is a matter of statutory
right. In the petition, the key issue was whether the appellant held an office of profit
on the date of scrutiny. For that purpose, the appellant ought to have stated that on
13-3-2002 he had requested for waiver of the notice period; that the appointing
authority had received the notice on the specified date and that his request for waiver
stood granted on the date of scrutiny and he ceased to be a government servant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 17
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
These were the material facts which the appellant should have pleaded so that the
returned candidates would not be taken by surprise. They were material facts within
his knowledge and ought to have been pleaded in the election petition. Lastly, even
the letter of the appellant seeking the waiver of the notice period did not form part of
the election petition. Hence, the High Court was right in dismissing the election
petition for want of material facts."
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 22
30. In Civil Miscellaneous No.8 of 2018 in Election Petition No.1 of 2017, dated
26.9.2019, supra, the Punjab and Haryana High Court held thus:
"20. For the aforesaid modified Form-26, it is thus seen that certain additional
particulars regarding sources of income of a candidate with his spouse/dependents as
also details pertaining to his contracts with the Government or any Public Company
or Companies are now required to be furnished, although even these particulars do
not directly specify disclosure of any outstanding liabilities of a Company, with which
the candidate or his/her spouse/dependents may be associated. Yet it may be argued
that the term 'Details of Contracts' would be large enough to cover the same. But even
in such eventuality, it is to be noted this new requirement of declaration of contracts
with the Government or Public Company or Companies has been introduced only
after 10.10.2018, and was admittedly not in existence at the time the Respondent was
elected i.e. in March, 2017. By any stretch of imagination therefore, at this stage, he
cannot be penalized for not having disclosed any such particulars, which were never
required of him in the specific Format, which he was obligated to do on affidavit at
the relevant time in 2017. Such an interpretation based on the principle of 'morality'
so emphatically stressed on behalf of Petitioner in the opinion of the Court is not
called for, as the same would not only have the effect of violating the basic canons of
jurisprudence that a person cannot be penalized retrospectively for not disclosure of
any particulars, which were never required to be disclosed at the relevant time. Such
a course would also have the effect of overreaching the competent authorities i.e.
Election Commission, or the Central Government, who were otherwise authorized to
incorporate or modify Form-26 with the evolution of time.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 23
21. For the aforesaid reasons, this Court finds no tangible cause of action for the
Petitioner to challenge the Respondent's election of 2017 on the alleged ground of
non-disclosure of his liabilities towards the Government or Public Institution, which
were actually liabilities of the Company/Companies, with which, he was associated
only in his capacity as Director and which he was not obligated to disclose in
accordance with specific Format in force at the relevant time. Consequently, the
Respondent's Application under Order VI Rule 16 read with Order VII Rule 11 and
Section 151 CPC is allowed and the Election Petition stands dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 18
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
31. In the order dated 12.9.2022 in Election Petition No.10 of 2017 cited by the
learned counsel for the first respondent, the Allahabad High Court held as under:
―34. .... In the case in hand, neither there is any such incontrovertible and
unimpeachable document, which could show that the respondent did not hold the
alleged degree in Engineering/technology nor there are specific allegations that how
alleged incorrect and false statement of facts favourably prejudiced the prospects of
his election. Considering all these facts of the matter, the inaccuracy or concealment
regarding educational qualification of the respondent did not amount to unduly
influencing the voters, as the defect in disclosure was not of substantial character that
could have materially prejudiced the prospects of the election, for it to be termed as a
corrupt practice within the meaning of Section 123 of the Representation of People
Act.
....
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 24
36. After considering all relevant facts of the matter and the law applicable thereto it
clearly emerges that the averments contained the election petition do not amount to
any corrupt practice and at the most the same relate to irregularities and illegalities
alleged to have been committed by the respondent, which would at best be relevant if
there was further allegation that it materially affected the result of the election. The
averments contained in paras 32 to 38 and 40 containing narration of facts about
corrupt practice do not make out any corrupt practice so as require any further
adjudication on merits of the matter. These allegations even if assumed to be true do
not make out any case of commission of corrupt practice as enshrined in sub-section
(2) or (4) of Section 123 of R.P. Act. From the law laid down in case of Dhartipakar V.
Rajiv Gandhi (supra) it is clear that if the allegations made by the petitioner do not
amount to any corrupt practice as contemplated by Section 123 of the R.P. Act and
the period for which the respondent was elected is already over and fresh elections
have taken place, the petition could be dismissed.(cid:130)
32. It has been submitted on behalf of the election petitioner that the first respondent
has filed false affidavits of his educational qualifications, father's name and his age in
the past elections while filing his nomination papers and also in the election in
question, the first respondent has stated false educational qualification in Form-26.
Learned counsel for the election petitioner demonstrates the educational
qualifications of the first respondent as mentioned in the past elections as well as in
the election in question as under:
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 25
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 19
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
(i) In the 9th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2007, it
has been mentioned as "B.A. passed from Manipur
University in the year 1985".
(ii) In the 10th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 1992, it
has been mentioned as "B.A. passed from Manipur
University in the year 1992".
(iii) In the 11th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2017, it
has been mentioned as "B.A. passed from Manipur
University in the year 1992".
(iv) In the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2022, it
has been mentioned as "B.A. passed from Y.K. College, Wangjing under Manipur
University in the year 1988".
33. It is submitted on behalf of the election petitioner that the first respondent mentioned his
father's name in the 9th and 10th Manipur Legislative Assembly Elections held in the year 2007 and
2012 as "S.Nilla Singh", whereas in the 11th and 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Elections, it has
been mentioned as "Sorokhaibam Yaimabi Singh". Similarly, the case of the election petitioner is
that different age has been mentioned during 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly
Elections, 2007, 2012, 2017 and 2022 respectively.
34. Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel for the election petitioner pointed out that the first
respondent has mentioned in his affidavit under Form-26 while filing his nomination paper that his
spouse's closing balance at the Bank of MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 26 Baroda Savings Bank
Account is Rs.42,53,095.23 as on 31.01.2022 and the absence of filing of income tax return as
indicated in paragraph 4 of the affidavit in Form-26 by his spouse goes to show that his wife is
having undisclosed source of income and the vague disclosure of income of his wife being a Manager
of the Brick Field is not sufficient when Rs.42,53,095.23 is found in her account as on 31.1.2022.
35. According to Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel for the election petitioner, the first
respondent has mentioned that his other source of income and as that of his wife is from land
compensation. However, no detailed particulars have been given by the first respondent in his
affidavit in Form-26. According to the learned counsel, the factum of the first respondent being the
Proprietor of the Brick Field namely M/s.SR Construction Materials has not been properly disclosed
in the affidavit in Form-26.
36. Similarly, it is the contention of the election petitioner that the first respondent has not disclosed
the immovable properties belonging to him and his dependents in the affidavit in Form-26 while
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 20
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
filing the nomination paper on 7.2.2022 and the particulars of which have been stated as under:
(i)The property under Patta No.175/547 (new) covered by C.S. Dag No.1031/1361
measuring an area of 0.22663 hectare and under Patta No.316 (old) 227/587 (new)
covered by C.S. Dag No.1219/1377 measuring an area of 0.2593 hectare situated at
No.76 Salam Keikhu - owned by the first respondent.
(ii)The property under Patta No.76 (old), 147/421 (new) covered by C.S. Dag
No.34/414 measuring an area of 0.06475 hectare MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 27
and under Patta No.338/550 (new) covered by C.S. Dag No.1032/1364 measuring an
area of 0.23675 hectare situated at No.76, Salam Keikhu - in the name of dependent
SorokhaibamJayananda Singh, son of the first respondent.
(iii)The property under Patta No.194 (old) 121/471 (new) covered by C.S. Dag
No.2/379 measuring an area of 1.3314 hectare situated at No.76, Salam Keikhu in the
name of dependent No.2.
(iv)The property under Parra 142 (old) 286/673 (old), 121/471 (new) covered by C.S.
Dag No.1092/1414 measuring an area 0.18818 hectare situated at No.76, Salam
Keikhu in the name of dependent No.3.(cid:130)
37. It is also the submission of the learned counsel for the election petitioner that the first
respondent has failed to disclose particular plot of land recorded in his name covered by C.S. Dag
No.1009 under Patta No.281 situated at No.76, Salam Keikhu, Sub Division Lamsang, Tehsil Salam,
Imphal West District in the nomination paper. The aforesaid non-disclosure of the said land is in
violation of the provisions of the Act/Rules and, the Returning Officer ought to have rejected the
nomination paper of the first respondent.
38. At this juncture, it is apposite to mention that the right to get information in democracy is
recognized all throughout and it is a natural right flowing from the concept of democracy. Article
19(1) and (2) of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights states as under:
―(1) Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 28 (2) Everyone shall have the right to freedom of
expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in
the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.(cid:130)
39. Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India provides for freedom of speech and expression.
Voters' speech or expression in case of election would include casting of votes, that is to say, voter
speaks out or expresses by casting vote. For this purpose, information about the candidate to be
selected is must. Voter's right to know antecedents, including criminal past of the candidate
contesting election for MP or MLA, is much more fundamental and basic for survival of democracy.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 21
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
The voter may think over before making his choice of electing law breakers as law makers.
40. In Samant N.Balkrishna and another v. V.George Fernandez and others, (1969) 3 SCC 238, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the election petition must set out the material facts on which a
charge can be made and mere repetition of the words of the statute does not amount to proper
statement of facts. The material facts must be stated in the petition and if they are missing, it is
impossible to think that the charge has been made or can be later amplified.
41. In D.Ramachandran v. R.V.Janakiraman and others, (1999) 3 SCC 267, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court observed that distinction is to be made between the terms "full particulars" and "material
facts", however Court cannot dissect the MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 29 pleadings and strike off
portion of it. The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held that if it was otherwise found that the facts
and cause of action disclosed in the petition were sufficient regarding the averments of the case and
were sufficient to void the election in case, then it could not be said that full particulars were not
mentioned in the election petition.
42. In Ponnala Lakshmaiah v. Kommuri Pratap Reddy and others, (2012) 7 SCC 788, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that the Courts are competent to dismiss petitions not only on the ground that
the same do not comply with provisions of Sections 81, 82 and 117 of the Representation of the
People Act, but also on the ground that the same do not disclose any cause of action. The expression
"cause of action" has not been defined either in the Code of Civil Procedure or elsewhere and is more
easily understood than precisely defined.
43. In Kisan Shankar Kathore v. Arun Dattatray Sawant and others, (2014) 14 SCC 162, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court relied upon the decision in the case of Union of India v. Association for Democratic
Reforms and another (2002) 5 SCC 294, wherein it has been held that it was incumbent upon every
candidate, who is contesting the election, to give information about his assets and other affairs,
which requirement is not only essential part of fair and free elections, inasmuch as, every voter has a
right to know about these details of the candidates, such a requirement is also covered by freedom of
speech granted under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 30
44. In Ashraf Kokkur v. K.V.Abdul Khader, (2015) 1 SCC 129, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
the election petition having disclosed a cause of action should not have been thrown out at the
threshold.
45. Whether the allegation leveled by the election petitioner are correct or not has to be proved by
the election petitioner and further, as to whether, filing of the affidavit in Form-26 by the returned
candidate was false or not and whether the alleged false affidavit would amount to violation of the
provisions of Section 33 of the Representation of People Act so as to render the election of the first
respondent void are to be considered by the Court in course of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 22
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
46. On a thorough reading of the instant election petition, it cannot be said that the same does not
contain a concise statement of material facts. In fact, it does disclose a cause of action. Whether or
not the said allegations would be proved is a matter of evidence which can be considered only at the
time of trial.
47. Indeed, the first respondent has failed to produce any materials to disregard the arguments of
the learned counsel for the election petitioner. The first respondent simply stated that the election
petitioner has failed to disclose the cause of action against the first respondent in terms of the
provisions of the Representation of People Act and the Code of Civil Procedure and nothing more.
48. When this Court read over the averments set out in the election petition wholly, it is clear that
the election petitioner has stated full and material particulars following the cause of action for filing
the election petition. Prima facie, the election MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 31 petitioner has
narrated in the election petition qua the non-disclosure of information and/or incomplete
information while filing the nomination paper along with Form-26 affidavit by the first respondent.
49. It is settled that so long as the claim discloses some cause of action or raises some questions fit
to be decided by a Judge, the mere fact that the case is weak and not likely to succeed is no ground
for striking it out. The implications of the liability of the pleadings to be struck out on the ground
that it discloses no reasonable cause of action are generally more known than clearly understood.
The failure of the pleadings to disclose a reasonable cause of action is distinct from the absence of
full particulars.
50. In Harishankar Jain v. Sonia Gandhi, (2001) 8 SCC 233, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
the expression "cause of action" would mean facts to be proved, if traversed, in order to support his
right to the judgment of the Court and that the function of the party is to present a full picture of the
cause of action with such further information so as to make opposite party understand the case he
will have to meet. In paragraph 23, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:
―23. Section 83(1)(a) of RPA, 1951 mandates that an election petition shall contain a
concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies. By a series of
decisions of this Court, it is well settled that the material facts required to be stated
are those facts which can be considered as materials supporting the allegations made.
In other words, they must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations
made in the petition and would constitute the cause of action as understood in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The expression "cause of action" has been MC(El.
Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 32 compendiously defined to mean every fact which it
would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to support his right
to the judgment of court. Omission of a single material fact leads to an incomplete
cause of action and the statement of claim becomes bad. The function of the party is
to present as full a picture of the cause of action with such further information in
detail as to make the opposite party understand the case he will have to meet.
(Samant N. Balkrishna v. George Fernandez, JitendraBahadur Singh v. Krishna
Behari. Merely quoting the words of the section like chanting of a mantra does not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 23
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
amount to stating material facts. Material facts would include positive statement of
facts as also positive averment of a negative fact, if necessary. In V. S.
Achuthanandan v. P. J. Francis this Court has held, on a conspectus of a series of
decisions of this Court, that material facts are such preliminary facts which must be
proved at the trial by a party to establish existence of a cause of action. Failure to
plead "material facts" is fatal to the election petition and no amendment of the
pleadings is permissible to introduce such material facts after the time-limit
prescribed for filing the election petition.It is the duty of the court to examine the
petition irrespective of any written statement or denial and reject the petition if it
does not disclose a cause of action. To enable a court to reject a plaint on the ground
that it does not disclose a cause of action, it should look at the plaint and nothing
else. Courts have always frowned upon vague pleadings which leave a wide scope to
adduce any evidence. No amount of evidence can cure basic defect in the pleadings.(cid:130)
(Underlying added) MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 33
51. In Mayar (H.K.) Ltd. and others v. Owners and Parties, Vessel M.V. Fortune Express and others,
(2006) 6 SCC 100, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:
―12. From the aforesaid, it is apparent that the plaint cannot be rejected on the basis
of the allegations made by the defendant in his written statement or in an application
for rejection of the plaint. The Court has to read the entire plaint as a whole to find
out whether it discloses a cause of action and if it does, then the plaint cannot be
rejected by the Court exercising the powers under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code.
Essentially, whether the plaint discloses a cause of action, is a question of fact which
has to be gathered on the basis of the averments made in the plaint in its entirety
taking those averments to be correct. A cause of action is a bundle of facts which are
required to be proved for obtaining relief and for the said purpose, the material facts
are required to be stated but not the evidence except in certain cases where the
pleadings relied on are in regard to misrepresentation, fraud, wilful default, undue
influence or of the same nature. So long as the plaint discloses some cause of action
which requires determination by the court, mere fact that in the opinion of the Judge
the plaintiff may not succeed cannot be a ground for rejection of the plaint. In the
present case, the averments made in the plaint, as has been noticed by us, do disclose
the cause of action and, therefore, the High Court has rightly said that the powers
under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code cannot be exercised for rejection of the suit filed
by the plaintiff-appellants. Similarly, the Court could not have taken the aid of
Section 10 of the Code for stay of the suit as there is no previously instituted suit
pending in a competent court between the MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 34
parties raising directly and substantially the same issues as raised in the present
suit.(cid:130) (Underlining added)
52. In construing a plea in any pleading, Courts must keep in mind that a plea is not an expression
of art and science, but an expression through words to place fact and law of one's case for a relief.
Such an expression may be pointed, precise, sometimes vague but still it could be gathered what he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 24
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
wants to convey through only by reading the whole pleading, depending on the person drafting a
plea.
53. When this Court carefully examined the decisions in the cases of Harishankar Jain and Mayar
(H.K.) Ltd, supra, it is clear that the Courts need to be cautious in dealing with requests for
dismissal of the election petition at the threshold and exercise their powers of dismissal only in cases
where even on a plain reading of the election petition no cause of action is disclosed. In the case on
hand, the election petition establishes the cause of action.
54. An election which is vitiated by reason of corrupt practices, illegalities and irregularities
enumerated in Sections 100 and 123 of the Representation of People Act cannot obviously be
recognized and respected as the decision of the majority of the electorate. The Courts are, therefore,
duty bound to examine the allegations whenever the same are raised within the framework of the
statute without being unduly hyper-technical in their approach and without being oblivious of the
ground realities.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 35
55. The result of the election can be questioned on the grounds enumerated in Section 100 of the
Representation of People Act. Section 100(1)(b) and 100(1)(d)(i), (ii) and (iv) of the Representation
of People Act, provides:
―100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if the High Court is of opinion--
(a).......
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his
election agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his
election agent; or
(c) ......
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has
been materially affected--
(i) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by an
agent other than his election agent, or
(iii) ......
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 25
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
(iv) by any non--compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or
of any rules or orders made under this Act.(cid:130)
56. As stated supra, the election petition must set out the material facts on the basis of which the
charge can be made and in the event of the material facts not being stated in the election petition,
the same is liable to be dismissed. The expression material facts would mean all the basic facts
constituting the ingredients MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 36 of the particular corrupt practice
which the election petitioner is bound to substantiate before he can succeed on that charge.
57. Whether in election petition, a particular fact is material or not, and as such required to be
pleaded is a question which depends on the nature of the charge leveled, the ground relied upon and
the special circumstances of the case. All those facts which are essential to clothe the election
petitioner with a complete cause of action are material facts which must be pleaded and failure to
plead even a single material fact amounts to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1)(a) of the
Representation of People Act.
58. The object and purpose of pleading material facts is to enable the opposite party to know the
case he has to meet and in the absence of such a pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead
evidence. The requirement under Section 83(1)(a) of the Representation of People Act in
contradiction to Section 83(1)(b) of the Representation of People Act is that the election petition
needs to contain only a concise statement of the material facts and not material particulars. For the
purpose of considering a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of the election petition, the
averments in the election petition should be assumed to be true and the Court has to find out
whether these averments disclose a cause of action or a triable issue as such. However, the Court
cannot dissect the pleadings into several parts and consider whether each one of them discloses a
cause of action.
59. As stated supra, the election petitioner assails the election of the first respondent under Sections
80, 80-A, 81, 84, 100(1)(d)(i) & 101 of the MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 37 Representation of
People Act. After going through the averments made in the election petition as a whole, it cannot be
said that the election petition does not contain a concise statement of material facts. In fact, prima
facie, it does disclose a cause of action.
60. The argument of the learned counsel for the first respondent that the election petition has no
cause of action has no merit. This Court is of the considered view that the election petition having
disclosed a cause of action, it should not be thrown out at the threshold. That apart, when there are
allegations of corrupt practices alleged in the election petition, the Court is bound to examine the
same.
61. The cause of action is a bundle of facts which taken with the law applicable gives the election
petitioner a right to relief against the returned candidate. Every fact and bundle of facts together
constitutes a question of fact which is required to be proved for the relief.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 26
Shri Sorokhaibam Rajen Singh vs Smt. Pukhrambam Sumati Devi on 12 September, 2023
62. It is well settled that our election law being statutory in character must be strictly complied with
since an election petition is not guided by ever changing common law principles of justice and
notions of equity. Being statutory in character, it is essential that it must conform to the
requirements of our election law. But at the same time the purity of election process must be
maintained at all costs and those who violate the statutory norms must suffer for such violation. If
the returned candidate is shown to have secured his success at the election by corrupt means he
must suffer for his misdeeds.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 38
63. It is reiterated that the instant election petition as such does disclose a cause of action which if
unrebutted could void the election and the provisions of Order 7, Rule 11 CPC cannot therefore be
invoked in the present case. There is no substance in the contention that some of the allegations are
bereft of material facts and, as such, do not disclose a cause of action. It is elementary that under
Order 7, Rule 11(a) CPC, the Court cannot dissect the pleading into several parts and consider
whether each of them discloses a cause of action. Further, the contention of the first respondent that
the election petitioner approached this Court with unclean hands is not supported by any materials.
64. At this stage, this Court is not considering the issues - whether the first respondent filed false
affidavit at the time of filing his nomination and has failed to disclose the true and correct facts,
thereby violated the provisions of Section 100(1)(d)(i)& (iv) of the Representation of People Act and
whether the Returning Officer has correctly or wrongly accepted the nomination of the first
respondent and there was violation of Section 33 of the Representation of PeopleAct or not. These
are all the matter of trial. Thus, this Court is of the view that there had been substantial compliance
with the provisions of Section 83(1)(a) of the Representation of People Act. Moreover, the question
as to whether the pleadings made by the election petitioner in the election petition are sufficient or
not can only be determined at the time of final hearing of the election petition. Since the election
petition discloses cause of action and the election petition needs to be tried, the present
miscellaneous case is devoid of merits and the same is liable to be dismissed.
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 39
65. In the result, MC (El. Pet.) No.7 of 2022 is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
NR/NFR ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
Ab. Surjit
MC(El. Petn.) No.7 of 2022 Page 40
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126252403/ 27
