Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O
Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
1
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 14TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SACHIN SHANKAR MAGADUM
M.S.A.NO.100093 OF 2017
BETWEEN:
SRI. MAHANTESH
S/O CHANNABASAPPA NAGANUR,
AGE: 54 YEARS, OCC: BUSINESS & AGRICULTURE,
R/O: BAILHONGAL,
TQ & DIST: BELAGAVI-591 102
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI.HARISH MAIGUR & SMT.R.M.HIREMATH, ADVS.)
AND:
SRI. MANJUNATH
S/O MADIWALAPPA HOSUR
AGE: 34 YEARS, OCC: AGRICULTURE,
R/O: VAKKUND, TAL: BAILHONGAL,
DIST: BELAGAVI - 591 102
...RESPONDENT
(NOTICE TO RESPONDENT IS HELD SUFFICIENT)
THIS MSA IS FILED UNDER ORDER XLIII RULE (1)(u) OF CPC
PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT AND DECREE PASSED BY
THE SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE COURT BAILHONGAL (FIRST APPELLATE
COURT) DATED: 01.04.2017 IN R.A.22/2014 ALLOWING THE
APPEAL WITH COSTS, IN THE INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY.
THIS MSA COMING ON FOR FURTHER HEARING THIS DAY, THE
COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
2
JUDGMENT
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 1
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
The captioned Miscellaneous Second Appeal is filed by the appellant/plaintiff questioning the
judgment and decree passed by the First Appellate Court in R.A.No.22/2014 wherein the Appellate
Court has allowed the appeal and has set aside the ex-parte decree passed in O.S.No.126/2007.
2. The facts leading to the case are as under:
The appellant/plaintiff filed a suit for specific performance of contract by specifically
contending that the respondent/defendant has executed agreement of sale for a total
sale consideration of Rs.50,000/- and pursuant to execution of suit agreement has
received earnest money of Rs.35,000/-. The respondent/defendant remained absent
and was accordingly placed ex-parte.
3. The Trial Court proceeded with the suit and on examination of the ocular evidence led in by the
appellant/plaintiff and having perused the documentary evidence answered issue No.1 in the
affirmative and decreed the suit granting discretionary relief of specific performance and
consequently ordered that the respondent/defendant shall execute registered sale deed in favour of
the appellant/plaintiff by receiving balance sale consideration of Rs.15,000/-.
4. The ex-parte decree passed in O.S.No.126/2007 is challenged before the Appellate Court under
Section 96(2) of CPC. The Appellate Court instead of examining the correctness of the judgment and
decree under challenge has adopted a recourse contemplated under the provisions of Order IX Rule
13 of CPC and has set aside the ex-parte decree on the ground that summons was addressed to a
wrong address and the respondent/defendant has succeeded in showing sufficient cause for having
failed to contest the proceedings before the Trial Court. On these set of reasonings, the Appellate
Court has allowed the appeal filed under Section 96 read with Order XLI Rule 1 of CPC and the
matter is remitted back to the Trial Court to re-hear the matter afresh after affording opportunity to
the parties.
5. It is this remand order passed by the Appellate Court which is under challenge by the
appellant/plaintiff.
6. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant/plaintiff would vehemently argue and contend
before this Court that the Appellate Court erred in not testing the reasons and conclusions arrived at
by the Trial Court and therefore, erred in examining the case of the respondent/defendant as to
whether he had a sufficient cause which prevented the respondent/defendant from appearing and
contesting the suit. To buttress her arguments, she would place reliance on the judgment rendered
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of N.Mohan vs. R.Madhu1. By placing reliance on the above
said judgment, she would vehemently argue and contend before this Court that when an ex-parte
decree is passed, it is trite law that defendant has two AIR 2020 SC 41 remedies. The defendant who
has suffered an ex-parte decree can challenge the judgment and decree on merits under Section 96
of CPC or he can question the ex-parte decree by invoking the provisions under Order IX Rule 13 of
CPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 2
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
7. Placing reliance on the said judgment, she would submit to this Court that the
respondent/defendant having failed to take recourse to the provisions of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC,
ought to have only questioned the judgment and decree of the Trial Court on merits. Therefore, she
would submit to this Court that the Appellate Court has no jurisdiction to examine as to whether the
respondent/defendant was prevented by any sufficient cause as defendant cannot be permitted to
raise all these contentions as regards correctness or otherwise of the order posting the suit for
ex-parte hearing by the Trial Court or in regard to existence of sufficient cause for non-appearance
of the defendant before the Trial Court. On these set of grounds, she would submit to this Court that
the remand order under challenge suffers from perversity and therefore, warrants interference at
the hands of this Court.
8. The respondent is served and unrepresented to contest the proceedings before this Court.
9. Heard learned counsel appearing for the appellant. Perused the judgment under challenge and
also the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment cited supra.
10. Before I advert to the controversy in the present case on hand, this Court has to examine the
scope of enquiry which is provided to the respondent/defendant, in the event there is an ex-parte
decree. Section 96 of CPC contemplates and provides a statutory appeal even against an original
decree passed ex-parte. Section 96(1) and (2) reads as under:
"96. Appeal from original decree.--(1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the
body of this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie
from every decree passed by any Court exercising original jurisdiction to the Court
authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court.
(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte."
11. On plain reading of Section 96 of CPC, it is clearly evident that first appeal has a valuable right
and the parties have a right to be heard both on questions of law and on facts and the judgment in
the first appeal must address itself to the issues of law and fact and decide it by giving reasons in
support of the findings.
12. The word 'appeal' has been held to be 'the removal of a cause from an inferior to a superior Court
for the purpose of testing the soundness of the decision of the inferior Court." It is trite law that
appeal is not an independent proceedings but it is only a continuation of the original proceedings
and it is a stage in the suit itself. Where an appeal is preferred under Section 96(2) of CPC, the
Appellate Court is precluded in an appeal against an ex-parte decree from discussing the propriety
of ex-parte order itself apart from the merits of the case on law and evidence. The appeal filed under
Section 96(2) of CPC against the ex-parte decree cannot be converted into proceedings for setting
aside ex-parte decree. The scheme that is provided under Section 96(2) of CPC read with Order XLI
contemplates that aggrieved party has to argue on merits and the Appellate Court hearing an appeal
under Section 96 of CPC has to decide on merits of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 3
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
13. Therefore, the question that would arise in the present case on hand is, when an appeal is filed
by the respondent/defendant questioning the ex-parte decree under Section 96(2) of CPC, whether
the Appellate Court was justified in converting it into proceedings for setting aside the decree when
the concomitant duty of affording the parties an opportunity of adducing evidence for and against
any ground that may be raised in support thereof under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC.
14. It would be useful for this Court to cull out the provisions of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC with the
amended provisions:
13. Setting aside decree ex parte against defendants.--In any case in which a decree is
passed ex parte against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree
was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the Court that the summons
was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing
when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside
the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or
otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit:
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as
against such defendant only it may be set aside as against all or any of the other
defendants also:
[Provided further than no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the
ground that there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied
that the defendant had notice of the date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear
and answer the plaintiff's claim.] [Explanation.--Where there has been an appeal
against a decree passed ex parte under this rule, and the appeal has been disposed of
an any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, no
application shall lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte decree.]"
15. On perusal of Rule 13, it is clearly evident that in any case where a decree is passed against the
defendant, he can seek setting aside of ex-parte provided he satisfies the Court that summons was
not duly served or that he was prevented from any sufficient cause from appearing when the suit
was called on for hearing. Therefore, on reading of Rule 13, it can be inferred that Rule is wide
enough to cover several application to set aside an ex-parte decree provided defendant's allegation is
either that the summons was not duly served or that the defendant was prevented by sufficient cause
from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing. Therefore, if the remedies which are
available to defendant either under Section 96(2) of CPC or under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC are
examined, it is quite clear that the remedies available to the defendant in the event there is an
ex-parte decree are totally on a different footing and both the remedies provided under Section
96(2) of CPC and the one provided under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC are based on totally different
criteria. The remedy that is available to the defendant under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC has to be
initiated before the very Court which has proceeded to pass an ex-parte decree.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 4
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
16. The words in Order IX Rule 13 of CPC are imperative and if either of these conditions are
satisfied, the Court is bound to set aside the ex-parte decree. While setting aside the ex-parte decree
under Order IX Rule 13, factors to be considered are not confined to finding as to sufficiency of
reasons for non-appearance. The Court has to also find out the totality of situation including the
defect in its own procedure. Therefore, the intent of legislature in providing additional remedy
under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC cannot be usurped by the Appellate Court which is hearing an appeal
under Section 96(2) of CPC.
17. When an appeal is preferred under Section 96(2) of CPC, the Appellate Court has to
independently assess the material on record and pass judgment on merits. While hearing an appeal
under Section 96(2) of CPC, the Appellate Court is also required to adhere to the procedure
contemplated under Section 99 of CPC as well as the procedure under Order XLI Rules 30 and 31 of
CPC. If a decision is correct on merits and the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court is
within the jurisdiction of the Trial Court, the same should not be upset on technical or immaterial
defects. Section 99 of CPC clearly confers discretion upon the Appellate Court not to reverse or
modify a decree for any error or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case or jurisdiction.
Unless there is an error, defect or irregularity of procedure which virtually affects the merits of the
case, the Appellate Court hearing an appeal under Section 96(2) cannot upset the judgment and
decree of the Trial Court merely on the ground that there are mere irregularity which do not affect
the merits of the case.
18. Now let me examine the judgment and decree passed by the First Appellate Court. The reasons
assigned by the Appellate Court in setting aside the ex-parte decree and remanding for denovo trial
can be found at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the judgment under challenge. The Appellate Court without
examining the merits of the suit has virtually adopted the procedure provided under Order IX Rule
13 of CPC. Therefore, I am of the view that the judgment and decree passed by the Appellate Court
by invoking the provisions of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC is one without jurisdiction. I am of the view
that the entire procedure which is adopted by the Appellate Court in an appeal under Section 96(2)
of CPC stands vitiated. Paragraph 17 of the judgment under challenge reads as follows:
"17. The sole defence of the appellant/defendant is that, purposefully the
plaintiff/Respondent in order to get the exparte decree, he has given wrong address,
thus contended that, he was not aware about the suit filed by the
plaintiff/Respondent. Even the Respondent-plaintiff has not stepped into the witness
box to denied the averments made in affidavit to I.A.I, except cross-examine the
PW-1. Smt. S.G.C. vehemently argued that, vested right of the plaintiff/Respondent is
taken away, if the appeal is allowed. The Respondent/plaintiff has not produced any
documents what is the stage of execution proceedings, whether he has taken sale
deed or not and in pursuance of sale deed by filing miscellaneous he has taken
possession of the suit property or not has not been demonstrated. If such thing has
been established before the Court, definitely the court could have understood the
contention of the Respondent/plaintiff. Merely there is a delay of 6 years and odd
appeal of the plaintiff/Respondent cannot be dismissed, because he has all along
contended that, only when he has verified the revenue records, he came to know the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 5
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
judgment and decree passed by the lower court. The defendant/appellant has shown
the sufficient cause, because the summons issued to the defendant, where the
defendant is not permanent resident. In fact, as per the registered agreement to sell,
the defendant is the permanent resident of Vakkund village, no summons was issued
to that address. Under such circumstances, it can infer that summons was not duly
served. Even there is no evidence, the wife of the defendant has intimated the same to
her husband. In a several rulings of Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Court, if the
sufficient cause is shown, delay can be condoned. The learned counsel appearing for
the appellant has pressed into the service of reported ruling of Hon'ble Supreme
Court reported in 1987 SC 1353 in the matter of Collector Land Acquisition Anantnag
and Anr V/s Mr. Kkatiji and Ors, wherein Hon'ble Supreme Court has given following
principles and also hold that, such a application has to be construed liberally. Those
principles are as under:
1. Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging an appeal late.
2. Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious matter being thrown out at
the very threshold and cause of justice being defeated. As against this when delay is
condoned the highest that can happen is that a cause would be decided on merits
after hearing the parties.
3. "Every day's delay must be explained"
does not mean that a pedantic approach should be made. When not every hour's delay, every
second's delay? The doctrine must be applied in a rational common sense pragmatic manner.
4. When substantial justice and technical considerations are pitted against each other, cause of
substantial justice deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to have vested right in
justice being done because of a non-deliberate delay.
5. There is no presumption that delay is occasioned deliberately, or on account of culpable
negligence, or on account of malafides. A litigant does not stand to benefit by resorting to delay. In
fact he runs a serious risk.
6. It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on account of its power to legalize justice on
technical grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice and is expected to do so.
The said ruling is aptly applicable to the case on hand, because the plaintiff/Respondent has given
the address of father-in-law's house, at Tadakod village Dharwad District, though the defendant is
the permanent resident of Vakkund village, Belagavi District. For this, the plaintiff has not assigned
reason, therefore the defendant/appellant has no occasion to contest the suit filed by the plaintiff.
Further because of the decree there is no vested right vest with the plaintiff and in this regard, no
material is produced. No doubt, there is substantial delay in filing the appeal, that can be
compensated by imposing some costs. Accordingly, I.A.No.I filed by the appellant/defendant U/O
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 6
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
41 Rule 3-A of C.P.C. R/w sec. 5 of Limitation Act is hereby allowed on costs of Rs.3000/-,
accordingly point under reference answered in the Affirmative."
19. If the reasons assigned by the Appellate Court at paragraph 17 are examined, this Court is of the
view that there is a substantial error and defect in the procedure adopted by the Appellate Court
while deciding an appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC. The Appellate Court has not adjudicated the
case on merits but has proceeded to set aside the ex-parte decree on the ground that summons was
not duly served on the respondent/defendant. The Appellate Court while hearing an appeal under
Section 96(2) of CPC was bound by the procedure and scheme provided under Section 96(2) of CPC
and therefore, the judgment under challenge is not decided in terms of Section 96(2) of CPC and the
Rules contained therein. Therefore, I am of the view that the judgment and decree of the First
Appellate Court is not sustainable since it suffers from serious error and defect relating to procedure
adopted by the Appellate Court. It is clearly evident from the judgment under challenge that the
defect in procedure is substantial and has virtually affected the decision of the case on merits. What
the Appellate Court has virtually lost sight of is that there is a gulf of difference in the procedure
provided under Section 96(2) and under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. There are several implications
and consequences when the rights of the parties are adjudicated under Section 96(2) of CPC and
under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC.
20. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff
in the case of N.Mohan vs. R.Madhu (supra) has held that the defendant against whom an ex-parte
decree is passed has two options. The first is to file an appeal and the second is to file an application
under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. It is quite interesting to note that the defendant can have recourse to
both the remedies simultaneously. In the judgment cited supra, the Hon'ble Apex Court was of the
view that if an application is filed under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC, that would not take away the right
of an appeal which is provided under Section 96(2) of CPC. The Hon'ble Apex Court was of the view
that even if an application filed under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC is rejected, that would not take away
the right of an appeal which is available to the defendant under Section 96(2) of CPC. The Hon'ble
Apex Court reiterating the principles laid down in the case of Deepal Girishbhai Soni vs. United
India Insurance Company Limited2, held that the right of an appeal is a statutory right and that the
litigant cannot be deprived of such right.
21. Therefore, on perusal of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment
cited supra, what emerges is that even if an application under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC is rejected,
the remedy available to the defendant under Section 96(2) of CPC is not taken away. But the
converse may not be true. If the defendant avails both the remedies simultaneously and if the appeal
filed under Section 96(2) of CPC is dismissed, then the proceedings under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC
for setting aside the ex-parte decree would not survive for consideration. The reason is that the
decree of the Trial Court becomes superseded or merged with that of (2004) 5 SCC 385 the
Appellate Court. Therefore, as long as the defendant's appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC is pending,
he can pursue his remedy under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. It goes without saying that if the
miscellaneous application is rejected by the Trial Court which has passed ex-parte decree, he still
has a further remedy by way of an appeal before the Superior Court. But, however, this remedy is
subject to the outcome of the appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 7
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
22. Therefore, what can be inferred from the above said two schemes is that as long as the Appellate
Court does not decide the correctness of the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court, the
remedy under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC continues to exist. But, however, the moment the appeal
under Section 96(2) of CPC is decided, the right, if any, under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC stands lost
forthwith.
23. Now coming to the present case on hand, the Appellate Court has failed to note that when an
ex-parte decree is challenged under Section 96(2) of CPC, the respondent/defendant could not have
raised a contention regarding correctness or otherwise of the order posting the suit for ex-parte
hearing and consequently could not have raised any ground questioning the ex-parte decree on the
ground that summons were not served on him. The first appellate court has presumed that
respondent/defendant is permanent resident of Vakkund and therefore, the temporary address
shown at Tadkod is an incorrect address. Therefore, the first appellate court has come to the
conclusion that summons was not at all served on the defendant. The first appellate court has gone
to the extent of recording a finding that summons was served on the wife of the
respondent/defendant does not indicate that she has intimated her husband in regard to service of
summons on defendant.
24. It is this finding of the first appellate court which goes against the spirit and object of remedies
contemplated under Section 96(2) of CPC and Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. There is absolutely no legal
impediment for the defendant to question an ex-parte decree under Section 96(2) of CPC or avail a
remedy under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. Though remedies are concurrent, but their scope is entirely
different. What the first appellate court has totally lost sight of is that the two remedies provided
against an ex-parte decree are in respect of two different situations and are to be resorted to, if facts
of the situations are available to the litigant. If the respondent/defendant has opted to prefer an
appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC, the first appellate court cannot examine the conditions
enumerated under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. In a first appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC, the
defendant on merits of the suit can contend that the materials brought on record by the plaintiff
were not sufficient for passing a decree in his favour. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bhanu
Kumar Jain Vs Archana Kumar and Another3 at paragraph 38 held as follows:
(2005) 1 SCC 787 "38. The dichotomy, in our opinion, can be resolved by holding that
whereas the defendant would not be permitted to raise a contention as regard the
correctness or otherwise of the order posting the suit for ex parte hearing by the trial
court and/or existence of a sufficient case for non-
appearance of the defendant before it, it would be open to him to argue in the first appeal filed by
him under Section 96(2) of the Code on the merits of the suit so as to enable him to contend that the
materials brought on record by the plaintiffs were not sufficient for passing a decree in his favour or
the suit was otherwise not maintainable. Lack of jurisdiction of the court can also be a possible plea
in such an appeal. We, however, agree with Mr.Chaudhari that the "Explanation" appended to Order
9 Rule 13 of the Code shall receive a strict construction as as held by this court in Rani Choudhury,
P.Kiran Kmar and Shyam Sundar Sarma v.Pannalal Jaiswal."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 8
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
25. On reading of paragraph 38 of the judgment cited supra, it is clearly evident that defendant
cannot be permitted to raise a contention as regards the correctness or otherwise of the order
posting the suit for ex-parte hearing. But however, it would be open to him to argue in the first
appeal questioning the findings recorded by the trial court on merits. What can be inferred is, even
in the absence of defence, defendant can make out a case before the first appellate court that the
materials placed on record by plaintiff are not sufficient enough to grant reliefs as sought by the
plaintiff.
26. The principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment cited supra are followed in
an subsequent judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in N.Mohan (supra). The Apex Court
re-iterating the principles has infact culled-out relevant paragraph 38, which is cited supra.
Therefore, on meticulous reading of the principles laid down by the Apex Court in the judgment
cited supra, it can be inferred without any doubt that the first appellate court while entertaining an
appeal under Section 96(2) of CPC, cannot examine the correctness of the order posting the case for
ex- parte hearing. Further, the first appellate court under Section 96(2) of CPC, also cannot venture
into examining whether defendant had sufficient and cogent reasons for having failed to contest the
suit on the date fixed for hearing. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bhanu Kumar Jain (supra),
has clearly held that the conditions in Clause (a) and (b) of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC cannot be raised
in the first appeal against an ex-parte decree under Section 96(2) of CPC. If the defendant cannot
raise the said contention, conversely the first appellate court while examining an appeal under
Section 96(2) of CPC also cannot examine the conditions stipulated under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC.
The explanation appended to Order IX Rule 13 of the Code shall receive a strict construction as was
held by Apex Court in Rani Choudhary Vs Lt.Col.Suraj Jit Choudhary4 and Shyam Sundar Sarma Vs
Pannalal Jaiswal and Others5. The judgment rendered by the Apex Court in the case of Rani
Choudhary (supra) and Shyam Sundar (Supra) though were dealing with doctrine of merger of
decree of a trial court consequent to disposal of (1982) 2 SCC 596 (2005) 1 SCC 436 the appeal by
the first appellate court, what emerges from the principles laid down by the Apex Court in the two
judgments cited supra is that defendant has two options. In the case of Rani Choudhary (supra) the
Apex Court has referred to the remedy available to the defendant to file an application before trial
court under Order IX Rule 13 of CPC seeking setting aside the decree. The doctrine of merger in the
event appeal is decided under Section 96(2) is also explained and the scope of explanation to Rule 13
of Order IX of CPC was also interpreted and a view was taken by the Apex Court that doctrine of
merger was enormously extended by introduction of explanation to Rule 13 of Order IX and
therefore, where an appeal under Section 96(2) was dismissed for default or it stood abated on
account of death of a party, the Apex Court while interpreting explanation to Rule 13 was of the view
that trial court decree would merge with the appellate decree. Though these judgments do not deal
with the scope of enquiry under Section 96(2) and Order IX Rule 13, but, however, on meticulous
examination of the principles laid down by the Apex Court in the judgments cited supra, it can be
inferred that when a remedy is sought to challenge the order passed by the trial court posting the
defendant as ex-parte, the said remedy has to be invoked before the court of first instance which
placed defendant ex-parte. Though remedies provided under the Code does not confine defendant to
single course of action, but however, defendant cannot be permitted to raise the grounds available
under sub-clause (a) and (b) of Order IX Rule 13 under Section 96(2) as held by the Hon'ble Apex
Court in Bhanu Kumar Jain (supra).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 9
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
27. Remedy of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC should be always availed before the court of first instance
which passed an ex-parte order. In the present case on hand, the trial court records clearly indicate
that summons was duly served on the wife of the respondent/defendant. Therefore, even otherwise,
the finding of the first appellate court that summons was duly served on respondent/defendant is
perverse and palpably erroneous. If the respondent/defendant had any grievance in regard to due
service of summons and if he seriously disputes, then he ought to have initiated proceedings under
Order IX Rule 13 of CPC before the court at the first instance. The material on record would clearly
indicate that summons was served on the wife of respondent/defendant and therefore, there is due
compliance of Order V Rule 15 of CPC. Prior to 1956 amendment, the summons was always required
to be served either on the defendant or on the male members of the family. By way of 1976
amendment, the same is substituted and now service may be on adult member of defendant's family.
Admittedly, the summons was served on respondent/defendant's wife. Therefore, a presumption
would arise that summons was duly served on respondent/defendant. Even if respondent/defendant
were to deny and place some evidence and if presumption is refuted, in that event, the burden shifts
on the plaintiff to prove due service by leading evidence. There is absolutely no material placed on
record by respondent/defendant that no honest attempt was made to personally serve on the
defendant at his residential address and therefore, service on the family member cannot be held as
sufficient service. It is a trite law that in view of amendment to Rule 15 of Order V of CPC, service
effected on the wife of the defendant is sufficient service. In the present case on hand, the summons
was served on the wife of respondent/defendant and it is not his case that he is not residing with his
wife. No materials are placed along with the application by the respondent/defendant to prima facie
demonstrate that he was not residing in the address furnished by the appellant/plaintiff. All these
significant details and relevant factors have to be gone into and examined by the court of first
instance which passed ex- parte decree under the provisions of Order IX Rule 13 of CPC. If the
summons which is served by the process server which has been tendered on respondent/defendant's
wife bears the signature of the wife of the respondent/defendant and the order sheet also indicates
that summons was served on the wife of the respondent/defendant.
28. The first appellate court has not examined the sufficiency of service on the wife of
respondent/defendant.
More emphasis is laid down on the fact that
respondent/defendant's permanent residence is Vakkund
village of Bailhongal taluk, whereas is summons is sought to be served at Tadkod, which happens to
be the residence of father-in-law of respondent/defendant herein. Service on wife of the
respondent/defendant is not examined in terms of Order V Rule 15 of CPC. The ex-parte judgment
and decree is sought to be challenged in a very casual manner.
29. Conclusions:
(i) If defendant is questioning the correctness of the order posting the case for
ex-parte hearing and consequentially raises several contentions indicating that he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 10
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
was not served with summons, the said contentions have to be raised in a petition
filed under Order IX Rule 13 before the court of first instance who has passed the
order of posting the case for ex-parte hearing and consequentially has passed an
ex-parte decree. In view of the principles laid down by the Apex Court in Bhanu
Kumar Jain (supra), the conditions enumerated under clause (a) and (b) of Order IX
Rule 13 of CPC cannot be raised in a first appeal against the ex-parte decree under
Section 96(2) of CPC.
(ii) In an appeal under Section 96(2), the defendant on merits of suit can contend
that the material brought on record by the plaintiff were not sufficient for passing a
decree in his favour, which necessarily presupposes that defendant even in the
absence of defence or rebuttal evidence can still argue that evidence available on
record is not sufficient to grant any reliefs to the plaintiff.
(iii) The principles laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Bhanu Kumar Jain
(supra), clearly indicate that defendant cannot be permitted to raise contention as
regard to correctness or otherwise of order posting the suit ex-parte hearing;
conversely can be inferred that appellate court also cannot examine the existence of
sufficient case for non-
appearance of the defendant in an appeal filed under Section 96(2) and has to only confine its
adjudication on merits.
(iv) There is no legal impediment in filing the appeal against the ex-parte decree. Though remedies
under Order IX Rule 13 and Section 96(2) are concurrent but their scope is entirely different. The
two remedies provided against ex-parte decree are in respect of two different situations and can be
resorted to only if the facts of the situations are available to litigant.
(v) If the there is denial of service by defendant, the presumption raised under Section 27 of the
General Clauses Act on the basis of expression 'may presume' stands refuted and burden would shift
upon the plaintiff to prove due service by leading evidence and also by examining the process server
and this exercise has to be done before the court of first instance which has proceeded to place the
defendant ex-parte and consequentially ex-parte decree is passed.
(vi) An enquiry under Rule 13 of Order IX necessarily involves adducing of evidence either to show
that summons was not duly served or that he was prevented from appearing by any sufficient cause.
The correctness of an order under that provision can be considered by appellate court in an appeal
under Order XLIII Rule 1(d) of the Code. The petition to set aside ex-parte decree is a less expensive
remedy than an appeal for which court fee on the subject matter of the appeal has to be paid.
(vii) An error, defect or irregularity which has affected the decision of the case may be challenged in
an appeal against the decree whether ex parte or otherwise. But an appeal against the ex parte
decree under Section 96(2) CPC cannot be converted into proceedings for setting aside the decree
with the concomitant duty of affording to the parties an opportunity of adducing evidence for and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 11
Shri.Mahantesh S/O Channabasappa ... vs Shri.Manjunath S/O Madiwalappa Hosur on 14 January, 2022
against any ground that may be raised in support thereof under Order IX Rule 13, CPC. Nor can
such an appeal be converted into an appeal under Order XLIII Rule 1(d), CPC. The reason is that
when a particular remedy is provided for setting aside an ex parte decree and there is, by way of
appeal, another special remedy against an order refusing to set aside, these remedies and none other
must be followed.
30. Therefore, this court is of the view that the judgment and decree passed by the first appellate
court in setting aside the ex-parte decree is palpably erroneous and there is an error in the
procedure adopted by the first appellate court. Therefore, the miscellaneous second appeal has to
succeed and the remand order passed by the first appellate court is liable to be set aside, as the same
is not at all sustainable.
For the foregoing reasons, I pass the following:
ORDER The Miscellaneous Second Appeal is allowed. The judgment and decree
dated 01.04.2017 passed in R.A.No.22/2014 by the First Appellate Court is set aside.
The Appellate Court is directed to hear the matter on merits after affording an
opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
Sd/-
JUDGE CA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76764927/ 12
