Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27
February, 2023
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
[1]
SHOUGR Digitally
by
signed
AKPAM SHOUGRAKPAM
DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
Date: 2023.02.27
DA SINGH 13:48:55 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022
(Ref:- El. Petn. No. 12 of2022)
Shri Jotin Waikhom, aged about 37 years, S/o (L) Waikhom
Surendra Singh, resident of Thangmeiband Hijam Leikai, P.O.
Lamphel, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795004.
...Applicant
-Versus -
1. Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh, aged about 57 years, S/o
Late Kh. Ingocha Singh, resident of Thangmeiband Khuyathong
Polem Leikai, P.O. Lamphel, Imphal West District, Manipur-
795004 and
2. Shri Hijam Nutanchandra Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Shri
Hijam Gunachandra Sigh, resident of Thangmeiband Thingel
Leikai, P.O. Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795001.
.... Respondents
-AND-
IN THE MATTER OF:
(In Election Petition No. 12 of 2022) Shri Jotin Waikhom, aged about 37 years, S/o
(L) Waikhom Surendra Singh, resident of Thangmeiband Hijam Leikai, P.O.
Lamphel, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795004.
... Petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 1
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
-Versus-
1. Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh, aged about 57 years, S/o Late Kh. Ingocha
Singh, resident of Thangmeiband Khuyathong Polem Leikai, P.O. Lamphel, Imphal
West District, Manipur- 795004 and
2. Shri Hijam Nutanchandra Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Shri Hijam
Gunachandra Sigh, resident of Thangmeiband Thingel Leikai, P.O. Imphal, Imphal
West District, Manipur - 795001.
... Respondents MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the Applicant :: Mr. Ajoy Pebam, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. N. Ibotombi, Senior Advocate
asstd. by Mr. A. Rommel, Advocate
Date of Hearing :: 23-02-2023
Date of Judgment & Order :: 27-02-2023
JUDGMENT & ORDER
[1] Heard Mr. Ajoy Pebam, learned counsel appearing for the
applicant and Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. A. Rommel, learned counsel
appearing for the respondent No 1. None appeared for the respondent No 2.
The present application had been filed under Order VI Rule 17 of the CPC, 1908 with a prayer for
allowing to delete the letter "h" from the name of the respondent No. 1 appeared at the Index, List of
Date and Synopsis, Cause Title at page No. 4, para No. 14(I) at page No. 17, para No. 14 (II) at page
No. 19, para No. 22 at page No. 29 and para No. 1(II) at page No. 44 of the connected Election
Petition No. 12 of 2022.
[2] In the present application, it has been pleaded that in El. Petn. No 8 of 2017 filed by the present
applicant in connection with the previous election, the present respondent No. 1 wrote his name as
"Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" in the cause title of his written statement as well as in the affidavit
filed in support of his written statement. It has also been pleaded that while executing and
registering a Sale Deed dated 02-06-2017, the name of the respondent No. 1 was written as
"Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" and that in Revenue Receipt No. 0935 in respect of his land issued
by the Revenue Department, the name of the respondent No. 1 is written as "Joykishan" and MC(El.
Petn.) No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 2
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
that before the Sub-Divisional Officer, Lamphel, Imphal West, the respondent No. 1 presented
himself as "Joykishan" as the appellant in Revenue Appeal Case No. 5 of 2017 and Revenue Appeal
Case No. 7 of 2017.
[3] It is the case of the applicant that the name of the respondent No. 1 is some time written as
"Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" and some time as "Khumukcham Joykisan Singh" in some of his
important/ official documents and accordingly, at the time of drafting the present Election Petition
No. 12 of 2022, the learned counsel for the applicant committed a mistake in writing the name of the
respondent No. 1, in that he added the letter "h" in between the letters "s" and "a" in writing the
name of the respondent No. 1, which appeared at the Index, List of Date and Synopsis, Cause Title at
page No. 4, para No. 14(I) at page No. 17, para No. 14 (II) at page No. 19, para 22 at page No. 29 and
para No. 1(II) at page No. 44 of the election Petition No. 12 of 2022.
The applicant also pleaded that the respondent No. 1 wrote his name as "Joykisan" in filing his
nomination paper in connection with the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election, 2022,
however, being a time bound matter, the applicant did not perused properly the spelling of the name
of the respondent No. 1 mentioned in the said election petition and consequently the applicant failed
to write the name of the respondent No. 1 as "Joykisan" in some pages of the election petition during
the preparation of the said election petition.
[4] Mr Ajoy Pebam, learned counsel appearing for the applicant submitted that while drafting the
said Election Petition No. 12 of 2022, the learned counsel for the applicant through bona fide
mistake and oversight wrote the name of the respondent No. 1 as "Joykishan" in some pages of the
election petition, however, the name of the respondent No. 1 is also written MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of
2022 Contd.../-
as "Joykisan" in some pages of the election petition. It has also been submitted that the respondent
No. 1 had accepted service of notice of the said election petition, which was sent under the name
"Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" and the respondent No. 1 has knowledge about the pendency of
the said election petition and contested the same by filing his written statement. The learned
counsel further submitted that while deleting the letter "h" from the name of the respondent No. 1
by way of amendment as sought for will not change the nature and character of the election petition
but it would rather assist this court to give justice to the applicant and that if the connected election
petition is heard and disposed of without allowing the present application, it will cause great loss
and irreparable damage to the applicant. The learned counsel accordingly submitted that it will be
just and appropriate to grant leave of this court to delete the letter "h" from the name of the
respondent No. 1 as prayed for in the present application for proper adjudication of the said election
petition.
[5] Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 submitted that
through bona fide mistake on the part of the respondent No. 1, he wrongly typed his name as
"Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" in the written statement filed by him in connection with the earlier
El. Petn. No. 8 of 2017 though the respondent No. 1 clearly mentioned his name as "Khumukcham
Joykisan Singh" in the nomination paper and Form- 26 affidavits and that though the respondent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 3
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
No. 1 wrongly typed his name as "Khumukcham Joykishan Singh", he signed his written statement
and other connected papers as "Khumukcham Joykisan Singh". The learned senior MC(El. Petn.)
No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
counsel further submitted that any bona fide mistake regarding the correct name of the respondent
No. 1 on the earlier occasion, i.e., at the time of filing his written statement in the earlier election
petition has nothing to do in the present case and that the applicant cannot take advantage of the
said bona fide mistake in the present election petition and that such mistake cannot cure the defect
committed by the applicant in his election petition. [6] The learned senior counsel for the
respondent No. 1 submitted that the name of the returned candidate from 9-Thangmeiband
Assembly Constituency in the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election is "Khumukcham
Joykisan Singh" and not "Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" and that there is no person called and
known as "Khumukcham Joykishan Singh", s/o (L) Kh. Ingocha Singh at Thameiband Khoyathong
Polem Leikai, Imphal, Manipur. It has also been submitted that the petitioner did not implead
"Khumukcham Joykisan Singh", the returned candidate from 9- Thangmeiband Assembly
Constituency in the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election in El. Petn. No. 12 of 2022 and
accordingly, the said election petition is hit by principle of non-joinder of necessary parties and the
said election petition is liable to be dismissed.
[7] It has also been submitted on behalf of the respondent No. 1 that the amendment as sought for
by the present applicant is not sustainable in the eye of law and also not permitted by law and that if
the amendment as prayed for is allowed, it will change the entire character of the connected election
petition and that the amendment to the election petition cannot be permitted to cure inherent defect
after the expiry of limitation period. The MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
learned senior counsel accordingly submitted that the present application is liable to be dismissed as
being not maintainable.
[8] I have heard the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties at
length and also examined the materials available on record. It is undeniably found on record that
the name of the returned candidate is written as "Khumukcham Joykishan Singh" in some pages of
the Election Petition No. 12 of 2022 as mentioned hereinabove and his name is also written as
"Khumukcham Joykisan Singh" in some pages of the election petition. After hearing the arguments
advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and on careful examination of the
pleadings made in the said election petition, this Court is of the considered view that the insertion of
the letter "h" in between the letters "s" and "a" while writing the name of the returned candidate is
purely a typographical mistake and a simple case of spelling mistake and nothing more. In my
considered view, the said mistake is only a mis-description of the respondent No. 1's name and that
a mistake in spelling the name is merely a typographical error and is preeminently a curable defect
and that if the correction is allowed, it would not amount to adding any new party and it would not
alter the cause of action or bring any substantive change in the complexion of the petition which
would remain the same in content and so long as there is substantial compliance of section 82 of the
RP Act, that should be sufficient to support the amendment sought. It is also not the case where the
identity and address of the respondent No. 1 is in dispute. Moreover, the returned candidate has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 4
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
knowledge about filing of the said election petition challenging his election and MC(El. Petn.) No.
110 of 2022 Contd.../-
contested the said election petition by filing his written statement. In view of the above, this Court is
of the considered view that the objection raised by the respondent No. 1 is purely on minor technical
ground and that the election petition cannot be invalidated by this insignificant typographical error.
In this connection, we can gainfully relied on the following judgments:-
1. 1995 Supp (3) SCC 407 "Gore Lal Shakya v. Maharaj Singh Yadav & ors."
"8. Learned counsel for Respondent 1 in support of his submission that the
averments in the election petition should be in strict compliance of Section 86(1) of
the Act, relied upon the decision in Rajendra Singh v. Usha Rani. But in the same
decision the learned Judges have observed: (SCC p. 345, para 15) "The mandate
contained in Section 81(3) enjoins that there should be no difference of any kind
whatsoever barring some typographical or insignificant omissions between the
petitions filed and the copy served on the respondent."
"9. In the present case we are of the firm view that the mentioning of the name of the
10th respondent as "Sanjai Kumar" in the array of parties is nothing but only a
typographical error which is insignificant. Under these circumstances we are unable
to agree with the High Court that this typographical error has invalidated the election
petition under Section 86(1) of the Act."
2. (2003) 1 SCC 289 "Ram Prasad Sarma v. Mani Kumar Subba & ors."
"24. It may be noted that in Paragraph 1 of the election petition it has been
mentioned that the respondents were the contesting candidates from 9-Tezpur
Parliamentary Constituency, that is to say, that Respondent No. 11 was also
impleaded as one who had contested the election from the said constituency. There
was every intention to implead such a person as a respondent. It may then be noted
that along with the election petition, copy of return of election is required to be filed
in Form 21-E under Rule 64 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961. It contains the
result of the election as well as the list of candidates. The said list is on record as
Annexure I to the election petition filed by the petitioner and the name of Abul
Khayer is indicated at MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
Serial No. 7 having contested as an independent candidate. It is thus evident that it is
not as if the correct name is not available on the record of the case. Apparently, it
seems to be a case of spelling mistake. Instead of Abul letter `d' got added extra
hence typed as Abdul in the array of parties and the spelling of Khayer as `Khyer'
omitting `a' after `kh'. It is to be noted that address of Respondent No.11 is also
indicated in the petition. It is not disputed that it is the address of the person who
contested the election. In this Court there is an office report of service of notice on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 5
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
respondent No. 8 prepared on the basis of the report received from the Gauhati High
Court. So far as the wrong spelling of Khyer is concerned, it is of little consequence.
Both words "Khyer" and "Khayer" would produce almost the same sound. Technically
there may be difference but by way of example some may spell `Banerjee' as `Banerji'
or `Saksena' as `Saxena' or the like. Therefore such difference in spelling of Khayar is
but to be ignored. There is certainly some difference in `Abul' and `Abdul' but there
is ample material on record to indicate that the same person who had contested
election was meant to be impleaded e.g. the address of the person, the averment that
the Respondents 7 to 18 had contested the election as well as the form of election
return indicating names of all those who had contested the election and the names
with correct spelling is on the record, namely, `Abul Khayer'. The respondent
therefore gets no advantage out of above-noted point sought to be made out. The
parties have however placed reliance on certain decisions on the point. On behalf of
Respondent No.1 reliance has been placed on Gore Lal Shakya v. Maharaj Singh
Yadav wherein Respondent No.10 was shown as Sanjay Kumar whereas the correct
name should have been Sanjiv Kumar. Similar arguments seems to have been
advanced that notice was not served on the correct respondent and the person who
ought to have been impleaded, has not been impleaded. The High Court dismissed
the petition for non- compliance with Section 82(a) of the Act. This Court upset the
decision of the High Court observing that High Court had made a mountain out of a
molehill as it was a mere typographical mistake. Then this Court noted that in the
body of the petition at one place his name was indicated as Sanjiv Kumar and at
another place his name was indicated as Sanjay Kumar. It is submitted that in the
present case no application for correcting the MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022
Contd.../-
name was moved nor was any written objection filed to indicate that it was a typing
error. We feel that absence of any such application will not adversely affect the
petition for the reasons we have already indicated earlier. Another case relied upon
by the learned counsel for the respondent is reported in K. Kamaraja Nadar v. Kunju
Thevar. This is a case relating to non-joinder of necessary parties. We are not
concerned here with such a point. This case therefore would be of no help to the
respondent. The learned counsel for the appellant relies upon a case reported in Shiv
Chand v. Ujagar Singh to indicate the approach which the Court may adopt while
dealing with a case under Section 86 (1) of the Act. It is observed that the test is
whether the election petition complies with provisions of Section 82, not whether the
election petitioner has failed to comply with Section 82. The substance of the matter
must govern, because hypertechnicality when the public policy of the statute is
fulfilled, cannot be permitted to play the procedural tyrant to defeat the vital judicial
process, namely, investigation into the merits of the case. We find no force in this
point too raised by Respondent No. 1. No other point has been urged.
[9] The Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana considered similar amendment
applications and allowed the said amendment in its judgment dated 29-10-2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 6
Shri Jotin Waikhom vs Shri Khumukcham Joykisan Singh on 27 February, 2023
passed in MCs No. 3-E & 4-E of 2013 (El.
Petn. No. 3 of 2012) with the following directions:-
"For the foregoing reasons, the application is allowed and the amendment is
permitted to be carried out. The amended petition is taken on record. The respondent
is at liberty to file afresh written statement or adopt the written statement already
filed by her. Four weeks time is granted to the respondent to do so or to omit to do so.
However, a challenge to a small mistake in typing 'r' for 'n' has led to a gross waste of
Court time in hearing this matter and passing judgment even when there was
sufficient case law in command for the proposition in issue. Besides, the respondent
has been put to unnecessary expense of Court hearings, counsel fee etc. on the
application for amendment for which she deserves to be compensated. Therefore, it is
deemed fir that the applications will be allowed subject to payment of MC(El. Petn.)
No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
(cid:128) 25,000/- as costs, half payable to the respondent and the ret to the Medication &
Conciliation Centre of this Court."
[10] For the reasons and findings given hereinabove and in view of the judgments quoted
hereinabove, the present application is allowed and the amendment sought for is permitted to be
carried out subject to payment of cost of Rs. 25,000/- (rupees twenty five thousand) to be paid to
the High Court Bar Association of Manipur. The counsel for the applicant is directed to carry out the
necessary amendments in the presence of the Registrar (Judl.) of this High Court and the counsel
for the respondent No. 1. The correction is to be carried out within a period of one week from today.
The respondent No. 1 is at liberty to file a fresh written statement or adopt the written statement
already filed by him, if so advised for which, four weeks' time is granted for doing the needful.
With the aforesaid directions, the present application is disposed of.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
Devananda
MC(El. Petn.) No. 110 of 2022 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151953507/ 7
