Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28
March, 2025
Author: Raj Beer Singh
Bench: Raj Beer Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44171
Reserved
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 34222 of 2024
Applicant :- Shubham And 5 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Manoj Kumar Dubey,Vipul Kumar Dubey
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Brahma Nand Pandey,G.A.,Ranjeet Verma
Hon'ble Raj Beer Singh,J.
1. Heard Sri Satyendra Narayan Singh, holding brief of Sri Vipul Kumar Dubey, learned counsel for
the applicants, Sri Brahma Nand Pandey, holding brief of Sri Ranjeet Verma, learned counsel for
opposite party No. 2 and learned AGA for the State.
2. This application u/s 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed for quashing of the entire proceedings, including
summoning order dated 17.01.2023, of Case No. 1852 of 2020, (Registration No. 8488/2020),
under Sections 323, 504, 506 I.P.C., Police Station Mahrajganj, District Jaunpur, pending in the
court of C.J.(J.D.)/FTC, Jaunpur. The order dated 30.04.2024, passed by learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Court No. 2, Jaunpur, in criminal revision no. 488 of 2023 is also being impugned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169247116/ 1
Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
3. It has been argued by learned counsel for the applicants that the impugned complaint has been
lodged by opposite party No. 2 / complainant making false and frivolous allegations. The applicant
No. 5 has made a complaint to the revenue authorities regarding illegal encroachment of Arazi Nos.
421 and 423 against the brother of complainant and others and in that connection the revenue
officials have submitted a report, wherein it was mentioned that the complainant and others have
illegally encroached the said land. Further, on 02.07.2020 the brother of applicant No. 6 has lodged
a first information report against the complainant and his family members for the offence under
Sections 147, 323, 504, 506 IPC and after that the impugned complaint has been lodged on
24.07.2020 as a counterblast. The complainant has not sustained any injury. Referring to the facts
of the matter, it was submitted that the impugned proceedings are malicious and that no prima facie
case is made out against the applicants and thus, the impugned proceedings are liable to be
quashed.
4. Learned counsel for opposite party No. 2/complainant and learned AGA for the State have
opposed the application and submitted that in fact the applicants have illegally taken over
possession of Arazi No. 421. It was submitted that on 06.05.2020 applicants have abused and
assaulted the complainant and they have snatched Rs. 800/- from him. The complainant has
supported that version in his statement, recorded under Section 200 Cr.P.C. Regarding incident
dated 02.07.2020 one first information report was lodged by the sister-in-law of complainant
against the applicants and others. It was further submitted that in the affidavit a false averment has
been made on behalf of the applicants that they have no criminal history. Referring to the facts of
the matter, it was submitted that a prima facie case is made out against the applicants.
5. I have considered the rival submissions and perused the record.
6. The legal position on the issue of quashing of criminal proceedings is well-settled that the
jurisdiction to quash a complaint or a charge-sheet should be exercised sparingly and only in
exceptional cases. However, where the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and material on
record even if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the accused, the charge-sheet may be quashed in exercise of
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. In well celebrated judgment reported in State of
Haryana and others Vs. Ch. Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 605, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has carved
out certain guidelines, wherein FIR or proceedings may be quashed but cautioned that the power to
quash FIR or proceedings should be exercised sparingly and that too in the rarest of rare cases. The
broad guidelines laid down by the Apex court for quashing a criminal complaint read as under:-
"In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code
under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of
decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and
reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169247116/ 2
Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same 1 1992 Supp 1 SCC 335 6 do not disclose the
commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
7. In State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. Golconda Linga Swamy & Anr. (2004) 6 SCC 522, the Apex Court
elaborated on what evidence and material the High Court can get into in cases where a prayer for
quashing a complaint has been made. The Court held:-
''Authority of the Court exists for advancement of justice, and if any attempt is made
to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the Court has power to prevent
such abuse. It would be an abuse of the process of the Court to allow any action which
would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169247116/ 3
Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or
continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of Court or quashing of these
proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed
by the complaint, the Court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is
sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the
complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations
are accepted in toto."
8. In R.P. Kapur Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1960 SC 866 : 1960 Cri LJ 1239, the Court observed that
inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a proper case either
to prevent the abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. It is not
possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of
this inherent jurisdiction. However, the Apex Court indicated some categories of cases where the
inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be cases
where it may be possible for the High Court to take the view that the institution or continuance of
criminal proceedings against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the process of the court
or that the quashing of the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal
proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by an accused
person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the
said proceeding, the High Court would be justified in quashing the proceeding on that ground. Cases
may also arise where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they
are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged.
9. Thus, the legal position is well settled that where the allegations made in the complaint and
material on record even if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused, the charge-sheet / complaint may be
quashed. Similarly, where the allegations made in the complaint are absurd and inherently
improbable or where criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide or maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive, the complaint / proceedings may be quashed.
10. It would be relevant to mention that applicant No. 4 Sushil has filed a revision against the
summoning order dated 17.01.2023 and that revision was dismissed by the Session court vide order
dated 30.04.2024. It is correct that availing of the remedy of the revision before the Sessions Judge
under Section 399 CrPC does not bar a person from invoking the power of the High Court under
Section 482 but it is equally true that the High Court should not act as a second Revisional Court
under the garb of exercising inherent powers. While exercising its inherent powers in such a matter
it must be conscious of the fact that the Sessions Judge has declined to exercise his revisory power in
the matter. In this connection a reference may be made to the case of Deepti aliasArati Rai v. Akhil
Rai & Ors, (1995) 5 SCC 751, Dharampal & Ors. v. Ramshri; 1993 (1) SCC 435 and Rajathi Vs.
C.Ganesan; 1999 SCC (Cri) 1118.
11. Keeping in view the aforesaid legal position, in the instant case it may be seen that in his
statement, recorded under Section 200 Cr.P.C., the complainant has made merely vague allegations
that on 06.05.2020 at about 07:00 PM, applicants-accused have abused him and did 'maarpeet' and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169247116/ 4
Shubham And 5 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
they have snatched Rs. 800/- from him. It has not been clarified that what specific abuses were
hurled by the applicants. As per version of complainant, he was attacked by six applicants-accused
persons but he has not sustained any injury. Further, perusal of record shows that on 02.07.2020
the brother of applicant No. 6, namely Avnish Kumar has lodged a first information report against
the complainant and his family members for the offence under Sections 147, 323, 504, 506 IPC and
after that the impugned complaint has been lodged by the complainant on 24.07.2020 regarding
alleged incident dated 06.05.2020. In view of attending facts and circumstances, the long delay in
filing the impugned complaint raises a serious doubt about the authenticity of the version of
complainant. As stated-above, in his statement under Section 200 Cr.P.C. the allegations levelled by
the opposite party No. 2/complainant are quite vague and he has not sustained any injury.
12. The aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case show that the impugned complaint was filed by
the opposite party No. 2 / complainant as a counterblast to the case lodged by the brother of
applicant No. 6, namely Avnish Kumar against the complainant and his family members for the
offence under Sections 147, 323, 504, 506 IPC. The vagueness of allegations made by the
complainant and long delay in lodging of the impugned complaint further raises serious doubt about
authenticity of the version of complainant. As stated-above the complainant has not sustained any
injury. It appears that the impugned proceedings are attended with mala fide and the same have
been maliciously instituted for wreaking vengeance upon the applicants-accused. Though as
stated-above the revision filed by one of the applicant No. 4 has already been dismissed by the
Session Court and in such circumstances interference under section 482 CrPC can be made only in
extra-ordinary circumstances but the above-referred attending facts show that if the impugned
proceedings are allowed to proceed, the same would be gross abuse of the process of court, hence a
case for invoking powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is made out and the impugned proceedings are
liable to be quashed.
13. In view of the aforesaid, the impugned proceedings, including summoning order, of aforesaid
case against applicants, namely, Shubham, Satyam, Shivam, Sushil, Rajesh and Sunil are hereby
quashed. The impugned order dated dated 30.04.2024, passed in criminal revision no. 488 of 2023
by the Additional Sessions Judge, Court No. 2, Jaunpur also stand quashed.
14. The application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed.
Order Date :- 28.03.2025 Anand
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169247116/ 5
