Siftehasan And 5 Others vs Union Of India And 4 Others on 31 January, 2025
Siftehasan And 5 Others vs Union Of India And 4 Others on 31
January, 2025
Author: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
Bench: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14770-DB
Court No. - 29
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 2687 of 2025
Petitioner :- Siftehasan And 5 Others
Respondent :- Union Of India And 4 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Girish Chandra Maurya,Shashank Maurya
Counsel for Respondent :- A.S.G.I.,C.S.C.
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar Mishra,J.
Hon'ble Donadi Ramesh,J.
1. Taking note of petitioners' grievance, this Court had passed following orders on 24.1.2025:
"Petitioner wants protection of his property which has been declared as enemy
property.
Shri Krishna Agarwal, learned counsel for the respondent has obtained instructions,
according to which the competent authority has already passed an order declaring
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104942744/ 1
Siftehasan And 5 Others vs Union Of India And 4 Others on 31 January, 2025
such property as enemy property in terms of Section 18 of the Act.
It is contended that without any opportunity of hearing and without following the
procedure in law, the petitioner's property has been declared as enemy property and
they are likely to be dispossessed.
Shri Krishna Agarwal, learned counsel for the respondent prays for and is allowed a
weeks' time to obtain further instructions in the matter.
Put up as fresh on 31.01.2025.
Till then, status quo shall be maintained with regard to nature and possession of the
property in question."
Sri Krishna Agarwal has obtained instructions according to which the property was declared 'enemy
property' in the year 2008 itself and none of the recorded tenure-holders raised an objection then.
The petitioners apparently got mutated over the said property in the year 2009.
It is, therefore, submitted that rights of the petitioners over the property would require examination
at the level of competent authority, i.e., the Central Government with reference to its jurisdiction
under Section 18 of the Act.
In the facts of the case, we are of the view that the remedy available to petitioners before the Central
Government can always be invoked at the first instance.
In such circumstances, the petitioners are permitted to approach the competent forum in terms of
Section 18 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968 along with a copy of this order annexing all materials in
support of petitioners' claim within two weeks from today. Such claim of the petitioners would be
accorded consideration by passing an appropriate order in accordance with law.
For a period of two weeks and if in the event petitioners represent before the Central Government in
terms of the liberty so granted till the disposal of petitioners' representation, no third-party rights
would be created in respect of the property in question.
It is, however, made clear that we have not examined the entitlement of the petitioners and all issue
relating to petitioners' right, title or interest over the property remains open for examination at the
level of competent authority at the first instance.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 LN Tripathi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104942744/ 2
