Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
Author: R.N. Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.A.No.707 of 2015
and Crl.M.P.No.6619 of 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Dated : 13.12.2021
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.A.No.707 of 2015
and
Crl.M.P.No.6619 of 2019
Silambarasan .. Appellant
Vs.
The Inspector of Police,
Morappur Police Station,
Dharmapuri District. .. Respondent
PRAYER : Criminal Appeal has been filed under sections 374 of
Criminal Procedure Code to set aside the order in S.C.No.290 of 2014
dated 09.10.2015 convicting the accused by the Mahila Court,
Dharmapuri.
For appellant : Mr.K.Murugesan
Legal Aid counsel
For Respondent : Mr.A.Gopinath
Govt. Advocate (Crl.Side)
JUDGMENT
This Criminal Appeal has been preferred challenging the judgment of the learned Sessions Judge
(Fast Track Court), Mahila Court, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Dharmapuri, dated 09.10.2015
made in S.C.No.290 of 2014.
2. The appellant is the accused before the trial Court. According to the case of the prosecution the
deceased minor victim aged 15 years was living with her parents and her younger sister. The accused
has developed an affair with the minor girl/the first victim/V1 (for the sake of convenience the
deceased are referred as V1, V2 and V3). The deceased V2 is the mother of V1. The accused, who is a
neighbour of V1 to V3, had developed love affair with V1. On giving false assurance to marry V1, he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 1
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
ravished V1 and in view of that she got conceived and she was two months pregnant. After coming to
know about that, her mother V2 along with her relatives went to the house of the accused and asked
about the occurrence. The accused and his parents denied the involvement of the accused. Having
got frustrated, on 03.04.2012 at about 9.00 p.m., the mother of V1 gave poison (Monocrotophos) to
V1 and V3. Out of frustration V2 has consumed the same poison. All the three died due to
consumption of poison. On the complaint given by the father of V2-Chittu, a case was registered
against the accused in Crime No.135 of 2012 for the offence under Section 174 of Cr.P.C. PW.22-Sub
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Inspector of Police on 04.04.2012 has taken up investigation. He
went to the place of occurrence and prepared a rough sketch and observation mahazer in the
presence of witnesses and recovered empty box of Monocrotophos and two silver tumblers, which
were used to consume poison. He also conducted inquest on the body of V2 and prepared inquest
report. Thereafter, she sent the body of V2 for post-mortem on the same day. She has enquired the
doctor, who had conducted the post- mortem.
3. Thereafter, PW.24-Inspector of Police [Thangaraj] continued the investigation and visited the
place of occurrence and enquired some of the witnesses. He has received death information about
V1 and went to the Government hospital and conducted inquest on the body of V1 in the presence of
Panchayadors and prepared the inquest report Ex.P22 and sent the body for post-mortem. He also
seized the letter written by V1 to her father, from her house. A case was registered on the earlier
complaint given by PW.1 Chittu itself. On perusing the materials available on record, he altered the
charges from 174 Cr.P.C., to 306 IPC and prepared an alteration report and sent it to the Court.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4. Further investigation was continued by PW.25-Inspector of police [Lakshmanakumar], who after
getting the death information of V3, went to the Government hospital and conducted inquest and
prepared the inquest report Ex.P28; then he sent the body of the deceased-V3 for post-mortem.
After completion of post-mortem, he handed over the body to her relatives and sent viscera for
examination through Court. He also sent the empty container seized from the place of occurrence
for chemical examination. Suicide letter written by V1 was also seized. He got the chemical report
and collected the foetus of the deceased V1 and sent it for DNA test through Court and got the DNA
report Ex.P.35. On 15.04.2012, he arrested the accused and recorded a confession statement. He
also sent the accused for conducting potency test through Court. Medical examination, post-mortem
and scientific expert to conduct chemical examination and got the relevant reports and completed
investigation. After the case was taken on file and after completing the legal mandates, the Court
framed charges for the offence under Sections 363, 366(a), 376 and 306 (3counts) IPC.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
5. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned Government Advocate(Crl.side) for
the State.
6. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the evidence of the prosecution does not
prove the guilt of the accused under Section 306 IPC. He further submitted that the DNA test report
Ex.P35 would show that the uterus sent for chemical examination did not contain the foetus and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 2
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
hence DNA test could not be carried out. By taking support from the above report, the learned
counsel for the appellant claimed that the guilt of the accused under Section 306 IPC is not proved
by the prosecution.
7. The learned Government Advocate (Crl.Side) for the State submitted that the accused had
ravished V1 and thereafter refused to admit his involvement. Because of shame and frustration
caused by the accused, the mother of V1 has taken the extreme decision of killing herself and her
children; the above series of events was followed by the offence of rape and that itself would confirm
that the occurrence of rape is proved. He further submitted that because of the act of the appellant,
the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis victims were forced to commit suicide and the same has been
clearly discussed by the Courts below by appreciating the evidence in a proper manner. Hence the
appeal has to be dismissed.
8. Points for consideration:
“Whether the sentence and judgment of the trial Judge is unfair, improper or not
legal?”
9. Despite the fact that the accused was charged for the offence under Section 376 and 306 (3
counts) IPC, the learned trial Judge has chosen to acquit the accused from the charges 366(A) and
323 IPC. The accused was only convicted for the offence under Sections 376 and 306 (3 counts) IPC.
It is very pathetic that a mother and children have consumed poison and committed suicide. V2
administered poison to her daughters V1 and V3 and thereafter she also consumed poison. All the
three victim died one by one and the container containing poison was also recovered from the place
of occurrence. The chemical examination of the said container and the tumbler used to consume the
poison by the victim had deducted Monocrotophos in the washings of the tumbler, which is a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis poisonous substance. The report of PW.23 on this aspect is
marked as Ex.P19 and it reads as under:-
“Item I: A small stainless steel tumbler with brownish stains inside and with pungent
odour. Deducted Monocrotophos in the washings of the tumbler.
Item II: A small stainless steel tumbler with brownish stains insider and with
pungent odour.
Deducted Monocrotophos in the washings of the tumbler.
Item III: A small stainless steel tumbler with brownish stains insider and with
pungent odour.
Deducted Monocrotophos in the washings of the tumbler.
Item IV: A plastic container (with screw type lid) with printed letters,“MONOKEM
MONOCHROTOPHOS 36% SL with dirty brown stains inside and with pungent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 3
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
odour.
Deducted Monocrotophos in the washings of the container.”
10. Though the cause of death of the deceased victim was proved to be consumption
of above poison, I am not able to find any evidence to show whether the accused had
directly induced or abetted the deceased victim to consume poison. In order to
convict the accused for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis abetting suicide the
following ingredients should be proved. In this context, it is relevant to refer the
decision of the Allahabad High Court rendered in Anand Singh And Others Vs. State
Of U.P. And Others, which reads as under:
"7. The essential ingredients of the offence under Section 306 IPC are : (i) the
abetment;
(ii) the intention of the accused to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to commit
suicide. The act of the accused, however, insulting the deceased by using abusive
language will not, by itself, constitute the abetment of suicide. There should be
evidence capable of suggesting that the accused intended by such act to instigate the
deceased to commit suicide. Unless the ingredients of instigation/abetment to
commit suicide are satisfied the accused cannot be convicted under Section 306 IPC."
61. Similarly, in another recent judgment of this Court in Ude Singh v. State of Haryana, a two judge
Bench of this Court, speaking through Justice Dinesh Maheshwari, expounded on the ingredients of
Section 306 of the IPC, and the factors to be considered in determining whether a case falls within
the ken of the aforesaid provision, in the following terms:
"38. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be a proof of direct or indirect
act/s of incitement to the commission of suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the
question of cause of a suicide, particularly in the context
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of an offence of abetment of suicide, remains a
vexed one, involving multifaceted and complex attributes of human behaviour and
responses/reactions. In the case of accusation for abetment of suicide, the Court
would be looking for cogent and convincing proof of the act/s of incitement to the
commission of suicide. In the case of suicide, mere allegation of harassment of the
deceased by another person would not suffice unless there be such action on the part
of the accused which compels the person to commit suicide; and such an offending
action ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a person has abetted
in the commission of suicide by another or not, could only be gathered from the facts
and circumstances of each case.
39. For the purpose of finding out if a person has abetted commission of suicide by
another, the consideration would be if the accused is guilty of the act of instigation of
the act of suicide. As explained and reiterated by this Court in the decisions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 4
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
above-referred, instigation means to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage
to do an act. If the persons who committed suicide had been hypersensitive and the
action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily expected to induce a similarly
circumstanced person to commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused guilty
of abetment of suicide. But, on the other hand, if the accused by his acts and by his
continuous course of conduct creates a situation which leads the deceased perceiving
no other option except to commit suicide, the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis case
may fall within the four-corners of Section 306 IPC. If the accused plays an active
role in tarnishing the self-esteem and self-respect of the victim, which eventually
draws the victim to commit suicide, the accused may be held guilty of abetment of
suicide. The question of mens rea on the part of the accused in such cases would be
examined with reference to the actual acts and deeds of the accused and if the acts
and deeds are only of such nature where the accused intended nothing more than
harassment or snap show of anger, a particular case may fall short of the offence of
abetment of suicide. However, if the accused kept on irritating or annoying the
deceased by words or deeds until the deceased reacted or was provoked, a particular
case may be that of abetment of suicide. Such being the matter of delicate analysis of
human behaviour, each case is required to be examined on its own facts, while taking
note of all the surrounding factors having bearing on the actions and psyche of the
accused and the deceased."
62. Similarly, in Rajesh v. State of Haryana, a two judge Bench of this Court, speaking through
Justice L. Nageswara Rao, held as follows:
"9. Conviction under Section 306 IPC is not sustainable on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the accused, which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide. In order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 IPC, there must be
a case of suicide and in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis commission of the said
offence, the person who is said to have abetted the commission of suicide must have
played an active role by an act of instigation or by doing certain act to facilitate the
commission of suicide. Therefore, the act of abetment by the person charged with the
said offence must be proved and established by the prosecution before he could be
convicted under Section 306 IPC."
63. In a recent decision of this Court in Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab, a three judge Bench of
this Court, speaking through Justice Hrishikesh Roy, held thus:
"15. As in all crimes, mens rea has to be established. To prove the offence of
abetment, as specified under Sec 107 of the IPC, the state of mind to commit a
particular crime must be visible, to determine the culpability. In order to prove mens
rea, there has to be something on record to establish or show that the appellant
herein had a guilty mind and in furtherance of that state of mind, abetted the suicide
of the deceased."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 5
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
64. In Vaijnath Kondiba Khandke v. State of Maharashtra, a two judge Bench of this Court, speaking
through Justice U.U. Lalit, dealt with an appeal against the rejection of an application under Section
482 of the CrPC, for quashing an FIR registered under Sections 306 and 506 read with Section 34 of
the IPC. A person serving in the office of the Deputy Director of Education Aurangabad had
committed suicide on 8 August 2017. His wife made a complaint to the police that her husband was
suffering from mental torture as https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis his superiors were getting heavy
work done from her husband. This resulted in him having to work from 10 AM to 10 PM and even at
odd hours and on holidays. The specific allegation against the appellant was that he had stopped the
deceased's salary for one month and was threatening the deceased that his increment would be
stopped. This Court noted that there was no suicide note, and the only material on record was in the
form of assertions made by the deceased's wife in her report to the police. The Court went on to hold
that the facts on record were inadequate and insufficient to bring home the charge of abetment of
suicide under Section 306 of the IPC. The mere factum of work being assigned by the appellant to
the deceased, or the stoppage of salary for a month, was not enough to prove criminal intent or
guilty mind. Consequently, proceedings against the appellant were quashed."
......
26. The next judgment cited by the counsel for the Opposite Party No. 2 is in the case of Chitresh
Kumar Chopda (supra) wherein the Supreme Court with respect to scope of Section 107 IPC
elaborated and discussed the phrase ''instigate' and after referring to the various judgments and
after referring to the suicide note held that, on the basis of the material on record, it cannot be said
that any inference of the appellant having instigated were expected. The Supreme Court recorded as
under:
25. It is trite that at the stage of framing of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis charge,
the court is required to evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to
finding out if the facts emerging therefrom, taken at their face value, disclose the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence or offences. For this
limited purpose, the court may sift the evidence as it cannot be expected even at the
initial stage to accept as gospel truth all that the prosecution states. At this stage, the
court has to consider the material only with a view to find out if there is ground for
"presuming" that the accused has committed an offence and not for the purpose of
arriving at the conclusion that it is not likely to lead to a conviction. (See Niranjan
Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya[(1990) 4 SCC 76 : 1991 SCC
(Cri) 47] .)
27. In the present case, even if submissions of are taken on their face value to be
gospel truth, there is nothing material or ground for even for presuming that the
applicants could be held guilty for committing the offence under Section 306 IPC.”
11. In this case, even though the victims got aggrieved due to denial of the
involvement of the accused in ravishing V1, there is no evidence on record to show
that the accused had directly abetted the suicide of the mother of V1 [V2] and V2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 6
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
alone gave poison to her https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis daughters V1 and V3.
12. Regarding the charges under Section 376 IPC, it is claimed by the learned counsel
for the appellant that in view of the absence of foetus in the uterus sent for chemical
examination, DNA test could not be conducted and hence the accused has benefit of
doubt.
13. One important piece of evidence in this case is the evidence of Dr.A.S.Arun, who
examined V1 before her death. He has been examined as PW.11. His evidence would
reveal that on 02.04.2012 at 10.00 a.m., the deceased V1 was brought by her Aunt
PW.3 [Kalpana] by reporting that the V1 did not get her mensuration for three
months.
When the doctor examined, he found that V1 was pregnant. The Aunt [Kalpana], who accompanied
with V1 has been examined as PW.3. After coming to know about the pregnancy of V1, PW.3 tried to
handle the issue softly. She sent V1 to school and told the parents of V1 about the test results. On
hearing that V2 -mother of V1 got very emotional and upset. After V1 came back from school, she
enquired V1 in the presence of PW.3. At that time, the deceased V1 told that it was the accused who
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis was the reason for her pregnancy. In her evidence PW.3 has
spoken about the events that had happened subsequent to the revelation made by her and V1. It is
stated that the mother of V1 was very much disturbed and she was crying all along. Since the mother
of V1 was not able to handle the issue legally and practically, she got very much disturbed. She asked
about this to the accused also. Since the accused refused his involvement, V1 and her mother
became helpless. The act of the accused would show that he had cheated V1 in the pretext of love.
14. Further, the extreme choice chosen by V2 to kill herself and her daughters subsequent to the
denial of the accused would show that, the accused brought troubles to the family of V1. The
evidence of PW.3 would substantiate the events that had taken place prior to the act of suicide
committed by V2. After PW.3 left her house, she heard a strange noise from the house of V2 and
immediately she rushed to the house. Since the house was locked, she kicked and opened it and
found that V1 and V2 had consumed poison. This has been witnessed not only by PW.3 but also by
the neighbours who were residing nearly. PW.4 to PW.6, who were the neighbours of the deceased
have also corroborated https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the evidence of PW.3. All these witnesses
were aware of the involvement of the accused in ravishing V1. Even if the DNA report is not
available, the above evidence would clearly show that the accused had ravished the victim and
thereafter left V1 helpless. The medical examination conducted by PW.11 on V1 would also show that
she was pregnant.
15. The learned trial Judge had adverted this material evidence available on record and found that
the accused is guilty for the offence under Section 376 IPC. The deceased V1 is a minor whose
consent is immaterial. One crucial material that has been recovered from the house of V1 is the
suicide note. In which V1 has written suicide note, which was marked as M.O.4. The learned trial
Judge has reiterated its content as below:
“vd;id rpyk;gurd; vd;w xU
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 7
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
igad; fhjypj;J fy;ahzk;
gd;dpfpnwd; vd;W brhy;yp vd;id
fw;gHpj;J vdf;F Jnuhfk; bra;J
tpl;lhd;/ mjdhy vd; FLk;gnk
mspe;J tpl;lJ vd; FLk;gk;
,we;jJf;F mtd; jhd; fhuzk;
mtd; FLk;gk; jhd; fhuzk;/”
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. The family of the victim is very peaceful and normal as others. There is no materials on record to
show that the family of the deceased had any other problem to take the extreme decision of killing
themselves. The medical evidence, the suicide note written by V1 and other evidences available on
record would show that the family peace of V1 was shattered after she became pregnant due to the
rape committed on her by the accused. The hand writing expert examined the hand writing of the
suicide note and other hand writing of the V1 (Ex.P33) and confirmed that the hand writing and
suicide note were written by V1 only. Since the said note was written by V1 soon before her death, it
is her dying declaration.
17. Further the deceased V1 or her family did not have any motive to falsely point out the accused
that he was the reason for making V1 pregnant.
18. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the defence that PW.1 have a previous enmity with the
appellant and complaint was a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis motivated one. This is the case in
which three human lives were lost. The mother of V1 was in extreme frustration when the accused
disowned his acts which caused the pregnancy of V1. She was frustrated to the extent of taking away
her life and the lives of her children. The scientific evidence and medical evidence and the suicide
notes of the deceased are sufficient circumstantial evidence, which would directly and conclusively
connect the accused to the offence of rape committed by him on V1. The learned trial Judge
appreciated these materials carefully and found the accused guilty for the offence under Section 376
IPC.
19. Hence, I find no reason to interfere with the findings of the learned trial Judge with regard to the
offence of rape under Section 376 IPC.
20. This is not the case of the prosecution that at the time of the occurrence of suicide, the deceased
was present at the house of the accused and did any positive act for facilitating the victims to
commit suicide.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 8
Silambarasan vs The Inspector Of Police on 13 December, 2021
21. In the result, this Criminal Appeal is partly allowed. The judgment of the Mahila Court,
Dharmapuri, dated 09.10.2015 passed in S.C.No.29 of 2014 is modified to the effect that the accused
was found guilty for offence under Section 376 IPC alone and stands convicted. The accused is
acquitted from the offence under Section 306(3 counts) IPC. Consequently, the connected criminal
miscellaneous petition is also dismissed.
13.12.2021 Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes/No rpl To
1.The Mahila Court, Dharmapuri.
2.The Inspector of Police, Morappur Police Station, Dharmapuri District.
3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N. MANJULA, J.
rpl https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 13.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195189091/ 9
