Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G.
Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
CRR No. 76/2016
IA No. 01/2016
State through CBI
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Vs
Payal Aggarwal & Ors.
Through: Mr. M A Bhat, Advocate for R-8
Ms. Zoya Bhardwaj, Adv for R-11
CRR No. 51/2016
IA No. 01/2016
State through CBI
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Vs
Lovish Bharat & Ors.
Through: Mr. Jagdish Parihar, Adv for R-1,3,6&7
Mr. P N Raina, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. J. A. Hamal, Advocate for R-4
CRR No. 58/2016
IA No. 01/2016
State through CBI
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Vs
Om Parkash & Ors.
Through: Mr. Pawan Kumar Manni, Adv for R-2&3
CRR No. 63/2016
IA No. 01/2016
State through CBI
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Vs
Sheetal Gupta & Ors.
Through: Mr. Pawan Kumar Manni, Adv for R-2&3
CRR No. 71/2016
IA No. 01/2016
State through CBI
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Vs
Jhabar Singh & Ors.
Through: Mr. Atul Chandel, Advocate vice
Mr. Vikas Sharma, Adv for R-2&3
Reserved on: 20.02.2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 1
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
Pronounced on:02.03.2023
2 CRR Nos. 76, 51, 58, 63, 71 of 2016
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Since a common question of law is to be decided in all these criminal revisions, same are proposed
to be disposed of by this common judgment.
2. Petitioners through the medium of aforesaid revision petitions have challenged the order dated
29.01.2016 passed by the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge Jammu, and order dated
24.05.2013 passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate (Special Magistrate CBI) Jammu,
seeking directions to the learned CBI Magistrate to initiate proceedings to tender pardon to accused
Pankaj Kumar Priyadarshi and Heemant Singh Rajawat and in the alternative to quash the orders
aforesaid granting pardon to the aforesaid accused.
3. The CBI Magistrate vide order dated 24.05.2013, while considering the charge sheet arising out of
RC No. 004201S0009 of CBI (ACB) Jammu, wherein it has been prayed in all the cases that the
accused who had turned approvers to support the prosecution case be granted pardon and allowed
to be taken as approvers in the case under section 337 read with section 338 of J&K CrPC. The
learned Magistrate did not grant pardon as prayed for to those accused to become approvers in the
cases as the same were held to be impermissible in view of the law holding the field. It was held that
Section 337 of the CrPC does not apply in the cases and no pardon can be tendered to any of the
accused, as such, the submission of the CBI for approvers was declined.
4. Aggrieved of this order, the petitioner-State through CBI filed revision petitions against the order
passed by the CBI Magistrate before the Sessions Court, however, the Court of learned Additional
Sessions Judge Jammu, while hearing revision petitions upheld the order passed by the CBI
Magistrate, holding that no illegality or impropriety was found in the impugned orders passed by
the learned Magistrate and all the revision petitions filed by the petitioner herein were dismissed.
5. Dissatisfied with both the orders passed by the learned CBI Magistrate as well as the Revisional
Court, the criminal revisions on hand have been filed with alternative prayer to quash the orders
invoking inherent jurisdiction vested in this Court in terms of Section 561-A of J&K CrPC.
6. Shorn of minute details, the overview of the factual background of the case is, that in the year
2010, Government of Jammu & Kashmir referred 100 seats under the Management Quota to
Acharya Shri Chander College of Medical Sciences & Hospital (ASCOMS), Sidhara Jammu for
Combined Entrance Test (for short CET) for admission in MBBS/BDS courses, admission cards
were issued to the candidates, who were eligible in the said examination and the CET was conducted
on 21.08.2010 in the University Campus at Jammu. During examination, the staff appointed for
conducting CET found seven candidates impersonating on behalf of the actual candidates who had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 2
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
applied for admission in response to the Notification issued for the test. Subsequently, they were
apprehended as the photographs on the admission cards did not match with the photographs on the
original application forms and the incriminating material was seized.
7. Accordingly, the Director Admissions, made a written complaint on 21.08.2010 for registration of
FIR and the case for offences under sections 419, 420 read with section 120-B RPC and 2/5 of the
Jammu and Kashmir (Prevention of Unfairmeans) Examination Act, 1987 (for short PUE Act) was
registered at Police Station Gandhi Nagar Jammu vide FIR No. 177/2010 for the commission of
offences punishable under sections 419, 420 RPC and 2/5 PUE Act 1987. Subsequently, the
Government of Jammu & Kashmir referred the matter for CBI investigation and after consent of the
State Government, CR was registered by CBI (ACB) Jammu.
8. During investigation, Pankaj Kumar Priyadharshi, Hemant Singh Rajawat, Arvind Mahala,
Goverdan Dass Gabba, Virender Sahu, Mohd. Hafiz, Shahzeb and Kulwant Singh volunteered to
make confessional statements and accordingly their statements were recorded before a Magistrate.
Eventually, after completion of investigation in six different instances, separate charge-sheets were
laid, out of which, first five charge sheets were for the offences punishable under sections 419, 420,
468, 471, 120-B read with section 511 RPC and 2/5 of PUE Act and a prayer was made to the learned
CBI Magistrate for grant of pardon to above mentioned eight accused persons in terms of section
337 of CrPC and treat them as approvers. However, the learned CBI Magistrate rejected the prayer
of the petitioner to tender pardon to the accused in rest of the charge sheets on the ground inter alia
that since neither offences alleged against accused were exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions
nor the said offences were punishable with imprisonment extendable to seven years.
9. While sixth charge sheet presented against the accused was for the commission of offences
punishable under sections 419, 420, 468, 471 read with section 120-B RPC and 2/5 of PUE Act on
the ground that the candidates had been selected on the basis of answer sheets attempted by the
alleged impersonators, therefore, the learned trial Magistrate accepted the prayer of the petitioner
and granted pardon in the said charge sheets to the accused whose statements had been recorded
under section 164 CrPC.
10. Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the learned CBI Magistrate without
examining the accused, in order to satisfy himself whether the statements recorded under section
161 CrPC were admitted by the accused and whether they were ready to become approver or not,
wrongly interpreting section 337 of CrPC, passed the impugned order. It was also argued that the
Revisional Court had also committed error in interpreting section 337 of CrPC without appreciating
the relevant provisions in its true perspective and upheld the order passed by the learned CBI
Magistrate, dismissing all the revision petitions. It was further argued that though the petitioner has
challenged the impugned orders passed by the learned Magistrate as well as the Revisional Court by
way of criminal revisions, however, at the same time a prayer has been made in the alternative to
quash the impugned orders, invoking inherent jurisdiction of this Court.
11. Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued at the Bar that the offences of forgery and
cheating alleged against the accused are punishable upto seven years, therefore, the concurrent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 3
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
finding returned by the Trial Court, as well as, the Revisional Court that none of the offences is
punishable with sentence of seven years imprisonment is incorrect view, as such, the orders
impugned are liable to be set aside. It was further argued that since the offences of cheating and
forgery had been committed by the accused by forging the documents of admit cards etc., as such,
the learned Magistrate should have taken a view that the offence of forgery was not only attempted
as has been stated in the charge sheet but committed. It was finally prayed to allow the petitions by
quashing the orders impugned, passed by the learned Magistrate as well as the Revisional Court, by
directing to tender pardon to those accused who have made confessional statements so that they
may appear in the court as approvers during trial.
12. Learned counsel for the respondents, ex adverso, argued that the Trial Magistrate and the
Revisional Court both have interpreted the relevant provision contained in section 337 of CrPC
correctly to hold that the pardon cannot be tendered to the accused, who have made the confessional
statements, to make them approvers, since the provision of section 337 of CrPC, cannot be made
applicable in the cases, as neither any of the offences in the charge sheet is triable by High Court or
Court of Sessions nor any of the offences is punishable with imprisonment of seven years. They have
also vehemently argued that the petitioner has filed these criminal revisions having already
exhausted remedy of criminal revision before the Sessions Court and subsequently filing of criminal
revisions is statutorily barred, as such, the criminal revisions filed by the petitioner are not
maintainable.
13. Heard, perused and considered.
14. Section 337(1) of CrPC provides for tender of a pardon to accomplice in respect of the following
offences, namely:
i) Any offence triable exclusively by the High Court or Court of Sessions;
ii) Any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years;
iii) Any offence under any of the following sections of the IPC i.e 161, 165, 165-A,
216-A, 369, 401, 435 and 477-A.
15. As already stated in the preceding paras that in all the five cases for which these revision
petitions have been preferred, the accused were alleged to have attempted to commit offences
punishable under sections 419, 420, 468, 471, 120-B read with section 511 RPC and 2/5 of PUE Act.
The offences described in the charge sheet alleged to have been committed by the accused are
extracted in the following table indicating the offences and the punishment therefor.
Sec. Offence Punishment under the By what Court
of Ranbir Penal Code triable
RPC
Cheating by personation Imprisonment of either Court of Session
419 description for 3 years or or Judicial
fine, or both Magistrate of the
first or second
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 4
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
class
Cheating and thereby Imprisonment of either Court of Session
420 dishonestly inducing description for 7 years, or Judicial
delivery of property, or the and fine Magistrate of the
making, alteration or first class.
destruction of a valuable
security
Forgery for the purpose of Imprisonment of either Court of Session
468 cheating description for 7 years, or Judicial
and fine Magistrate of the
first class.
Using as genuine a forged Punishment for forgery of Same Court as
471 document which is known such document that by which the
to be forged forgery is triable
Attempting to commit Imprisonment for life or The Court by
511 offences punishable with imprisonment not which the offence
imprisonment for life and exceeding half longest attempted is
in such attempt doing Act term and of description, triable.
towards the commission of provided for the offence,
the offence or fine or both
Criminal Conspiracy Imprisonment of either Judicial
120- description for six Magistrate of the
B months, or fine or both first class
2(k) Unfairmeans Imprisonment for a term Judicial
2/5 which may extend to 2 Magistrate of the
PU years or with fine which first class
E Act may extend to Rs.2000 or
with both
16. None of the offences, except offences under sections 420, 468 RPC are punishable with
imprisonment of either discretion for seven years and fine, however, on consideration of all the
charge sheets, it appears that the charge sheets have been formulated by the investigating agency
CBI, that all the accused had attempted to commit these offences meaning thereby that the offences
of attempt to commit cheating and forgery for the purpose of cheating, under section 511 r/w 420
and 468 of RPC shall be punishable for imprisonment not exceeding half of the longest term of
description provided for the offence, or fine, or both. Having regard to section 511 RPC with regard
to commission of offences under sections 420, 468 RPC for attempting to commit cheating and
forgery become punishable not exceeding half of the maximum term of the description provided for
the main offence which means that the offences punishable under sections 420, 468 read with
Section 511 RPC each, shall be punishable for imprisonment of just three and a half years, being half
of seven years provided for those offences.
17. Having regard to the punishment for all the offences, not upto seven years, the matter with
regard to tender pardon to accused under section 337 of CrPC, is required to be taken into view. A
bare perusal of section 337 of CrPC shows that the view of the learned Trial Magistrate as well as the
Revsional Court is correct.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 5
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
18. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in case titled "State vs Hiralal G. Kothari & Ors.", reported as AIR
1960 SC 360:1960 Cri LJ 524, has held that the pardon can only be tendered with regard to the
offence which falls in one of these categories. It is not disputed that all the offences of which accused
made confessional statements do not fall within any of these categories. It was further held that as
we read section 337(1) of CrPC, it is to our mind perfectly clear that pardon can only be tendered
under that provision with respect to the three categories of offences mentioned therein. Taking into
account the provisions contained under section 337 of CrPC, it is held that in only three situations
pardon can be tendered to accomplice, firstly in case of any offence triable exclusively by the High
Court or Court of Sessions, secondly any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to seven years or thirdly any offence under any of the following sections of the RPC i.e 161, 165,
165-A, 216-A, 369, 401, 435 and 477-A, by a Magistrate at any stage of the investigation or enquiry
into or the trial of the offence with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have
been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to the offence tender a pardon to such person on
condition of his making a full and true disclosure of whole of the circumstances within his
knowledge relating to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as principal or
abettor, in the commission thereof. While doing so, the Magistrate must know the nature of offence,
person seeking pardon is likely to give nature of his complicity and degree of his in-culpability in
relation to offence and in relation to the accused.
19. Since none of the offences of which the accused seeking pardon are triable by High Court or
Sessions Court or carry the punishment upto seven years or any of those offences which are
enumerated in section 337 CrPC, therefore, no fault can be found with the impugned orders passed
by the learned CBI Magistrate and the Revisional Court.
20. So far as the contention of learned counsel for the respondents that the second revision petition
is not maintainable is concerned, the same also holds water, inasmuch as, section 435 of CrPC
provides for exercise of the power of revision can be exercised concurrently by the High Court or any
Sessions Judge with regard to any proceeding before any criminal court situate within its or his local
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety
of any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed and as to the regularity of any proceedings of
such court.
21. Provisions contained in sub-section 3 of section 435 and sub section 3 of section 438 of CrPC,
which are relevant on the subject, are extracted for ready reference as follows:
"435. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision (1)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (2)
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (3) If an
application under this section has been made by any person either to the High Court
or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be
entertained by the either of them."
" 4 3 8 . S e s s i o n s J u d g e ' s p o w e r s o f r e v i s i o n ( 1 )
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (2)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 6
Since A Common Question Of Law Is To Be ... vs Hiralal G. Kothari & on 2 March, 2023
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx (3) Where any
application for revision is made by or on behalf or any person before the Session
Judge, the decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person shall be
final and no further proceeding by way of revision at the instance of such person shall
be entertained by the High Court or any other Court."
Sub section 3 of section 435 provides that if an application under this section has been made by any
person either to the High Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person
shall be entertained by either of them. Therefore, in view of the clear statutory provision contained
in sub section 3 of section 435, a second revision petition is not maintainable. Sub section 3 of
section 438 of CrPC also provides that where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of
any person before the Sessions Judge, the decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such
person shall be final and no further proceeding by way of revision at the instance of such person
shall be entertained by the High Court or any other court. This court already in a case titled "State of
J&K vs Mohd Bashir & Ors", reported as 2010 (3) JKJ [HC] 533, held that a second petition
invoking revisional jurisdiction is not maintainable. Thus, in view of the provisions contained in sub
section 3 of sections 435 and sub section 3 of section 438 of CrPC second criminal revision petition,
is barred when this remedy has been availed before either of the forum provided therefor. It is,
therefore, held that all the revision petitions filed by the petitioners herein are barred and are non
maintainable.
22. So far as the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that these petitions in view of the
alternative prayer for exercising inherent jurisdiction is concerned, in view of what has been held
earlier with regard to merits of the cases, in absence of any grave illegality or perversity in the orders
passed by the learned CBI Magistrate or by the revisional Sessions Court, do not warrant any
interference by invoking inherent jurisdiction which is to be exercised very cautiously and sparingly.
Both the impugned orders are thus upheld.
23. For the foregoing reasons and the observations made hereinabove, all the five criminal revision
petitions alongwith pending application(s), if any, are found without any merit and substance and
are also held to be non maintainable being statutorily barred, and are hereby dismissed. Interim
orders, if any, shall stand vacated. The learned Magistrate shall proceed with the trial of the cases in
accordance with law. Copy of this judgment shall be placed across each of the clubbed file and a copy
thereof shall be sent down for compliance.
(M A Chowdhary)
Judge
JAMMU
02.3.2023
Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135989597/ 7
