Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24
May, 2022
Author: M.V. Muralidaran
Bench: M.V. Muralidaran
1
JOHN Digitally signed
by JOHN TELEN
TELEN KOM
Date: 2022.05.26
KOM 09:59:09 +05'30' IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
Bail Appln. No.08 of 2021
Abujam Tombisana Singh, aged about 45 years, s/o late Thabal
Singh of Samurou Awang Leikai, PO & PS Wangoi, Imphal West,
District, Manipur-795009.
......Petitioner
- Versus -
1. The State of Manipur, represented by Secretary(Home), PO & PS
Imphal, Imphal West-795001.
2. The Officer-in-Charge, Wangoi Police Station-795009.
.... Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN For the Petitioner : Mr. L. Seityandra,
Adv.
For the Respondents : Mr. H. Samarjit, PP.
Date of reserved : 04.05.2022
Date of Judgment & Order : 24.05.2022.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 1
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 1
JUDGMENT & ORDER
(CAV)
[1] This petition has been filed by the petitioner under Section
439 Cr.P.C to enlarge him on bail in connection with the Special Trial (POCSO) Case No. 68 of 2020
pending on the file of the Fast Track Special Court No 1, Manipur.
[2] The case of the prosecution is that on 29.8.2018, the complainant, father of the victim, lodged a
complaint with the Officer-in- Charge of Wangoi Police Station stating that his daughter, aged 15
years, was staying at the Boarding and Coaching Centre at Samurou Awang Leikai for her
preparation of HSLC Examination, 2018. The said Boarding and Coaching Centre was run by the
petitioner/accused, who is also the uncle of the complainant. While the victim was staying at the
said Boarding and Coaching Centre, on 13.3.2018 at about 3.30 a.m., the accused raped the victim
many times by threatening her that he will make her fail the HSLC Examination. The accused also
threatened the victim not to disclose the act committed by him. Based on the said complaint, the
respondent police registered an FIR bearing No.43(8)2018 under Section 506 IPC and Section 4 of
the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as Bail
appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 2 "POCSO Act"), upgraded to Section 6 of the said Act against the
petitioner/accused.
[3] Mr. L. Seityandra, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is an
innocent and has been falsely implicated in the alleged crime. Further, there are more than 10
female students at the boarding run by the petitioner and the students studied in group and no
separate or isolated study rooms were maintained by the petitioner. In fact the house of the victim
was just adjacent to the boarding and the joint family of the petitioner was also residing adjacent to
the boarding. He would submit that all the female students were sleeping in the same room and the
beds were joined together and it is absolutely not possible that the petitioner could enter and raped
the victim many times without waking up the other female boarders. [4] The learned counsel further
submitted that the petitioner is suffering from acute Hemorrhoids and Thrombosed Perianal
Varices and several other ailments and proper treatment could not be taken in the judicial custody.
The learned counsel submitted that the petitioner has been incarcerated for more than three years
and the trial has not Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 3 been commenced. In such circumstances, the
learned counsel prayer for bail.
[5] Per contra, Mr. H. Samarjit, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor submitted that on
interrogation, the petitioner admitted to have committed the offence charged against him. The
petitioner disclosed that he was a teacher at the Little Master English School, Samurou and also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 2
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
running Boarding and Coaching Centre at his house located at Samurou Awang Leikai. He further
disclosed that he molested the victim girl many times inside his house which was used as a Boarding
and Coaching Centre. After the petitioner sexually assaulted the victim two times, he threatened the
victim not to disclose the sexual harassment and sexual assault committed by him. [6] The learned
Additional Public Prosecutor further submitted that investigation completed and charge sheet dated
23.9.2018 has been filed and the case is being proceeded as Special Trial Case No.68 of 2020 before
the learned Fast Track Special Court No.1, Manipur. He urged that considering the evidence
gathered during the investigation, there is every likelihood of the petitioner being convicted of the
offences charged against him. He further submitted Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 4 that if the
petitioner is released on bail, there is likelihood of committing similar offence, as he had many
negative remarks from the inhabitants of his locality. There is also likelihood of influencing
prosecution witnesses and hampering the trial.
[7] This Court considered the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner and the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor and also perused the materials available on record. [8] The
case of the prosecution is that on 13.03.2018, the petitioner raped the victim girl, who was staying at
his Boarding and Coaching Centre at Samurou Awang Leikai and the petitioner also threatened the
victim not to disclose the act committed by him. Based on the complaint dated 29.8.2018 lodged by
the father of the victim, the Wangoi Police registered an FIR against the petitioner under Section 4
upgraded to Section 6 of the POCSO Act and under Section 506 IPC. [9] According to the
prosecution, the investigation has completed and charge sheet has also been filed and the case has
been taken on file as Special Trial (POCSO) Case No.68 of 2020 on the file of the Fast Track Special
Court No.1, Manipur. However, the trail has not commenced.
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 5
[10] The petitioner was arrested on 29.8.2018 and he was in
custody till date. The bail application moved by the petitioner before the Fast Track Special Court
No.1, Manipur was rejected by the order dated 11.12.2020. The petitioner seeking bail mainly on the
ground of his illness. According to the petitioner, he is suffering from acute Hemorrhoids and
Thrombosed Perianal Varices and also other ailments and proper treatment could not be done in the
judicial custody. The petitioner has also produced a report of the Medical Officer of the Manipur
Central Jail, Sajiwa to show that he needs required treatment from a well-equipped health institute
where special facilities are available.
[11] On a perusal of the report of the Medical Officer dated 19.10.2020, it is clear that the petitioner
needs treatment outside the jail, as proper treatment could not be given due to Covid-19 pandemic.
[12] At this juncture, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor submitted that by stating the same
ground, the petitioner has filed bail application before the trial Court and the same was rejected.
When the Medical Officer of the Jail himself stated that the petitioner needs outside treatment for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 3
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
his ailment, rejecting the bail on the ground that Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 6 the jail authorities
are making necessary arrangement for the treatment of the petitioner in JNIS hospital as and when
necessary is not appropriate. Admittedly, the petitioner is in judicial custody for more than 3 ½
years.
[13] It is settled law that an order refusing an application for bail does not necessarily preclude
another on a later occasion giving more materials, further developments and different
considerations. While the Court should take into account the circumstance under which the earlier
bail application was rejected, it cannot be said that the Court is barred from second consideration at
a later stage.
[14] As stated supra, in the order dated 11.12.2020 of the trial Court rejecting the bail petition, it has
been stated that there is no merit in granting bail to the petitioner on medical ground. When the
Medical Officer opined that the petitioner needs better treatment from a well equipped health
institution, the trial Court ought not to have rejected the bail application of the petitioner.
[15] Coming to the ground for rejection of the bail by the trial Court - gravity of the offence, spirit of
the POCSO Act, this Court is of the view that the merits of the offence alleged against the petitioner
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 7 cannot now be gone into. It is true that the offence committed by a
person under POCSO Act should not be enlarged on bail like other offences.
[16] It is settled that the grant or refusal to grant bail lies within the discretion of the Court. The
grant or denial is regulated to a large extent by the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
In the case on hand, the petitioner seeks bail mainly on the ground of his illness, which fact was also
evident from the report of the Medical Officer produced by the petitioner along with the bail
petition. It is to be noted that no contra medical records have been produced by the prosecution.
[17] It appears that the offence alleged was dated 13.03.2018 and the complaint was lodged on
29.8.2018 and the petitioner was arrested on 29.8.2018. It is not the case of the prosecution that the
petitioner is delaying the trial of the case and according to the petitioner, there is no question of
hamper or tamper with any prosecution evidence after he is released on bail.
[18] In Alakh Alok Srivasta v. Union of India and others, (2018) 17 SCC 291, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court directed for constitution of Special Courts to deal with the cases under the POCSO Act and
issued Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 8 direction to the High Courts to give suitable Instructions to
the Special Courts to fast track the cases by not granting unnecessary adjournments and following
the procedure laid down in the POCSO Act and complete the trial in a time bound manner or within
a specific time frame under the Act.
[19] Further, as per Section 35 of the POCSO Act, evidence of the victim/child shall be recorded
within a period of thirty days of the Special Court taking cognizance of the offence and the reason for
delay, if any, shall be recorded by the Special Court. The provision of the POCSO Act further
provides that the Special Court shall complete the trial, as far as possible, within a period of one year
from the date of taking cognizance of the offence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 4
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
[20] In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner is delaying the trial of
the case. May be, due to Covid-19 pandemic and the related lockdowns and also the restricted
functioning of the Courts during pandemic, the trial is being delayed. However, when the under-trial
prisoners are detained in jail custody to an indefinite period, Article 21 of the Constitution of India is
violated. Every person, detained or arrested, is entitled to speedy trial and the Act also Bail
appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 9 provides time frame to complete the trial. Merely the fact that the
offence allegedly committed by the petitioner was registered under Section 4 of the POCSO Act,
upgraded to Section 6 of the Act, he cannot be denied bail on the ground that the offence is serious
in nature. [21] In Babba v. State of Maharastra, (2005) 11 SCC 569, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held
that when there is a delay in the trial, bail should be granted to the accused. In the instant case,
admittedly, there is a delay in the trial.
[22] The petitioner is not well and he needs better treatment outside the jail. The right to ball is not
to be denied merely because of the sentiments of the society and/or community against the accused.
The law is well settled that the primary purposes of ball in a criminal case are to relieve the accused
of imprisonment, to relieve the State of the burden of keeping him, pending the trial, and at the
same time, to keep the accused constructively in the custody of the Court, whether before or after
conviction, to assure that he will submit to the jurisdiction of the Court and be in attendance
thereon whenever his presence is required.
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 10
[23] In Sanjay Chandra v. CBI, (2012) 1 SCC 40, the Hon„ble
Supreme Court observed as follows:
"21. In bail applications, generally, it has been laid down from the earliest times that the object of
bail is to secure the appearance of the accused person at his trial by reasonable amount of bail. The
object of bail is neither punitive nor preventative. Deprivation of liberty must be considered a
punishment, unless it is required to ensure that an accused person will stand his trial when called
upon. The Courts owe more than verbal respect to the principle that punishment begins after
conviction, and that every man is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and duly found guilty."
[24] Time and again, the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as this Court held that bail is the rule and
committal to jail is an exception. The Courts have also observed that refusal of bail is a restriction on
the personal liberty of the individual guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
[25] The principles relating to grant or refusal of bail have been stated in the case of Kalyan Chandra
Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan, (2004) 7 SCC 528. In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (supra), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed that the Court granting bail should exercise its Bail appln.No.08 of 2021
Page 11 discretion in a judicious manner and not as a matter of course. Though at the stage of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 5
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
granting bail a detailed examination of evidence and elaborate documentation of the merit of the
case need not be undertaken, there is a need to indicate in such orders reasons for prima facie
concluding why bail was being granted particularly where the accused is charged of having
committed a serious offence. Any order devoid of such reasons would suffer from non-application of
mind. It is also necessary for the Court granting ball to consider among other circumstances and the
following facts also before granting bail; they are:
(a) The nature of accusation and the severity of punishment in case of conviction and
the nature of supporting evidence.
(b) Reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or apprehension of
threat to the complainant.
(c) Prima face satisfaction of the Court in support of the charge.
[26] In Dataram Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another, (2018) 3 SCC 22, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court observed that a fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the presumption of Bail
appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 12 innocence, meaning thereby that a person is believed to be innocent
until found guilty. However, there are instances in our criminal law where a reverse onus has been
placed on an accused with regard to some specific offences, but that is another matter and does not
detract from the fundamental postulate in respect of other offences. Yet another important facet of
our criminal jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is the general rule and putting a person in jail or
in a prison or in a correctional home is an exception. Unfortunately, some of these basic principles
appear to have been lost sight of with the result that more and more persons are being incarcerated
and for longer periods. This does not do any good to our criminal jurisprudence or to our society.
[27] Thus, it is clear that grant or denial of bail is entirely the discretion of the Judge considering the
case but even so, the exercise of judicial discretion has been circumscribed by a large number of
decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as by the High Courts in the country.
[28] To put it shortly, a humane attitude is required to be adopted by a Judge while dealing with the
ball application. Even if the offence is a serious offence, requires a humane treatment by the Court.
Humane treatment to all including an accused is requirement of law.
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 13 Furthermore, a prisoner, who is suffering from an ailment, has to
be given due treatment and care while in prison.
[29] In the case on hand, the petitioner was aged more than 45 years and according to the health
status of the petitioner submitted by the Medical Officer of the Central Jail, he is suffering from
acute Hemorrhoids and Thrombosed Perianal Varices. It would be better for him if he receives
treatment from a well-equipped hospital outside the jail as proper treatment could not be given due
to Covid-19 situation in the jail. Therefore, this Court is of the view that both the ground for long
custody of more than 3 ½ years in jail and on medical ground, the petitioner is entitled to be
enlarged on bail, though the offence allegedly committed by him is grave in nature.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 6
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
[30] The petitioner has been charged under Section 4, upgraded to Section 6 of the POCSO Act,
which entails a punishment of not less than seven years, but which may extent to imprisonment for
life with fine. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is innocent to the
alleged crime. On the other hand, it is the submission of the learned Additional Public Prosecutor
that under Section 29 of the POCSO Act, it is presumed that the petitioner has committed the
offence unless the contrary is proved. The innocence Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 14 and the
alleged involvement of the petitioner in the crime cannot now be gone into, as the trial is yet to
begin. Therefore, as stated supra, this Court has not delved into the merits of the case.
[31] It is true that victims of POCSO Act are suffering and facing social stigma, agony and trauma
because of the occurrence and could not recover completely from the said heinous incident. In some
of the cases, the minor victims are suffering not only mental trauma, agony, social ostracisation, but
also withdrawn from the society. However, considering the petitioner's medical condition, which is
confirmed by the medical status report, which shows that the petitioner suffers from acute
Hemorrhoids and Thrombosed Perianal Varices and in view of the assurance extended on behalf of
the petitioner that he shall not hamper or tamper the prosecution witnesses, this Court persuaded to
grant bail to the petitioner for taking better treatment outside the jail for his ailment.
[32] Accordingly, the petition is allowed and the petitioner is ordered to be enlarged on bail in
connection with the Special Trial (POCSO) Case No.68 of 2020 on the file of the Fast Track Special
Court No.1, Manipur, subject to his furnishing a personal bond in the Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page
15 sum of Rs. 25,000/- with two local sureties in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court
with the following conditions:
(i) The petitioner shall not leave the place of residence without permission of the trial
Court and shall ordinarily reside at a place of residence and the complete address of
such place shall be furnished to the trial Court at the time of release.
(ii) The petitioner is directed to report before the respondent Police daily at 10.00
a.m. for a period of two weeks.
(iii) The petitioner shall appear before the trial Court on all hearing dates and shall
co-operate for speedy disposal of the case.
(iv) If the petitioner has a passport, he shall also surrender the same to the trial
Court.
(v) The petitioner shall not contact nor visit nor threaten nor offer any inducement to
the victim or the complainant or any of the prosecution witnesses.
(vi) The petitioner shall not tamper with evidence nor otherwise indulge in any act or
omission that would prejudice the proceedings in the matter.
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 16
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 7
Singh Of Samurou Awang Leikai vs The State Of Manipur on 24 May, 2022
(vii) It is clarified that if the petitioner misuses the liberty or violate any of the
conditions imposed upon him, the prosecution shall be free to move this Court for
cancellation of the bail.
[33] The learned Special Judge, Fast Track Court No.1, Manipur is directed to complete the trial of
the case on day to day basis within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
order and send a report to this Court within ten days thereafter. [34] Any observations made
hereinabove shall not be construed to be a reflection on the merits of the case and shall remain
confined to the disposal of the present bail petition.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
John Kom
Bail appln.No.08 of 2021 Page 17
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177035876/ 8
