Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Author: M.Nagaprasanna
Bench: M.Nagaprasanna
1
Reserved on : 08.01.2025
Pronounced on : 05.03.2025
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 05TH DAY OF MARCH, 2025 R
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No.100038 OF 2025 (T-RES)
BETWEEN:
SLM STATIONERY
BUILDING NO. 22/175
KARUKATHIRUTHY, MARANCHERI
MALAPPURAM, KERALA - 679 584.
THROUGH ITS PROPRIETOR
MR. ABDUL SALAM
S/O KUNJIMARAKKAR
AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
RESIDENT OF POUNKKATTIL HOUSE
KANHIRAMUKKU, MARANCHERI
MALAPPURAM, KERALA - 679 584.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI SAMEER GUPTA, ADVOCATE FOR
SMT. GAYATRI S. R., ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. UNION OF INDIA
THROUGH ITS SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 1
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE
NORTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI - 110 001.
2. THE GOODS AND SERVICES TAX COUNCIL
OFFICE OF THE GST COUNCIL SECRETARIAT
5TH FLOOR, TOWER II
JEEVAN BHARTI BUILDING
JANPATH ROAD, CONNAUGHT PLACE
NEW DELHI - 110 001.
3. JOINT COMMISSIONER OF COMMERCIAL TAXES
(ENFORCEMENT), N.Z.BELAGAVI
SUMOULYA SOUDHA CLUB ROAD
BELAGAVI - 590 001.
4. COMMERCIAL TAX OFFICER (ENFORCEMENT)- 2
AFZALPUR, TAKKE, VIJAYAPUR - 586 101.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI GANGADHAR J. M., AAG A/W., SRI SHARAD V.MAGADUM, AGA FOR R1;
SRI GIRISH S.HULMANI, ADVOCATE FOR R2) THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226 AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO ISSUE A WRIT,
ORDER OR DIRECTION IN THE NATURE OF CERTIORARI QUASHING THE IMPUGNED
ORDER FOR EXTENSION OF PHYSICAL VERIFICATION FORM GST MOV-03 (ANNEXURE-A)
DATED 25.11.2024 BEARING NO. PA/PR-01/49/2024-25/B WHICH HAS BEEN PASSED BY THE
RESPONDENT NO.3 WITHOUT JURISDICTION ETC.
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 24.02.2025,
COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
CORAM: THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA CAV ORDER The
petitioner, a proprietorship concern is at the doors of this Court calling in question
orders dated 25.11.2024 and 30.11.2024, both passed by the third respondent seeking
extension of time for physical verification; a confiscation order dated 24.12.2024,
passed by the fourth respondent; a consequent direction against the impugned
auction notice of the confiscating material, all of which are issued on the score that
they are without jurisdiction and a consequential mandamus is also sought for
release of goods and vehicle without any condition.
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, facts in brief, germane, are as follows:
The petitioner is said to be the owner of certain goods -
Arecanut, in the case at hand, which were to be supplied to one Pooja enterprises and
it being transported, in a vehicle bearing registration No.KA-63, 3260. It is the case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 2
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
of the petitioner that prior to the movement of the goods as aforesaid, the petitioner
has generated an invoice and handed over to the driver of the said vehicle but the
e-way bill could not be generated due to network issues. The consignment and vehicle
were intercepted by the fourth respondent - Commercial Tax Officer, (Enforcement
-2), Vijayapura, an officer under the Karnataka Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017.
The statement of the driver of the vehicle was recorded on 19.11.2024 and on the
same day, an order for physical verification is passed by the fourth respondent, on
the ground that the existence of the consignor and consignee, genuineness of the
documents of the goods in transit, genuineness of the transactions within the
consignor and consignee are suspicious, and would need further verification.
3. It is the claim of the petitioner that he visited the fourth respondent, tendered all
necessary documents and requested for release of the goods and the conveyance and
he had no intention to evade tax. The oral representation of the petitioner was not
considered and on 25.11.2024, the third respondent - Joint Commissioner of
Commercial Taxes, Enforcement Wing, Belagavi, passes an order extending the time
limit for physical verification only on the score that the authorized person did not
appear to conduct physical verification, which is disputed by the petitioner.
On 26.11.2024, summons is issued under Section 70 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017/ KGST, directing the petitioner to appear before him on 28.11.2024. In compliance of the
summons, the petitioner appeared before the fourth respondent on 04.12.2024 and tendered his
statement under Section 70 of the KGST read with Section 6 of the CGST and Section 20 of the
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 and stated that the goods in question belonged to him
and they were being transported to a buyer in Delhi.
4. Fourth respondent is said to have carried out physical verification on 04.12.2024, 14 days after
the date of interception and then passes an order of detention of the goods on the ground that prima
facie, the documents tendered were found to be defective apart from its genuineness of the
transaction itself being in doubt. A show cause notice comes to be issued on 10.12.2024, seeking to
show cause as to why the goods found in the vehicle should not be confiscated. The petitioner replies
to the said notice on 16.12.2024. Not being convinced with the reply, the confiscation order is passed
on 24.12.2024 and an auction notice, to auction the goods so confiscated is passed on 02.01.2025.
Aggrieved by all the aforesaid orders, the petitioner is before this Court in the subject petition.
5. Heard Sri Sameer Gupta, learned counsel for Smt. Gayatri S.R., learned counsel for the petitioner,
Sri Gangadhar J.M., learned Additional Advocate General along with Sri Sharad V. Magadum,
learned Additional Government Advocate for respondent No.1 and Sri Girish S. Hulmani, learned
counsel for respondent No.2.
SUBMISSIONS:
PETITIONER'S:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 3
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner would vehemently contend that the fourth respondent is
not the proper officer in terms of Section 4 of the IGST, as there is no notification issued specifically
authorizing the fourth respondent to be the proper officer. It is his submission that in the absence of
such authorization, the act of the fourth respondent becomes without jurisdiction. It is his further
submission that it is for the Government of India to notify such authorization in a manner known to
law. Therefore, if the fourth respondent is not the proper officer as obtaining under Section 4 of the
IGST, all his actions are non est in the eye of law. He would place reliance upon the judgment of the
High Court of Madras rendered in the case of TVL.
VARDHAN INFRASTRUCTURES VS. HEAD OF THE GST, COUNCIL SECRETARIAT reported in
(2024) 125 GSTR 334, with regard to cross empowerment. It is the further submission that the
fourth respondent is only authorized or a proper officer under Section 6 of the CGST and KGST and
not under Section 4 of the IGST.
RESPONDENT - STATE:
7. Per contra, learned Additional Advocate General -
Sri Gangadhar J.M., would vehemently refute the submissions to contend that there is no necessity
to issue a notification under Section 4 of the IGST. The cross empowerment under Section 6 of the
CGST and KGST would ipso facto become applicable to the IGST and the fourth respondent is an
authorised and proper officer. He would submit that the petition be dismissed as dehors the
question of jurisdiction, the petitioner in the case a hand has alternative remedy in terms of Section
107 of the CGST Act.
8. Therefore, the matter was heard and reserved only for a decision with regard to the jurisdiction of
the fourth respondent acting as a proper officer under IGST.
9. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
respective parties and have perused, the material on record.
10. The afore-narrated facts, link in the chain of events and dates are all matter of record, they
would not require any reiteration. Since the matter is reserved for determination whether the fourth
respondent would be the proper officer or not, I deem it appropriate to notice the statutory frame
work and interpretation on the said statutory frame work.
11. Three enactments form the fulcrum of the lis, they are, the Central Goods and Services Tax Act,
2017 ('CGST' for short), the Karnataka Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ('KGST' for short) and the
Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ('IGST' for short). Certain provisions of the afore-
quoted statutes are necessary to be noticed. Section 6 of the CGST deals with authorization of
officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in certain circumstances. It reads as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 4
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
"6. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in
certain circumstances.--(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the
officers appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes
of this Act, subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub-section
(1),--
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an
order under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and
Services Tax Act, as authorised by the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, under intimation to the
jurisdictional officer of State tax or Union territory tax;
(b) where a proper officer under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any proceedings on a subject
matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the proper officer under this Act on the
same subject matter.
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any
order passed by an officer appointed under this Act shall not lie before an officer
appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods
and Services Tax Act."
(Emphasis supplied)
12. Likewise, Section 6 of the KGST which also deals with an identical circumstance reads as follows:
"6. Authorisation of officers of central tax as proper officer in certain
circumstances.--(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers
appointed under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to be the
proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such conditions as the
Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub-section
(1),--
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an
order under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, as authorised by the said Act
under intimation to the jurisdictional officer of central tax;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 5
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(b) where a proper officer under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated
any proceedings on a subject matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the proper
officer under this Act on the same subject matter.
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any
order passed by an officer appointed under this Act, shall not lie before an officer
appointed under the Central Goods and Services Tax Act."
(Emphasis supplied) Therefore, Section 6 in both the Central and State enactments deal with officer
of the CGST or the KGST to be the proper officer in certain circumstances, subject to the conditions
stipulated in Section 6 of both the Central and State enactments.
13. The third enactment is the IGST. Section 4 of the IGST which is germane to be noticed reads as
follows:
"4. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in
certain circumstances.--Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers
appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods
and Services Tax Act are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this
Act, subject to such exceptions and conditions as the Government shall, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify."
(Emphasis supplied) Section 4 of the IGST deals with authorisation of officers appointed under the
State Tax Act or Union Territory Tax Act as proper officer in certain circumstances. Section 4 of the
IGST unequivocally mandates that the officer appointed under the KSGT or the Union Territory are
authorised to be the proper officer for the purpose of IGST, subject to exceptions and conditions as
the government shall on the recommendation of the Council, would specify by issuance of a
notification.
14. It is an admitted fact that there is no notification issued by the Government of India specifying
persons other than the officers who are found in Section 4 of the IGST. Section 4 of the IGST is
unequivocal. The officers under Section 6 of the CGST or KGST are authorised to be the proper
officers for the purposes of the IGST. The exceptions are to be notified by the Government of India,
on consultation or on the recommendation of the Council.
Therefore, a notification or recommendation should ensue only when the government wants to
carve out exceptions to the definition of 'proper officer' under Section 4 of the IGST. The normal
rule is that, the officers appointed under the CGST or KGST to be the proper officers under Section 4
of the IGST.
There cannot be any other interpretation to Section 4 of the IGST.
As the provisions of the IGST, envisages a cross empowerment and not an exception that is required
by issuance of a notification.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 6
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
15. The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed heavy reliance upon the judgment of the High
Court of Madras in the case of TVL VARDHAN supra. The said judgment would not be applicable to
the facts obtaining the case at hand as the judgment is dealt with a different set of circumstance.
16. It is now germane to notice the interpretation of Section 4 of the IGST and the cross
empowerment that it envisages. A division bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in the
case of SODHI CARGO MOVERS (P) LTD. V. STATE OF HARYANA AND OTHERS1 interpreting
Section 4 of the IGST has held as follows:
".... ..... ....
9. Pursuant to 10st Amendment of the Constitution three enactments were passed by the Parliament
i.e. the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017,
the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. In addition to the aforesaid three
enactments, the legislature of the State of Haryana on 8-6-2017 passed an enactment known as the
Haryana Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ("the HGST Act"). In matters of inter-State trade and
commerce, including import into the territory of India and out of it, the IGST Act, 2017 applies,
whereas in matters of intra-State trade and commerce "the CGST Act, 2017" and the State Goods
Services Tax Act apply.
10. Reference was made to the pronouncement of the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh in
Advantage India Logistics (P) Ltd. v. Union of India [Advantage India Logistics (P) Ltd. v. Union of
India, (2018) 58 GSTR 247 : 2018 SCC OnLine MP 1822] dated 23-8-2018 and the Hon'ble
Allahabad 1 2023 SCC OnLine P&H 3949 High Court in Satyendra Goods Transport Corp. v. State of
U.P. [Satyendra Goods Transport Corp. v. State of U.P., (2018) 54 GSTR 3 : 2018 SCC OnLine All
6079]
11. The abovesaid two judgments are on the proposition that cross-empowerment under Section 4 of
the IGST Act, 2017 and Section 6 of the CGST Act, 2017 means that State authorities are empowered
under the HGST Act, 2017 can also enforce the provisions of the CGST Act, 2017 or the IGST Act,
2017."
(Emphasis supplied) In the afore-quoted judgment, the division bench holds that Section 4 of the
IGST would mean that the State authorities who are empowered under the HGST Act therein and
can also enforce the provisions of the CGST and IGST. If the words in the HGST Act is paraphrased
to the case at hand, which is the KGST, the same principle would become applicable.
17. A division bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh interpreting Section 4 of the IGST in the
case of ADVANTAGE INDIA LOGISTICS PVT. LTD. V. UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS2, has held
as follows:
".... ..... ....
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 7
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
4. The sole contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that in absence of any notification
2 (2018) 58 GSTR 247 under Section 4 of IGST Act, 2017, the respondent No.4 is not competent to
issue show cause notice and the impugned seizure memo dated 15.07.2018 is wholly without
jurisdiction.
5. The IGST Act, 2017 deals with taxability of inter-State supply of goods and services. Section 4 of
the IGST Act reads as under :
"4. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the
State Goods and Services tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services tax Act
are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such
exceptions and conditions as the Government shall, on the recommendations of the
council, by notification, specify."
6. From perusal of the aforesaid, it is clear that the officers appointed under the MPGST Act, 2017
was authorized to be proper officers for the purposes of the IGST Act.
7. At present, no notification was issued by the Central Government under section 4 of the IGST Act.
By order dated October 12,2017, respondent No. 4 was authorized as proper officer and was
bestowed with powers such as inspection, search and seizure under section 68 of the MPGST Act.
Serial Nos. 31 and 57 of the order dated October 12, 2017 (annexure-R/1) reads as under :
Sl. Section Functions assigned Designation of proper No. officer 31 68(3) To intercept
any Deputy Commissioner of conveyance to State Tax, Assistant inspect
Commissioner of State documents, Tax, State Tax Officer, devices and goods
Inspector of State Tax, Taxation Assistant.
57 129(3) To issue notice and Deputy Commissioner of
pass an order in tax State Tax, Assistant
and penalty of relation Commissioner of State
to seized goods Tax, State Tax Officer.
8. Section 20 of the IGST Act provides for the provisions of the Central Goods and
Services tax Act (in short, "the CGST") relating to inspection, search, seizure, etc.
Section 68 of the MPGST Act provides the powers of inspection, search and seizure of
goods in movement. Section 129 of the MPGST Act provides the power in respect of
detention, seizure and release of goods and conveyance in transaction.
9. In the present case, it is an admitted position that the subject vehicle was
transporting goods for inter-State supply of goods from Gurgaon, Haryana to Pune,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 8
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Maharashtra. As per e-way bill system (annexure P/4), the number of vehicle was
mentioned as HR-38-0823 whereas, the correct vehicle number is HR-38-X-0823. It
was found by respondent No. 4 that the e-way bill was defective and not updated,
therefore, show cause notice was issued on July 13, 2018 to inspect the subject
vehicle on July 15, 2018. On inspection, respondent No. 4 in exercise of powers under
section 129(1) of the MPGST Act passed the seizure order (annexure-P/1) on July 15,
2018.
10. Respondent No. 4 in compliance of the statutory mandate under section 129(6)
has passed a final order dated July 23, 2018 directing the petitioner to pay an amount
of Rs. 4,20,266 (minimum) as tax and penalty in terms of section 129(3) of the
MPGST Act.
11. Against the aforesaid final order dated July 23, 2018, statutory appeal under
section 109 of the Act has been provided.
12. The learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn our attention to articles 246A
and 269A of the Constitution which was brought by One Hundred and First (101)
Amendment on September 8, 2016 and submitted that Parliament has exclusive
power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax where the supply of goods,
or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. As
no notification has been issued under section 4 of the IGST Act and, therefore,
respondent No. 4 was not competent to pass any order and, therefore, the petitioner
without availing the statutory remedy has filed this writ petition. He has also drawn
our attention to the notification dated October 13, 2017 issued by the Government of
India, Ministry of Finance in respect of refund under section 20 of the IGST Act and
submitted that similar type of notification is required and prayed for its quashment.
13. On due consideration of the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties so
also the provisions of section 4 of the IGST Act, we are of the view that officers
appointed under the MPGST Act are authorized to be proper officers for the purpose
of IGST and, therefore, the contention of the petitioner that no notification was
issued and in absence of any notification under section 4 of the IGST Act has no
force, we cannot accept the contention of the petitioner that the action of respondent
No. 4 is wholly without jurisdiction."
(Emphasis supplied) The division bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh holds that the officers
appointed under the MPGST are authorised to be the proper officers for the purpose of the IGST.
Therefore, the contention that the officer appointed under the MPGST is not a proper officer and
has no jurisdiction was declined to be accepted.
18. Yet another division bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana dealing with identical
circumstance of seizure, confiscation of goods and answering the very contention that the officer
appointed under the State Tax Act therein, to be the proper officer for the purpose of the IGST and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 9
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
interpreting Section 4 of the IGST in the case of BRIGHT ROAD LOGISTICS V. STATE3, has held as
follows:
"... ..... ....
11. The following questions require consideration in the present case :
"1. Whether the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer (Enf.) Gurugram was a 'Proper
Officer' and was authorized to inspect and detain the vehicle which was carrying
goods for inter-State transportation from Tamil Nadu to Delhi and was further
authorized to pass an order under sections 129 and 130 of the GST Act, 2017 read
with provisions of the IGST Act, 2017 ?
2. Whether the impugned order dated November 26, 2018 (annexure P-1) is liable to
be quashed ?"
Question No.1
12. The appellate authority while passing the impugned order (annexure P-1) has dealt with a
preliminary objection by discussing the history of new direct taxation regime including the
applicability of IGST Act, 2017 for inter- State trade and commerce and held that in view of the
provisions of section 4 of the IGST Act, 2017 and section 6 of the GST Act, 2017, the State authorities
are empowered 3 2023 SCC ONLINE P&H 4242 under the HGST Act, 2017 and they can also
enforce the provisions of the CGST Act, 2017 and the IGST Act, 2017.
13. In the written statement, the respondents have taken a specific stand in a reply to para Nos.
32(xvi) and (xvii) that AETO (Enf.)-cum-proper officer of State Tax is duly empowered to check the
goods and vehicle in inter- State transactions as per the provisions of section 6(1) of the CGST Act,
2017 and as per powers delegated under section 4 of the IGST Act, 2017. It has also been submitted
in the written statement that cross-empowerment and delegation of powers to State Tax Officers
appointed under MPGST Act has been upheld as per the decision dated August 27, 2018 by the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh Bench at Indore in Writ Petition No. 16266/2018 in the matter of
Advantage India Logistic Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India.
14. We have considered the observations made by the appellate authority in view of the provisions of
IGST Act, 2017, CGST Act, 2017, the Haryana Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (for short, "the
HGST Act, 2017") and the various notifications and orders made by the Government of India,
Ministry of Finance.
15. The preamble of the IGST Act, 2017 clearly specify the applicability of the said Act provides for
levy and collection of tax for inter-State supply of goods. The preamble reads as under :
"An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on inter- State supply of
goods or services or both by the Central Government and for matters connected
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 10
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
therewith or incidental thereto."
16. The CGST Act, 2017 makes provisions for levy and collection of the tax for intra-State supply of
goods. The preamble of the said Act makes it clear which reads as follow:
"An Act to make a provision for levy and collection of tax on intra- State supply of
goods or services or both by the Central Government and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto".
17. Section 20 of the IGST Act, 2017 provides that the provisions of CGST Act, 2017 relating to
various matters including inspection, search, seizure and arrest, etc., are applicable to the IGST Act,
2017 subject to the provisions of CGST, 2017. The same reads as under :
"20. Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services Tax Act.--Subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of Central Goods
and Services Tax Act relating to,
(i) scope of supply ;
(ii) composite supply and mixed supply ;
(iii) time and value of supply ;
(iv) input-tax credit ;
(v) registration ;
(vi) tax invoice, credit and debit notes ;
(vii) accounts and records ;
(viii) returns, other than late fee ;
(ix) payment of tax ;
(x) tax deduction at source ;
(xi) collection of tax at source ;
(xii) assessment ;
(xiii) refunds ;
(xiv) audit ;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 11
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(xv) inspection, search, seizure and arrest ; (xvi) demands and recovery ;
(xvii) liability to pay in certain cases ; (xviii) advance ruling ;
(xix) appeals and revision ;
(xx) presumption as to documents ;
(xxi) offences and penalties ;
(xxii) job work ;
(xxiii) electronic commerce ;
(xxiv) transitional provisions ; and (xxv) miscellaneous provisions including the
provisions relating to the imposition of interest and penalty, shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply, so far as may be, in relation to integrated tax as they apply in relation to
Central tax as if they are enacted under this Act :
Provided that in the case of tax deducted at source, the deductor shall deduct tax at
the rate of two per cent. from the payment made or credited to the supplier :
Provided further that in the case of tax collected at source, the operator shall collect
tax at such rate not exceeding two per cent., as may be notified on the
recommendations of the Council, of the net value of taxable supplies :
Provided also that for the purposes of this Act, the value of a supply shall include any
taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force
other than this Act, and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, if
charged separately by the supplier :
Provided also that in cases where the penalty is leviable under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act and the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act, the penalty leviable under this Act shall be the sum total
of the said penalties :
Provided also that where the appeal is to be filed before the appellate authority or the
Appellate Tribunal, the maximum amount payable shall be fifty crore rupees and one
hundred crore rupees respectively."
18. Since the vehicle was transporting the goods inter-State, therefore, the provisions of the IGST
Act, 2017 as well the provisions of the GST Act, 2017 in so far applicable in view of the provisions of
section 20 of the IGST Act, are applicable to the facts of the present case. In view of the said
enabling provisions under section 20 of the IGST Act, 2017, the provisions of Chapter XIV of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 12
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
GST Act, 2017 which deals with inspection, search, seizure and arrest and power of inspection,
search and seizure (section 67 and 68 of the CGST Act, 2017) are applicable to the inter-State supply
of goods.
19. As per the provisions of section 4 of the IGST Act, 2017, the officers who are appointed under the
State Goods and Services Tax Act or Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are authorized to
be the proper officers in the process of the IGST Act, 2017. The said section is reproduced as under :
"4. Authorization of officers of State tax or Union territory tax as proper officer in
certain circumstances.--Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers
appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods
and Services Tax Act are authorized to be the proper officers for the purposes of this
Act, subject to such exceptions and conditions as the Government shall, on the
recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify."
20. Apart from the enabling provisions under the IGST Act, 2017, the Commissioner of State Tax,
Haryana had issued the order dated December 7, 2017 (annexure P-46) exercising the powers
conferred under sub-section (1) of section 5 read with clause (91) of section 2 of the Haryana Goods
and Services Tax Act, 2017 assigning the functions to be performed under the said Act by a Proper
Officer. As per entry of Sl. Nos. 51, 52 and 53 of the said order, the Assistant Excise and Taxation
Officer of State Tax has been assigned the functions to be performed under section 129(1) and (3) ;
129(6) ; and section 130 of the Haryana Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. Sections 129 and 130 of
the said Act is having the similar provisions as under the said sections of the IGST Act, 2017.
21. As such, in view of the enabling provisions of sections 20 and section 4 of the IGST Act ; as well
as the order dated December 7, 2017 (annexure P-46) passed by the Excise and Taxation
Commissioner, Haryana, assigning the functions to the proper officer under the Haryana Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017, we are of the considered opinion that the Assistant. Excise and Taxation
Officer of State Tax is competent and authorized to exercise the powers under sections 129 and 130
of the IGST Act, 2017.
22. As such the first point for determination is accordingly, answered that the Assistant Excise and
Taxation Officer of State Tax was authorized to Act as a proper officer and was having the authority
to act under sections 129 and 130 of the IGST Act. The decision of the appellate authority in this
regard requires no interference.
(Emphasis supplied)
19. A division bench of the High Court of Orissa, at Cuttack, interpreting Section 4 of the IGST in the
case of NARAYAN SAHU VS. UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS4, holds as follows:
"..... ..... .....
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 13
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
6. Provision in section 4 of IGST Act is cross authorization, inter alia, of officers of State Tax. Before
us there is no dispute that there has been aforesaid notifications for appointment of proper officers
and assignment of powers and duties to them as officers of State Tax. For purposes of the IGST Act,
the empowering cross authorization provision says that inter alia, officers of State Tax are
authorized to be proper officers for the purposes of that Act. The authorization is subject to such
exceptions and conditions as the Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification 4 W.P.(C)28012/2024, disposed on 26.11.2024 specify. It is clear that there has been no
notification limiting authority of cross authorized officers by way of exception or condition. In the
circumstances, the appointment and powers of officers of State Tax, as proper officers will, under
the cross authorization provision, empower them to correspondingly act under the IGST Act."
(Emphasis supplied) The division bench in the afore-quoted judgment holds that Section 4 of the
IGST authorizes cross empowerment inter alia of the officers under the State Tax Act or the Central
Tax Act.
20. A division bench of the High Court of Kerala in the case of PINNACLE VEHICLES AND
SERVICES PRIVATE LIMITED v. JOINT COMMISSIONER5, has held as follows:
4. The learned Single Judge, who considered the writ petition at first instance, in his
reference order dated 07.11.2024, expressed the following prima facie view in the
matter:
"4. Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Senior
Government Pleader, I am prima facie of the view that the petitioner has not made
out any case for interference with Ext.P4 show cause notice on the ground that it is
issued without jurisdiction on account of the fact that there is no notification issued
under the provisions of Section 6(1) of the CGST Act empowering the officers of the
State Goods and Services Tax Act to issue such a show cause notice. Section 6(1) of
the CGST Act reads as follows:
5 2025 SCC OnLine Ker 231 Section 6. Authorisation of officers of State tax or Union
territory tax as proper officer in certain circumstances.
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act
are authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes of this Act, subject to such
conditions as the Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by
notification, specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions specified in the notification issued under sub-section
(1),--
(a) where any proper officer issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an
order under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 14
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Services Tax Act, as authorised by the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, as the case may be, under intimation to the
jurisdictional officer of State tax or Union territory tax;
(b) where a proper officer under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act has initiated any proceedings on a subject
matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the proper officer under this Act on the
same subject matter.
(3) Any proceedings for rectification, appeal and revision, wherever applicable, of any
order passed by an officer appointed under this Act shall not lie before an officer
appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods
and Services Tax Act.
A reading of Section 6(1) of the CGST Act makes it clear that the officers appointed under the State
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are authorised to be
proper officers for the purposes of the Act, subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on
the recommendations of the Council, by notification, specify. Unaided by authority, a reading of the
provision suggests to me that by virtue of the operation of the provision itself, the officers appointed
under the State Goods and Services Tax Act are proper officers for the purposes of the Central Goods
and Services Tax Act, and it is only when any restriction or condition has to be placed on the
exercise of power by any officer appointed under the State Goods and Services Tax Act that a
notification as contemplated by the provisions of Section 6(1) of the CGST Act has to be issued.
Paragraph Nos. 2 to 3.3 of the letter issued by the GST Policy Wing of the Central Board of Indirect
Taxes and Customs as F. No. CBEC-20/10/07/2019-GST dated 22-06-2020, reads thus:
"2. Issue raised in the reference is whether intelligence based enforcement actions
initiated by the Central Tax officers against those taxpayers which are assigned to the
State Tax administration gets covered under section 6(1) of the CGST Act and the
corresponding provisions of the SGST/UTGST Acts or whether a specific notification
is required to be issued for cross empowerment on the same lines as notification No.
39/2017-CT dated 13.10.2017 authorizing the State Officers for the purpose or
refunds under section 54 and 55 of the CGST Act.
3.1. The issue has been examined in the light of relevant legal provisions under the
CGST Act, 2017. It is observed that Section 6 of the CGST Act provides for cross
empowerment of State Tax officers and Central Tax officers and reads as:-- "6. (1)
Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under the State
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act are
authorised to be the proper officers for the purposes-of this Act, Subject to such
conditions as the Government shall, on the recommendations of the Council, by
Notification specify.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 15
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
3.2. Thus in terms of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the CGST Act and sub-section (1)
of section 6 of the respective State GST Acts respective State Tax officers and the
Central Tax officers respectively are authorised to be the proper officers for the
purposes of respective Acts and no separate notification is required for exercising the
said powers in this case by the Central Tax Officers under the provisions of the State
GST Act. It is noteworthy in this context that the registered person in GST are
registered under both the CGST Act and the respective SGST/UTGST Act.
3.3. The confusion seems to be arising from the fact that, the said sub-section
provides for notification by the Government if such cross empowerment is to be
subjected to conditions. It means that notification would be required only if any
conditions are to be imposed. For example, Notification No. 39/2017-CT dated
13.10.2017 restricts powers of the State Tax officers for the purposes of refund and
they have been specified as the proper officers only under section 54 and 55 of the
CGST Act and not under rule 96 of the CGST Rules, 2017 (IGST Refund on exports).
If no notification is issued to impose any condition, it means that the officers of State
and Centre have been appointed as proper officer for all the purpose of the CGST Act
and SGST Acts".
While the opinion expressed in the communication referred to above does not deter this Court from
taking a view different from the view expressed therein, as already noted, I am prima facie of the
view that the opinion expressed in the said communication represents the true meaning of the
provisions of Section 6(1) of the CGST Act. The Madras High Court in Tvl. Vardhan Infrastracture
(Supra) held thus:
"61. Thus, Section 6(1) of the respective GST Enactments empowers Government to
issue notification on the recommendation of GST Council for cross- empowerment.
However, no notification has been issued except under Section 6(1) of the respective
GST Enactments for the purpose of refund although officers from the Central GST
and State GST are proper officers under the respective GST Enactments.
62. Since, no notifications have been issued for cross-empowerment with advise of
GST Council, except for the purpose of refund of tax under Chapter-XI of the
respective GST Enactments r/w Chapter X of the respective GST Rules, impugned
proceedings are to be held without jurisdiction. Consequently, the impugned
proceedings are liable to be interfered in these writ petitions.
63. Thus, if an assessee has been assigned administratively with the Central
Authorities, pursuant to the decision taken by the GST Council as notified by Circular
No. 01/2017 bearing Reference F. No. 166/Cross- Empowerment/GSTC/2017 dated
20.09.2017, the State Authorities have no jurisdiction to interfere with the
assessment proceedings in absence of a corresponding Notification under Section 6
of the respective GST Enactments.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 16
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
64. Similarly, if an assessee has been assigned to the State Authorities, pursuant to
the decision taken by the GST Council as notified by Circular No. 01/2017 bearing
Reference F. No. 166/Cross-Empowerment/GSTC/2017 dated 20.09.2017, the
officers of the Central GST cannot interfere although they may have such intelligence
regarding the alleged violation of the Acts and Rules by an assessee.
65. The manner in which the provisions have been designed are to ensure that there
is no cross interference by the counterparts. Only exception provided is under Section
6 of the respective GST enactment. Therefore, in absence of a notification for
cross-empowerment, the action taken by the respondents are without jurisdiction.
Officers under the State or Central Tax Administration as the case may be cannot
usurp the power of investigation or adjudication of an assessee who is not assigned to
them.
66. Therefore, the proceedings initiated by the respondents so far against the
respective petitioners by the Authorities other than the Authority to whom they have
been assigned to are to be held as without jurisdiction. Therefore, the impugned
proceedings warrants interference".
Since the issue raised in this writ petition will affect several proceedings, and taking note of the view
expressed by the Madras High Court in Tvl. Vardhan Infrastructure (Supra), which is contrary to the
prima facie view that I have taken, I am of the opinion that this issue requires an authoritative
pronouncement by a Division Bench of this Court.
The writ petition is, therefore, adjourned to be heard by a Division Bench. The Registry shall place
the matter before the Division Bench, if necessary, after obtaining orders of Hon'ble the Chief
Justice."
5. We find ourselves in complete agreement with the prima facie view taken by the learned Judge
[Justice Gopinath P.] in the reference order. The provisions of Section 6(1) of the CGST Act make it
abundantly clear that the cross-empowerment of the Officers of the SGST/UTGST Department to
function as proper officers under the CGST Act is through the legislative mandate under Section 6(1)
of the CGST Act. It is a mandate and empowerment that is presently unqualified but expressly made
subject to such conditions as the Government shall, on the recommendation of the Council, by
notification, specify. In other words, while the statutory mandate at present is unqualified, it will be
qualified in the event the Government specifies conditions for the exercise of power under the
statutory mandate, pursuant to the recommendations of the Council. We cannot persuade ourselves
to read the statutory mandate as one that does not presently bring about a cross-empowerment but
merely envisages such a situation as and when a notification is issued at some time in the future.
6. We also find that the view taken by us accords with the view taken by a Division Bench of the
Delhi High Court in Indo International Tobacco Ltd. v. Additional Director General, DGGI, [(2022)
97 GSTR 414 (Delhi)], where at paragraphs 56 to 62, it is held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 17
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
"56. Sub-clause (1) of Section 6 of the CGST Act provides for the cross empowerment
of the Officer appointed under the SGST Act or the UTGST Act as a 'proper officer' for
the purpose of the CGST Act. We are informed that pari materia provisions of cross
empowerment of the Central Tax Officer are contained in the various SGST Act(s).
57. Sub-section (2)(a) of Section 6 of the CGST Act provides that where a 'proper
officer' issues an order under the CGST Act, he shall also issue an order under the
SGST Act and the UTGST Act, as the case may be.
58. Sub-section 2(b) of Section 6 of the CGST Act further states that where the
'proper officer' under the SGST Act or the UTGST Act has initiated any proceedings
on the subject matter, no proceedings shall be initiated by the 'proper officer' under
the CGST Act on the same subject matter.
59. We are informed that similar provisions in the reverse are contained in the
various SGST Act(s), with the State Tax Officer being required to pass an order under
the CGST Act while passing an order under the SGST Act, and being prohibited from
initiating any proceedings on the subject matter on which the Central Tax officer has
already initiated some proceeding.
60. Section 6 of the CGST Act is clearly guided by the object of providing a common
national market of goods and services and to eliminate the subjection of the
taxpayers to multiple jurisdictions. It aims to provide protection to the taxpayers
against being subjected to multiple agencies for the same set of transactions, at the
same time empowering the Officers under the CGST Act or the SGST Act or the
UTGST Act to pass a comprehensive order and take action, keeping in view and
extending to the other Acts. There should, therefore, be only one order insofar as the
tax entity is concerned.
61. To give effect to the above intent, Section 6(2)(b) of the CGST Act states that
where the proper officer under the SGST Act or the UTGST Act has initiated any
proceedings on a subject matter, the Central Tax Officer shall not initiate proceedings
on the same subject matter. Clearly the intent being that as the State Tax Officer is
empowered to pass an order even under the CGST Act, there is no occasion for the
Central Tax Officer to initiate parallel proceedings on the same subject matter.
62. As stated hereinabove, Section 6 of the CGST Act is intended to give the effect of
harmonious convergence of the States and the Union for the same event for
taxation."
The Special Leave Petition preferred against the said judgment has also been dismissed as
withdrawn, as is evident from the order dated 07.11.2022 of the Supreme Court in SLP (C). No. 5434
of 2022.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 18
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Thus, we answer the reference by upholding the view taken by the learned Single Judge in the
reference order for the reasons stated therein, as supplemented by the reasons in this judgment.
Further, as we find that no other issue arises for consideration in the writ petition, we also deem it
appropriate to dismiss the writ petition through this judgment. Needless to say, it will be open to the
petitioner to pursue its statutory remedies against the show cause notice issued to it by raising all
contentions available in law and thereafter getting the matter adjudicated in terms of the statutory
provisions."
(Emphasis supplied) The matter was referred to the Division Bench by the learned single Judge and
the Division Bench answering the reference, holds that Section 6(1) of the CGST cross empowers the
officer of the State GST Act or Union Territory GST Act to function as the proper officers under the
CGST. While so doing, the Division Bench considers the judgment of the High Court of Madras
rendered in TVL VARDHAN supra, upon which, the learned counsel for petitioner has placed heavy
reliance upon. The Division Bench takes a contrary view to VARDHAN and chooses to follow the
judgment of the Division Bench of High Court of Delhi in case of INDO INTERNATIONAL
TOBACCO LTD. V. ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL reported in (2022) 97 GSTR 414 (Delhi).
21. On a blend of the enunciation of law by several division benches of different High Courts, what
would unmistakably emerge is Section 4 of the IGST generates cross empowerment to become a
proper officer, upon an officer who is appointed under Section 6 of the CGST or KGST. It is an
admitted fact that the fourth respondent is declared to be the proper officer under Section 6 of the
KGST and confers cross empowerment in terms of Section 4 of the IGST, which unequivocally
mandates that the officer under Section 6 of the KGST would be the proper officer under Section 4
of the IGST and only an exception to the norm requires a separate notification by the Government of
India, or not otherwise. The Government of India has not issued any notification carving out an
exception declaring someone else to be the proper officer.
22. In that light, the mandate of Section 4 of the IGST runs and runs for all time to come. There is no
substance in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the fourth respondent is
not a proper officer. Since the judgment was reserved only for the aforesaid determination, the
DETERMINATION is as follows:
The fourth respondent who is an authorized officer under Section 6 of the KGST, is
declared to be the proper officer under Section 4 of the IGST.
23. The issue now would be, whether the petition could be entertained before this Court or the
petitioner should be left to avail the statutory remedy available under Section 107 of the KGST.
24. The matter was heard on the issue of whether the remedy of appeal would be available or
otherwise, and reserved the matter on the said issue of availability of remedy under Section 107 of
the KGST.
25. This Court had reserved the subject petition on 08-01-2025 to determine who would be the
proper officer under Section 4 of the IGST. It was determined that the officer appointed under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 19
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Section 6 of the KGST would be the proper officer under Section 4 of the IGST. Therefore, the
jurisdiction, as aforesaid, was determined against the petitioner who had contended that an officer
under Section 6 of the KGST, unless notified by the Government of India under IGST, would not
become the proper officer, to initiate proceedings under the IGST. It was opined while disposing the
petition that the petitioner could avail the remedy of filing an appeal before the Appellate Authority
under Section 107 of the KGST.
26. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there was no remedy of filing an appeal for
the kind of order that is passed, as there is specific bar under the KGST. Therefore, appeal neither,
under Section 107 of the KGST or Section 20 of the IGST was submitted to be unavailable to the
petitioner. Therefore, the matter was heard on 24-02-2025 on the issue of whether appeal would be
maintainable in the fact circumstance, before the Appellate Authority, and the following order was
passed:
"This Court had reserved the matter only to answer the issue qua who would be the
appropriate Officer under the IGST. The answer is that the Officer appointed under
Section 6 of the KGST is held to be the appropriate Officer. Therefore the question of
jurisdiction has gone against the petitioner. The issue now would be whether the
petition would be entertainable or the petitioner should be relegated to avail of the
statutory remedy of filing appeal before the appellate authority.
Learned counsel Shri Samir Gupta appearing for the petitioner submits that the
appeal available under Section 20 of the IGST as an appeal against order passed
under the IGST, the present order is passed not by an Officer who is the appropriate
Officer under section 6 of the KGST. Therefore, the appeal should lie in fact under the
KGST under Section 107 of the KGST. It is the submission of the learned counsel that
appeals cannot be entertained which arise out of IGST. Therefore there is a quagmire
as to who should be the appellate authority in the fact circumstance. He would seek
to place reliance upon the interim order granted by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad on the same lines interpreting Section 6 of the Uttar Pradesh GST which is
in para material with the KGST. Therefore the matter requires an answer there as
well.
Therefore, the matter is reserved for orders on this issue as well The respondents are
restrained from precipitating the matter till the next date of hearing.
List the matter on 03.03.2025."
Therefore, the subject order is in continuation of the order dated 20-02-2025. To determine
whether the remedy of appeal is available or otherwise, it becomes germane to notice certain
provisions of the Act and the Rules. The Act and the Rules would be the CGST Act and Rules, the
KGST Act and Rules, the IGST Act and Rules.
CGST ACT, 2017 KGST ACT, 2017
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 20
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless 2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,-- the context otherwise requires,-
.... ......
(4) "adjudicating authority" means (4) "adjudicating authority" means
any authority, appointed or authorised any authority, appointed or authorised
to pass any order or decision under this to pass any order or decision under Act, but does not
include the Central this Act, but does not include the Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs,
Commissioner, Revisional Authority, the Revisional Authority, the Authority the Authority for
Advance Ruling, the for Advance Ruling, the Appellate Appellate Authority for Advance Ruling,
Authority for Advance Ruling, [the the National Appellate Authority for National Appellate
Authority for Advance Ruling, the Appellate Advance Ruling, 5[the Appellate Authority, the
Appellate Tribunal and Authority, the Appellate Tribunal and the Authority referred to in
sub-section the Authority referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 171; (2) of Section 171;
..... ......
(8) "Appellate Authority" means an (8) "Appellate Authority" means an
authority appointed or authorised to authority appointed or authorised to
hear appeals as referred to in Section hear appeals as referred to in Section
107; 107;
3. Officers under this Act.--The 3. Officers under this Act.--The Government shall, by notification,
Government shall, by notification, appoint the following classes of appoint the following classes of
officers for the purposes of this Act, officers for the purposes of this Act, namely:-- namely:--
(a) Principal Chief Commissioners (a) Commissioner of State of Central Tax or
Principal tax, Directors General of Central (b) Additional Commissioners Tax, of
State tax,
(b) Chief Commissioners of (c) Joint Commissioners of Central Tax or Directors State
tax, General of Central Tax, (d) Deputy Commissioners of
(c) Principal Commissioners of State tax, Central Tax or Principal (e) Assistant
Commissioners Additional Directors General of State tax, and of Central Tax, (f) any
other class of officers
(d) Commissioners of Central Tax as it may deem fit:
or Additional Directors Provided that, the officers General of Central Tax, appointed
under the Karnataka
(e) Additional Commissioners of Value Added Tax Act, 2003 Central Tax or
Additional (Karnataka Act 32 of 2004) shall Directors of Central Tax, be deemed to
be the officers
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 21
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(f) Joint Commissioners of appointed under the provisions Central Tax or Joint
Directors of this Act.
of Central Tax,
(g) Deputy Commissioners of Central Tax or Deputy Directors of Central Tax,
(h) Assistant Commissioners of Central Tax or Assistant Directors of Central Tax, and
(i) any other class of officers as it may deem fit:
Provided that the officers appointed under the Central Excise Act, 1944(1 of 1944.)
shall be deemed to be the officers appointed under the provisions of this Act.
4. Appointment of officers.--(1) 4. Appointment of officers.--(1) The Board may, in
addition to the The Government may, in addition officers as may be notified by the to
the officers as may be notified Government under Section 3, under Section 3, appoint
such appoint such persons as it may persons as it may think fit to be the think fit to
be the officers under this officers under this Act.
Act. (2) The Commissioner shall
(2) Without prejudice to the have jurisdiction over the whole of
provisions of sub-section (1), the the State and all other officers
Board may, by order, authorise any shall, subject to such conditions as
officer referred to in clauses (a) to may be specified, have jurisdiction
(h) of Section 3 to appoint officers over the whole of the State or over
of central tax below the rank of such local areas as the
Assistant Commissioner of central Commissioner may, by order,
tax for the administration of this specify.
Act.
5. Powers of officers.--(1) 5. Powers of officers.--(1)
Subject to such conditions and Subject to such conditions and
limitations as the Board may limitations as the Commissioner
impose, an officer of central tax may impose, an officer of State tax
may exercise the powers and may exercise the powers and
discharge the duties conferred or discharge the duties conferred or
imposed on him under this Act. imposed on him under this Act.
(2) An officer of central tax may (2) An officer of State tax may
exercise the powers and discharge exercise the powers and discharge
the duties conferred or imposed the duties conferred or imposed
under this Act on any other officer under this Act on any other officer
of central tax who is subordinate to of State tax who is subordinate to
him. him.
(3) The Commissioner may, (3) The Commissioner may,
subject to such conditions and subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be specified in limitations as may be specified in
this behalf by him, delegate his this behalf by him, delegate his
powers to any other officer who is powers to any other officer who is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 22
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
subordinate to him. subordinate to him.
(4) Notwithstanding anything (4) Notwithstanding anything
contained in this section, an contained in this section, an
Appellate Authority shall not Appellate Authority shall not
exercise the powers and discharge exercise the powers and discharge
the duties conferred or imposed on the duties conferred or imposed on
any other officer of central tax. any other officer of State tax.
6. Authorisation of officers of 6. Authorisation of officers of
State tax or Union territory tax central tax as proper officer in
as proper officer in certain certain circumstances.--(1)
circumstances.--(1) Without Without prejudice to the
prejudice to the provisions of provisions of this Act, the
this Act, the officers appointed officers appointed under the
under the State Goods and Central Goods and Services Tax
Services Tax Act or the Union Act are authorised to be the
Territory Goods and Services proper officers for the purposes
Tax Act are authorised to be the of this Act, subject to such
proper officers for the purposes conditions as the Government
of this Act, subject to such shall, on the recommendations
conditions as the Government of the Council, by notification,
shall, on the recommendations specify.
of the Council, by notification,
specify.
(2) Subject to the conditions (2) Subject to the conditions
specified in the notification specified in the notification issued under sub-section
(1),-- issued under sub-section (1),--
(a) where any proper officer (a) where any proper officer issues an order under this
issues an order under this Act, he shall also issue an Act, he shall also issue an order
under the State Goods order under the Central and Services Tax Act or the Goods and
Services Tax Act, Union Territory Goods and as authorised by the said Act Services
Tax Act, as under intimation to the authorised by the State jurisdictional officer of
Goods and Services Tax Act central tax;
or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act,
as the case may be, under
intimation to the
jurisdictional officer of
State tax or Union territory
tax;
(b) where a proper officer under the (b) where a proper officer under
State Goods and Services Tax the Central Goods and Services
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 23
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Act or the Union Territory Tax Act has initiated any
Goods and Services Tax Act proceedings on a subject
has initiated any proceedings matter, no proceedings shall be
on a subject matter, no initiated by the proper officer
proceedings shall be initiated under this Act on the same
by the proper officer under this subject matter.
Act on the same subject
matter.
(3) Any proceedings for (3) Any proceedings for
rectification, appeal and revision, rectification, appeal and revision,
wherever applicable, of any order wherever applicable, of any order
passed by an officer appointed passed by an officer appointed
under this Act shall not lie before an under this Act, shall not lie before
officer appointed under the State an officer appointed under the
Goods and Services Tax Act or the Central Goods and Services Tax
Union Territory Goods and Services Act.
Tax Act.
107. Appeals to Appellate 107. Appeals to Appellate
Authority.--(1) Any person Authority.--(1) Any person
aggrieved by any decision or aggrieved by any decision or
order passed under this Act or order passed under this Act or
the State Goods and Services the Central Goods and Services
Tax Act or the Union Territory Tax Act by an adjudicating
Goods and Services Tax Act by authority may appeal to such
an adjudicating authority may Appellate Authority as may be
appeal to such Appellate prescribed within three months
Authority as may be prescribed from the date on which the said
within three months from the decision or order is
date on which the said decision communicated to such person.
or order is communicated to (2) The Commissioner may,
such person. on his own motion, or upon
(2) The Commissioner may, request from the Commissioner
on his own motion, or upon of central tax, call for and
request from the Commissioner examine the record of any
of State tax or the proceeding in which an
Commissioner of Union territory adjudicating authority has
tax, call for and examine the passed any decision or order
record of any proceedings in under this Act or the Central
which an adjudicating authority Goods and Services Tax Act, for
has passed any decision or the purpose of satisfying
order under this Act or the State himself as to the legality or
Goods and Services Tax Act or propriety of the said decision or
the Union Territory Goods and order and may, by order, direct
Services Tax Act, for the any officer subordinate to him
purpose of satisfying himself as to apply to the Appellate
to the legality or propriety of Authority within six months
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 24
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
the said decision or order and from the date of communication
may, by order, direct any officer of the said decision or order for
subordinate to him to apply to the determination of such
the Appellate Authority within points arising out of the said
six months from the date of decision or order as may be
communication of the said specified by the Commissioner
decision or order for the in his order.
determination of such points
arising out of the said decision
or order as may be specified by
the Commissioner in his order.
(3) Where, in pursuance of an (3) Where, in pursuance of an
order under sub-section (2), the order under sub-section (2), the
authorised officer makes an authorised officer makes an
application to the Appellate application to the Appellate
Authority, such application shall be Authority, such application shall be
dealt with by the Appellate dealt with by the Appellate
Authority as if it were an appeal Authority as if it were an appeal
made against the decision or order made against the decision or order
of the adjudicating authority and of the adjudicating authority and
such authorised officer were an such authorised officer were an
appellant and the provisions of this appellant and the provisions of this
Act relating to appeals shall apply to Act relating to appeals shall apply such
application. to such application.
(4) The Appellate Authority may, (4) The Appellate Authority if he is satisfied that the
appellant may, if he is satisfied that the was prevented by sufficient cause appellant
was prevented by from presenting the appeal within sufficient cause from presenting
the the aforesaid period of three appeal within the aforesaid period months or six
months, as the case of three months or six months, as may be, allow it to be presented
the case may be, allow it to be within a further period of one presented within a
further period of month. one month.
(5) Every appeal under this (5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form
and section shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as shall be
verified in such manner as may be prescribed. may be prescribed.
(6) No appeal shall be filed (6) No appeal shall be filed under sub-section (1), unless
the under sub-section (1), unless the appellant has paid-- appellant has paid --
(a) in full, such part of the amount (a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest,
fine, fee and of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the penalty arising
from the impugned order, as is admitted impugned order, as is admitted by him; and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 25
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
by him; and
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent of (b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining
amount of tax in the remaining amount of tax in dispute arising from the said dispute
arising from the said order, subject to a maximum of order, subject to a maximum of
twenty crore rupees, in relation twenty crore rupees, in relation to which the appeal
has been to which the appeal has been filed: filed.
Provided that no appeal shall be Provided that no appeal shall filed against an order under sub- be
filed against an order under section (3) of Section 129, unless a sub-section (3) of Section 129, sum
equal to twenty-five per cent. unless a sum equal to twenty-
of the penalty has been paid by the five per cent. of the penalty has
appellant. been paid by the appellant.
(7) Where the appellant has paid (7) Where the appellant has
the amount under sub-section (6), paid the amount under sub-section
the recovery proceedings for the (6), the recovery proceedings for
balance amount shall be deemed to the balance amount shall be
be stayed. deemed to be stayed.
(8) The Appellate Authority shall (8) The Appellate Authority shall
give an opportunity to the appellant give an opportunity to the appellant of being heard. of being
heard.
(9) The Appellate Authority may, (9) The Appellate Authority if sufficient cause is shown at any
may, if sufficient cause is shown at stage of hearing of an appeal, grant any stage of hearing of an
appeal, time to the parties or any of them grant time to the parties or any of and adjourn the hearing
of the them and adjourn the hearing of appeal for reasons to be recorded in the appeal for reasons to
be writing: recorded in writing:
Provided that no such Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted
adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party more than three times
to a during hearing of the appeal. party during hearing of the appeal.
(10) The Appellate Authority may, at the time of hearing of an (10) The Appellate
Authority appeal, allow an appellant to add may, at the time of hearing of an any
ground of appeal not specified appeal, allow an appellant to add in the grounds of
appeal, if it is any ground of appeal not specified satisfied that the omission of that in
the grounds of appeal, if it is ground from the grounds of appeal satisfied that the
omission of that was not wilful or unreasonable. ground from the grounds of appeal
was not wilful or unreasonable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 26
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(11) The Appellate Authority (11) The Appellate Authority shall, after making such
further shall, after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass inquiry as
may be necessary, pass such order, as it thinks just and such order, as it thinks just
and proper, confirming, modifying or proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the
decision or order annulling the decision or order appealed against but shall not refer
appealed against but shall not refer the case back to the adjudicating the case back to
the adjudicating authority that passed the said authority that passed the said decision
or order: decision or order:
Provided that an order Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or
enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or fine in lieu of
confiscation or confiscating goods of greater confiscating goods of greater value or
reducing the amount of value or reducing the amount of refund or input tax credit
shall refund or input tax credit shall not be passed unless the not be passed unless the
appellant has been given a appellant has been given a reasonable opportunity of
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the showing cause against the
proposed order: proposed order:
Provided further that where the Provided further that where Appellate Authority is of
the opinion the Appellate Authority is of the that any tax has not been paid or opinion
that any tax has not short-paid or erroneously refunded, been paid or short-paid or or
where input tax credit has been erroneously refunded, or where wrongly availed or
utilised, no order input tax credit has been requiring the appellant to pay such
wrongly availed or utilised, no tax or input tax credit shall be order requiring the
appellant to passed unless the appellant is given pay such tax or input tax credit
notice to show cause against the shall be passed unless the proposed order and the
order is appellant is given notice to show passed within the time limit cause against
the proposed specified under Section 73 or order and the order is passed Section 74
or Section 74-A. within the time limit specified under Section 73 or Section 74 or
Section 74-A. (12) The order of the Appellate (12) The order of the Appellate
Authority disposing of the appeal Authority disposing of the appeal shall be in writing
and shall state shall be in writing and shall state the points for determination, the the
points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for decision thereon
and the reasons such decision. for such decision.
(13) The Appellate Authority (13) The Appellate Authority shall, where it is possible
to do so, shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every appeal within hear
and decide every appeal a period of one year from the date within a period of one year
from on which it is filed: the date on which it is filed:
Provided that where the Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an
issuance of order is stayed by order of a court or Tribunal, the an order of a court or
Tribunal, period of such stay shall be the period of such stay shall be excluded in
computing the period excluded in computing the of one year. period of one year.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 27
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(14) On disposal of the appeal, (14) On disposal of the appeal, the Appellate Authority
shall the Appellate Authority shall communicate the order passed by it communicate
the order passed by it to the appellant, respondent and to to the appellant,
respondent and to the adjudicating authority. the adjudicating authority.
(15) A copy of the order passed (15) A copy of the order passed by the Appellate
Authority shall also by the Appellate Authority shall be sent to the jurisdictional also
be sent to the Commissioner Commissioner or the authority or the authority
designated by him designated by him in this behalf and in this behalf and the
jurisdictional the jurisdictional Commissioner of Commissioner of central tax or an
authority designated by him in this State tax or Commissioner of Union behalf.
Territory Tax or an authority designated by him in this behalf.
(16) Every order passed under (16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to the this
section shall, subject to the provisions of Section 108 or Section provisions of Section 108 or Section
113 or Section 117 or Section 118 113 or Section 117 or Section 118 be final and binding on the parties.
be final and binding on the parties.
121. Non-appealable decisions 121. Non appealable decisions and orders.--Notwithstanding and
orders.--Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any anything to the contrary in any provisions
of this Act, no appeal provisions of this Act, no appeal shall lie against any decision taken shall lie
against any decision taken or order passed by an officer of or order passed by an officer of central
tax if such decision taken or State tax if such decision taken or order passed relates to any one or
order passed relates to any one or more of the following matters, more of the following matters,
namely:-- namely:--
(a) an order of the Commissioner or (a) an order of the Commissioner other authority
empowered to or other authority empowered direct transfer of proceedings to direct
transfer of proceedings from one officer to another from one officer to another
officer; or officer; or
(b) an order pertaining to the (b) an order pertaining to the seizure or retention of
books of seizure or retention of books of account, register and other account, register
and other documents; or documents; or
(c) an order sanctioning prosecution (c) an order sanctioning under this Act; or
prosecution under this Act; or
(d) an order passed under Section (d) an order passed under Section
80. 80.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 28
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
130. Confiscation of goods or 130. Confiscation of goods or conveyances and levy of conveyances and
levy of penalty.--(1) Where any penalty.--(1) Where any person person-- --
(i) supplies or receives any (i) supplies or receives any goods in contravention of any goods in
contravention of of the provisions of this Act any of the provisions of this or the rules made
thereunder Act or the rules made with intent to evade payment thereunder with intent to of tax; or
evade payment of tax; or
(ii) does not account for any (ii) does not account for any goods on which he is liable to goods on
which he is liable pay tax under this Act; or to pay tax under this Act; or
(iii) supplies any goods liable to (iii) supplies any goods liable to tax under this Act without tax
under this Act without having applied for having applied for registration; or registration; or
(iv) contravenes any of the (iv) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the provisions of this
Act or the rules made thereunder with rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of intent
to evade payment of tax; or tax; or
(v) uses any conveyance as a (v) uses any conveyance as a means of transport for means of transport
for carriage of goods in carriage of goods in contravention of the contravention of the provisions of
this Act or the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder unless rules made thereunder the
owner of the conveyance unless the owner of the proves that it was so used conveyance proves that it
without the knowledge or was so used without the connivance of the owner knowledge or
connivance of himself, his agent, if any, and the owner himself, his the person in charge of the agent,
if any, and the person conveyance, in charge of the conveyance, then, all such goods or then, all such
goods or conveyances shall be liable to conveyances shall be liable confiscation and the person to
confiscation and the shall be liable to penalty under person shall be liable to Section 122.
penalty under Section 122.
(2) Whenever confiscation of any goods or conveyance is authorised (2) Whenever confiscation of by
this Act, the officer adjudging it any goods or conveyance is shall give to the owner of the goods
authorised by this Act, the officer an option to pay in lieu of adjudging it shall give to the owner
confiscation, such fine as the said of the goods an option to pay in officer thinks fit: lieu of
confiscation, such fine as the said officer thinks fit:
Provided that such fine leviable shall not exceed the Provided that such fine market
value of the goods leviable shall not exceed the confiscated, less the tax market value
of the goods chargeable thereon: confiscated, less the tax chargeable thereon:
Provided further that the Provided further that the aggregate of such fine and penalty
aggregate of such fine and leviable shall not be less than the penalty leviable shall not
be less penalty equal to hundred per cent than the penalty equal to of the tax payable
on such goods: hundred per cent. of the tax payable of such goods:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 29
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Provided also that where any such conveyance is used for the Provided also that
where any carriage of the goods or such conveyance is used for the passengers for
hire, the owner of carriage of the goods or the conveyance shall be given an
passengers for hire, the owner option to pay in lieu of the of the conveyance shall be
given confiscation of the conveyance a an option to pay in lieu of the fine equal to the
tax payable on confiscation of the conveyance a the goods being transported fine
equal to the tax payable on thereon. the goods being transported thereon.
(3) * * * (3) * * * (4) No order for confiscation of goods or conveyance or for (4) No
order for confiscation of imposition of penalty shall be issued goods or conveyance or
for without giving the person an imposition of penalty shall be opportunity of being
heard. issued without giving the person an opportunity of being heard.
(5) Where any goods or
conveyance are confiscated under (5) Where any goods or
this Act, the title of such goods or conveyance are confiscated under conveyance shall
thereupon vest in this Act, the title of such goods or the Government. conveyance
shall thereupon vest in the Government.
(6) The proper officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold (6) The proper
officer adjudging possession of the things confiscated confiscation shall take and hold
and every officer of Police, on the possession of the things confiscated requisition of
such proper officer, and every officer of Police, on the shall assist him in taking and
requisition of such proper officer, holding such possession. shall assist him in taking
and holding such possession.
(7) The proper officer may, after satisfying himself that the (7) The proper officer
may, after confiscated goods or conveyance satisfying himself that the are not
required in any other confiscated goods or conveyance proceedings under this Act
and after are not required in any other giving reasonable time not proceedings under
this Act and exceeding three months to pay fine after giving reasonable time not in
lieu of confiscation, dispose of exceeding three months to pay fine such goods or
conveyance and in lieu of confiscation, dispose of deposit the sale proceeds thereof
such goods or conveyance and with the Government. deposit the sale proceeds
thereof with the Government CGST RULES, 2017 KGST RULES, 2017
108. Appeal to the Appellate 108. Appeal to the Appellate Authority.-- (1) An appeal
to the Authority.--(1) An appeal to the Appellate Authority under sub- Appellate
Authority under sub-
section (1) of Section 107 shall section (1) of Section 107 shall be filed in Form GST APL-01, be filed
in FORM GST APL-01, along with the relevant along with the relevant documents, electronically,
and a documents, either electronically provisional acknowledgement or otherwise as may be notified
shall be issued to the appellant by the Commissioner, and a immediately: provisional
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 30
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
acknowledgement shall be issued to the appellant Provided that an appeal to immediately.
the Appellate Authority may be filed manually in FORM GST APL-
01, along with the relevant (2) The grounds of appeal and documents, only if-- the form of
verification as contained in FORM GST APL-01
(i) the Commissioner has so shall be signed in the manner notified, or specified in Rule 26.
(ii) the same cannot be filed electronically due to non- (3) A certified copy of the availability of the
decision decision or order appealed against or order to be appealed shall be submitted within seven
against on the common days of filing the appeal under sub-
portal, rule (1) and a final and in such case, a provisional acknowledgement, indicating
acknowledgement shall be issued to appeal number shall be issued the appellant immediately.
thereafter in FORM GST APL-02 by the Appellate Authority or an officer authorised by him in this
behalf:
(2) The grounds of appeal and the Form of verification as Provided that where the certified
contained in Form GST APL-01 shall copy of the decision or order is be signed in the manner
specified in submitted within seven days from Rule 26.
the date of filing the FORM GST APL-01, the date of filing of the (3) Where the decision or order
appeal shall be the date of issue of appealed against is uploaded on the provisional
acknowledgement and common portal, a final where the said copy is submitted acknowledgment,
indicating appeal after seven days, the date of filing number, shall be issued in FORM of the appeal
shall be the date of GST APL-02 by the Appellate submission of such copy.
Authority or an officer authorised by him in this behalf and the date of Explanation.--For the
provisions issue of the provisional of this rule, the appeal shall be acknowledgment shall be treated
as filed only when the final considered as the date of filing of acknowledgement, indicating the
appeal:
appeal number is issued.
Provided that where the decision or order appealed against is not uploaded on the common portal,
the appellant shall submit a self-certified copy of the said decision or order within a period of seven
days from the date of filing of FORM GST APL-01 and a final acknowledgment, indicating appeal
number, shall be issued in FORM GST APL-02 by the Appellate Authority or an officer authorised
by him in this behalf, and the date of issue of the provisional acknowledgment shall be considered as
the date of filing of appeal:
Provided further that where the said self-certified copy of the decision or order is not submitted
within a period of seven days from the date of filing of FORM GST APL-01, the date of submission of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 31
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
such copy shall be considered as the date of filing of appeal.
Explanation.--For the provisions of this rule, the appeal shall be treated as filed only when the final
acknowledgement, indicating the appeal number, is issued.
109. Application to the Appellate 109. Application to the Authority.--(1) An application to Appellate
Authority.--(1) An the Appellate Authority under sub- application to the Appellate section (2) of
Section 107 shall be Authority under sub-section (2) of filed in FORM GST APL-03, along Section
107 shall be made in FORM with the relevant documents, GST APL- 03, along with the electronically
and a provisional relevant documents, either acknowledgment shall be issued to electronically or
otherwise as may the appellant immediately: be notified by the Commissioner.
Provided that an appeal to the Appellate Authority may be (2) A certified copy of the filed manually
in FORM GST APL- decision or order appealed against 03, along with the relevant shall be
submitted within seven documents, only if-- days of the filing the application under sub-rule (1) and
an appeal
(i) the Commissioner has so number shall be generated by the notified, or Appellate Authority or an
officer
(ii) the same cannot be filed authorised by him in this behalf. electronically due to non-
availability of the decision or order to be appealed against on the common portal, and in such case, a
provisional acknowledgement shall be issued to the appellant immediately.
(2) Where the decision or order appealed against is uploaded on the common portal, a final
acknowledgment, indicating appeal number, shall be issued in FORM GST APL-02 by the Appellate
Authority or an officer authorised by him in this behalf and the date of issue of the provisional
acknowledgment shall be considered as the date of filing of appeal under sub-rule (1):
Provided that where the decision or order appealed against is not uploaded on the common portal,
the appellant shall submit a self-certified copy of the said decision or order within a period of seven
days from the date of filing of FORM GST APL-03 and a final acknowledgment, indicating appeal
number, shall be issued in FORM GST APL-02 by the Appellate Authority or an officer authorised
by him in this behalf, and the date of issue of the provisional acknowledgment shall be considered as
the date of filing of appeal:
Provided further that where the said self-certified copy of the decision or order is not submitted
within a period of seven days from the date of filing of FORM GST APL-03, the date of submission
of such copy shall be considered as the date of filing of appeal.
109-A. Appointment of Appellate 109A. Appointment of Appellate Authority-- (1) Any person
Authority.--(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order aggrieved by any decision or order
passed under this Act or the State passed under this Act or the Goods and Services Tax Act or the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 32
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Central Goods and Services Tax Act Union Territory Goods and Services may appeal to-- Tax Act
may appeal to--
(a) the Additional Commissioner
(a) the Commissioner (Appeals) (Appeals) where such decision where such decision or order is or
order is passed by the Joint passed by the Additional or Joint Commissioner; Commissioner;
(b) the Joint Commissioner
(b) the Additional Commissioner (Appeals) where such decision (Appeals) where such decision or or
order is passed by the order is passed by the Deputy or Deputy or Assistant Assistant Commissioner
or Commissioner or Commercial Superintendent, Tax Officer within three months from the date
within three months from the on which the said decision or order date on which the said decision or
is communicated to such person. order is communicated to such (2) An officer directed under sub-
person. section (2) of Section 107 to appeal (2) An officer directed under against any decision or
order sub-section (2) of Section 107 to passed under this Act or the State appeal against any decision
or Goods and Services Tax Act or the order passed under this Act or the Union Territory Goods and
Services Central Goods and Services Tax Act Tax Act may appeal to  may appeal to--
(a) the Commissioner (a) the Additional Commissioner (Appeals) where such (Appeals) where such
decision decision or order is passed or order is passed by the Joint by the Additional or Joint
Commissioner; Commissioner;
(b) the Additional (b) the Joint Commissioner Commissioner (Appeals) (Appeals) where such
decision where such decision or or order is passed by the order is passed by the Deputy or Assistant
Deputy or Assistant Commissioner or Commercial Commissioner or the Tax Officer Superintendent,
within six months from the date of communication of the said within six months from the date
decision or order. of communication of the said decision or order.
(Emphasis supplied) IGST Act, 2017 "20. Application of provisions of Central Goods and Services
Tax Act.--Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of
Central Goods and Services Tax Act relating to,--
(i) scope of supply;
(ii) composite supply and mixed supply;
(iii) time and value of supply;
(iv) input tax credit;
(v) registration;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 33
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(vi) tax invoice, credit and debit notes;
(vii) accounts and records;
(viii) returns, other than late fee;
(ix) payment of tax;
(x) tax deduction at source;
(xi) collection of tax at source;
(xii) assessment;
(xiii) refunds;
(xiv) audit;
(xv) inspection, search, seizure and arrest;
(xvi) demands and recovery;
(xvii) liability to pay in certain cases; (xviii) advance ruling;
(xix) appeals and revision;
(xx) presumption as to documents;
(xxi) offences and penalties;
(xxii) job work;
(xxiii) electronic commerce;
(xxiv) transitional provisions; and (xxv) miscellaneous provisions including the provisions relating
to the imposition of interest and penalty, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply, so far as may be, in relation
to integrated tax as they apply in relation to central tax as if they are enacted under this Act:
Provided that in the case of tax deducted at source, the deductor shall deduct tax at
the rate of two per cent. from the payment made or credited to the supplier:
Provided further that in the case of tax collected at source, the operator shall collect
tax at such rate not exceeding two per cent, as may be notified on the
recommendations of the Council, of the net value of taxable supplies:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 34
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Provided also that for the purposes of this Act, the value of a supply shall include any
taxes, duties, cesses, fees and charges levied under any law for the time being in force
other than this Act, and the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Act, if
charged separately by the supplier:
Provided also that in cases where the penalty is leviable under the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act and the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory
Goods and Services Tax Act, the penalty leviable under this Act shall be the sum total
of the said penalties:
Provided also that a maximum amount of forty crore rupees shall be payable for each
appeal to be filed before the Appellate Authority or the Appellate Tribunal."
(Emphasis supplied) IGST RULES, 2017 "2. Application of Central Goods and
Services Tax Rules.-- The Central Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017, for carrying
out the provisions specified in Section 20 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax
Act, 2017 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to integrated tax as they apply in
relation to central tax."
27. While hearing a challenge to the confiscation order passed under Section 130 of
the CGST, the Apex Court in the case of FALCON ENTERPRISES VS. STATE OF
GUJARAT6 holds that such orders can only be challenged by way of an appeal under
Section 107 of CGST. The Apex Court holds as follows:
"1.Being aggrieved by the order of confiscation of Goods and Demand of Tax, Fine
and Penalty dated 31-8-
2020 passed by the Government of Gujarat, State Tax Department, the Petitioner filed a writ
petition which was not entertained on the ground that the order which was passed Under Section
130 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 ('the CGST Act') is appealable Under Section
107 of the CGST Act.
2. Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner relies upon Rule 141
which proves that the seized goods may be released if the taxable person pays an amount equivalent
to the market price of such goods or things or the amount of tax, interest and penalty that is or may
become payable by the taxable person, whichever is lower.
3. Section 107(6) provides that an appeal shall not be entertained unless the Appellant pays the
amount of tax, SLP (C) No. 6923 of 2021, decided on 01.06.2021 interest, fine, fee and penalty
arising out of the impugned order in full, as is admitted by him, and a sum equivalent to 10% of the
remaining amount of tax in dispute arising out of the said order. She contends that the appeal under
Section 107 of the CGST Act is not an efficacious remedy. Section 107 of the CGST Act provides that
an appeal lies against any decision or order passed by the adjudicating authority.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 35
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
4. The Petitioner is at liberty to raise all issues before the appellate authority.
5. With the above observation, the special leave petition is disposed of. Pending application(s), if
any, shall also stand disposed of."
(Emphasis supplied)
28. Later, the Apex Court in the case of COMMR. OF STATE TAX V. COMMERCIAL STEEL LTD.7,
while deciding the issue of maintainability of a writ petition challenging an order of detention
passed under Section 129(3) of the CGST r/w Section 20 of the IGST, holds that the such orders
should be challenged by way of the statutory remedy of appeal provided under Section 107 of CGST
and the Writ Petition is only maintainable in certain circumstances mentioned below. The Apex
Court holds as follows;
"9. Section 107 is extracted below:
"107. Appeals to appellate authority.--(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or
order passed under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union
(2022)16 SCC 447 Territory Goods and Services Tax Act by an adjudicating authority
may appeal to such appellate authority as may be prescribed within three months
from the date on which the said decision or order is communicated to such person.
(2) The Commissioner may, on his own motion, or upon request from the
Commissioner of State tax or the Commissioner of Union territory tax, call for and
examine the record of any proceedings in which an adjudicating authority has passed
any decision or order under this Act or the State Goods and Services Tax Act or the
Union Territory Goods and Services Tax Act, for the purpose of satisfying himself as
to the legality or propriety of the said decision or order and may, by order, direct any
officer subordinate to him to apply to the appellate authority within six months from
the date of communication of the said decision or order for the determination of such
points arising out of the said decision or order as may be specified by the
Commissioner in his order.
(3) Where, in pursuance of an order under sub-
section (2), the authorised officer makes an application to the appellate authority, such application
shall be dealt with by the appellate authority as if it were an appeal made against the decision or
order of the adjudicating authority and such authorised officer were an appellant and the provisions
of this Act relating to appeals shall apply to such application.
(4) The appellate authority may, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from presenting the appeal within the aforesaid period of three months or six months, as the case
may be, allow it to be presented within a further period of one month.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 36
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub-section (1), unless the appellant has paid--
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty arising from the impugned
order, as is admitted by him; and
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent of the remaining amount of tax in dispute arising from the said
order, subject to a maximum of twenty-five crore rupees, in relation to which the appeal has been
filed:
Provided that no appeal shall be filed against an order under sub-section (3) of
Section 129, unless a sum equal to twenty-five per cent of the penalty has been paid
by the appellant.
(7) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub-section (6), the recovery
proceedings for the balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed.
(8) The appellate authority shall give an opportunity to the appellant of being heard.
(9) The appellate authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of hearing of
an appeal, grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing of the
appeal for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party
during hearing of the appeal.
(10) The appellate authority may, at the time of hearing of an appeal, allow an
appellant to add any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if it is
satisfied that the omission of that ground from the grounds of appeal was not wilful
or unreasonable.
(11) The appellate authority shall, after making such further inquiry as may be
necessary, pass such order, as it thinks just and proper, confirming, modifying or
annulling the decision or order appealed against but shall not refer the case back to
the adjudicating authority that passed the said decision or order:
Provided that an order enhancing any fee or penalty or fine in lieu of confiscation or
confiscating goods of greater value or reducing the amount of refund or input tax
credit shall not be passed unless the appellant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed order:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 37
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Provided further that where the appellate authority is of the opinion that any tax has
not been paid or short-paid or erroneously refunded, or where input tax credit has
been wrongly availed or utilised, no order requiring the appellant to pay such tax or
input tax credit shall be passed unless the appellant is given notice to show cause
against the proposed order and the order is passed within the time-limit specified
under Section 73 or Section 74.
(12) The order of the appellate authority disposing of the appeal shall be in writing
and shall state the points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for
such decision.
(13) The appellate authority shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide every
appeal within a period of one year from the date on which it is filed:
Provided that where the issuance of order is stayed by an order of a court or Tribunal,
the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the period of one year.
(14) On disposal of the appeal, the appellate authority shall communicate the order
passed by it to the appellant, respondent and to the adjudicating authority.
(15) A copy of the order passed by the appellate authority shall also be sent to the
jurisdictional Commissioner or the authority designated by him in this behalf and the
jurisdictional Commissioner of State tax or Commissioner of Union Territory Tax or
an authority designated by him in this behalf.
(16) Every order passed under this section shall, subject to the provisions of Section
108 or Section 113 or Section 117 or Section 118 be final and binding on the parties."
10. The respondent had a statutory remedy under Section 107. Instead of availing of the remedy, the
respondent instituted a petition under Article 226. The existence of an alternative remedy is not an
absolute bar to the maintainability of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. But a writ
petition can be entertained in exceptional circumstances where there is:
(i) a breach of fundamental rights;
(ii) a violation of the principles of natural justice;
(iii) an excess of jurisdiction; or
(iv) a challenge to the vires of the statute or
delegated legislation.
11. In the present case, none of the above exceptions was established. There was, in fact, no violation
of the principles of natural justice since a notice was served on the person in charge of the
conveyance. In this backdrop, it was not appropriate for the High Court to entertain a writ petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 38
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
The assessment of facts would have to be carried out by the appellate authority. As a matter of fact,
the High Court has while doing this exercise proceeded on the basis of surmises. However, since we
are inclined to relegate the respondent to the pursuit of the alternate statutory remedy under
Section 107, this Court makes no observation on the merits of the case of the respondent.
12. For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned order [Commercial Steel
Co. v. Commr. of State Tax, 2020 SCC OnLine TS 291] of the High Court. The writ petition filed by
the respondent shall stand dismissed. However, this shall not preclude the respondent from taking
recourse to appropriate remedies which are available in terms of Section 107 of the CGST Act to
pursue the grievance in regard to the action which has been adopted by the State in the present case.
(Emphasis supplied)
29. The Division Bench of this Court in the case of KESAR FARM v. ADDL. COMMISSIONER8 ,
while upholding an order of a Singe Bench of this Court regarding availability of an appeal under
Writ Appeal No.3974 OF 2019, Dated 02.12.2019.
section 107 of CGST, challenging an order under Section 129 of the KGST and CGST r/w Section 20
of the IGST, holds as follows:
".... .... ....
2. The appellant is the writ petitioner, who challenged the notice of tax and penalty under sub-
Section (1)(b) of Section 129 of the Karnataka Goods and Services Act, 2017 and the Central Goods
and Services Act, 2017 as well as Section 20 of the Integrated Goods and Service Tax Act, 2017. On
the basis of the said notice, an order of demand has been issued on 15th October 2019. The learned
Single Judge has declined to entertain the petition on the ground that an efficacious remedy of an
appeal under Section 107 of the Central Goods and Services Act of 2017 (for short 'the Central Act of
2017') is available.
3. The submission of the learned counsel for appellant is that Sections 129 and 130 of the Central
Act of 2017 start with a non obstante clause. Inviting our attention to sub-Section (6) of Section 107
of the Central Act of 2017, he submitted that obviously the remedy under Section 107 of the Central
Act of 2017 will not be available. He pointed out various sub-Sections forming a part of Sections 129
and 130 of the Central Act of 2017.
4. Sub-Section (1) of Section 107 of the Central Act of 2017 provides that any person aggrieved by
any decision or order passed under the Act or the State Goods and Services Act or the Union
Territory Goods and Services Tax Act by an Adjudicating Authority may appeal to the Appellate
Authority within the time specified therein. We fail to understand how the non obstante Clauses in
both Sections 129 and 130 of the Central Act of 2017, will affect the remedy of an appeal under
Section 107 of the Central Act of 2017, in any manner, in as much as, Section 107 of the Central Act
of 2017, provides for an appeal against any decision or order. Section 121 of the Central Act of 2017,
which starts with a non obstante clause provides that in certain category of cases, no appeal shall lie.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 39
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
The order subject matter of challenge before the learned Single Judge is not covered by Section
121. The submission of the learned counsel for appellant was that in Section 121 of the Central Act of
2017, there is a mistake and it should be read as if the provision is applicable only to a particular
Chapter, in which the said provision is there.
5.However, it is not permissible for us to read something in Section 121 of the Central Act of 2017,
which is not expressly provided by the Legislature.
6. We, therefore, concur with the view taken by the learned Single Judge that a remedy of an appeal
under Section 107 of the Central Act of 2017 was available to the appellant. Hence, we find no merit
in the appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed. Time granted by the learned Single Judge to
prefer the appeal is extended by another four weeks from today. All contentions urged on merits of
the appeal are not considered."
(Emphasis supplied) The Division Bench holds that the non-obstante clauses in Sections 129 and
130 of CGST will not affect the remedy of appeal under Section 107 of the CGST and Section 121 of
the CGST does not specifically state that orders under Section 129 and 130 of the CGST are not
appealable.
30. A co-ordinate bench of this Court in RAJALAKSHMI ENTERPRISES v. ADDITIONAL CHIEF
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT FINANCE DEPARTMENT9, following the judgment of the
Division Bench in the case of KESAR FARM supra holds that confiscation orders passed under
Section 130 of the KGST Act and CGST Act r/w the IGST Act can only be challenged by way of an
appeal under Section 107 of the CGST Act. The coordinate bench holds as follows:
".... .... ....
2.The Commercial Tax Officer (Enforcement)-16 South Zone, Bangalore by the impugned order has
passed orders for confiscation of 'Goods' and 'Conveyance' under Section 130 of the Karnataka
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (For short, 'KGST Act') and the Central Goods and Services Tax
Act, 2017 (For short, 'CGST Act') as well as Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (For short,
'IGST Act').The said officer has concluded that there is contravention of Sub-Sections (i) and (v) of
the provisions of Section 130(1) of the KGST Act/CGST Act.
3. The learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner's transaction viz., purchase of
arecanut from Kaduru, Chikkamagaluru District and transfer thereof to the recipient in Delhi is an
inter-state transaction and in terms of Section 10 of the IGST Act, the State of Delhi would be the
authority to collect taxes. The failure to produce e-way bill by the driver at the time of interception
of the vehicle on Huliyal - Shira road enroute to Delhi is a bona fide error. In any event, the officer
by the impugned order could not have levied tax, penalty or fine on the market value of the property.
4. Sri N.Hema Kumar, learned Additional Government Advocate submits that the petitioner has an
alternative remedy under Section 107 of the CGST Act and the time within such alternative remedy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 40
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
could be availed has not expired. On the Writ Petition No. 12554/2020, Dated 13.11.2020.
question whether an appeal could lie under Section 107 of the CGST Act, a Division Bench of this
Court in Writ Appeal No.3974/2019 has affirmed that indeed such remedy would be available.
5.In the facts and circumstances of the case, and in the light of the enunciation by the Division
Bench in W.A.No.3974/2019, this Court is of the considered view that the petitioner must avail the
alternative remedy under Section 107 of the CGST Act. At this point of time, Sri Hema Kumar,
learned Additional Government Advocate points out that the authorities have not taken any
precipitous action because the appeal time has not lapsed. If this be so, it would be just and
reasonable to dispose of this writ petition with liberty to the petitioner to avail alternative remedy
under Section 107 of the CGST Act, while directing the authorities not to take precipitous action in
the limitation period within which appropriate appeal could be filed by the petitioner.
(Emphasis supplied)
31. On a similar issue of non-availability of an appeal under Section 107 of the CGST, a co-ordinate
Bench of this Court in the case of K.B. PROCESSING AND TRADING V. JOINT COMMISSIONER
OF COMMERCIAL TAXES10, holds as follows:
".... .... ....
2. The petitioner is before this Court questioning the order at Annexure-A, dated 07.06.2023,
passed by the 2nd respondent. The order is passed by the Authority under Section 130 of the Central
Goods and Service Tax Act 2017 ('CGST Act' for short).
Writ Petition No. 105711 of 2023, Decided on 08.12. 2023
3.The learned counsel for the respondents raised a preliminary objection relating to the
maintainability of the writ petition on the premise that the impugned order is appealable under
Section 107 of CGST Act.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner to substantiate his contention that writ petition is
maintainable, urged the following contentions:
a. The Authority who passed the order under Section 130 of the CGST Act has no
jurisdiction to pass the order under Section 130 of CGST Act as the conditions
precedent to pass the order under Section 130 of CGST Act have not been met;
b. The Authority which passed the impugned order has no power to impose tax and
the Authority imposing penalty equivalent to tax, could not have imposed the penalty
as he had no authority to impose the tax without there being adjudication under
Section 74 of the CGST Act;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 41
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
c. The Officer who passed the impugned order claims to be the "proper officer"
under the Act and claims that authority is duly assigned to him by the Commissioner.
In such an event, the authority does not come under the definition of 'Adjudicating
Authority' as defined under Section 2(4) of the KGST Act as the "Commissioner" is
not an Adjudicating Authority under Section 2(4) of the KGST Act. Since the appeal is
provided under Section 107 of the CGST Act, only against the order of an
'Adjudicating Authority', and as the Commissioner is not the adjudicating authority
under Section 2(4) of the KGST Act, the appeal under Section 107 of the CGST Act is
not maintainable.
5. This Court has considered the contentions raised at the bar.
6. As far as the jurisdiction of the officer under the KGST Act to take appropriate action in respect of
goods which are supposed to be the goods coming under Integrated Goods and Services, the learned
counsel for the respondent-revenue refers to Circular dated 22.06.2020. On perusal of the said
circular, it is apparent that the officer under the State Goods and Service Tax Act is also empowered
to exercise the power under the IGST Act. This being the position, the contention that the officer
under the State Act has no jurisdiction to pass any orders in respect of the transaction covered under
the IGST Act, has no merit.
7. The contention that penalty imposed under Section 130 of the CGST Act equivalent to the tax
payable is one without jurisdiction, as the Authority under Section 74 of the CGST Act has not yet
determined the tax, is concerned, same is not acceptable for the simple reason that proper officer
under the CGST Act is enabled under the State Act to impose the penalty determined under Section
122 of the CGST Act.
8. Section 122 of CGST Act provides for imposing penalty of Rs.10,000/- or an amount equivalent to
tax evaded and such other amount of tax specified in the said provision. If the Authority empowered
to impose penalty equivalent to the tax evaded, then by necessary implication, it can be concluded
that the Authority also has power to determine the tax. Thus, the contention that there is no
authority for the proper officer exercising power under Section 130 of the CGST Act to impose
penalty, cannot be accepted.
9. As far as the contention that appeal remedy is not available, it is to be noticed that definition of
'Adjudicating Authority' as defined in Section 2(4) of the KGST Act, cannot be made applicable to
hold that the petitioner has no appeal remedy under Section 107 of CGST Act.
10.Section 2(4) of the CGST Act defines the term "Adjudicating Authority" and under the said
definition, the Commissioner is not kept out of the purview of the definition of "Adjudicating
Authority" as is done under the KGST Act.
11. The definition of "Adjudicating Authority" under the State Act, cannot be made applicable to the
definition of "Adjudicating Authority" under Section 107 of the CGST Act as the expression
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 42
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
Adjudicating Authority under the CGST Act is defined including the Commissioner as the
Adjudicating Authority. To interpret the meaning of expression "Adjudicating Authority" found in
Section 107 of CGST Act, one has to refer to the definition found in the very same Act and not any
other Act, unless such prescription is found in the Act. No provision is pointed out to support the
contention.
12.Thus, this Court is of the view that the petitioner has alternative remedy of appeal before the
Appellate Authority. No exceptional case is made to entertain the writ petition despite alternative
remedy being available. Accordingly writ petition is not entertained."
(Emphasis supplied) The coordinate bench holds that an officer under the State Goods and Service
Tax Act is also an officer under the IGST and the Commissioner is not kept out of the purview of the
definition of Adjudicating Authority under Section 2(4) of the CGST and therefore, an order under
Section 130 of the CGST is appealable under Section 107 of the CGST.
32. In the case at hand, the order of confiscation is passed under Section 130 of the KGST supra,
exercising power under the IGST. The issue with regard to jurisdiction is answered in favour of the
Revenue holding that the Officer appointed under Section 6 of the KGST is a proper officer under
Section 4 of the IGST. On the same reason, the appeal against an order of confiscation by an officer
under Section 130 of the KGST would undoubtedly be maintainable under Section 107 of the KGST
or Section 20 of the IGST, as the case would be.
33. In view of the preceding analysis, I hold that the petition before this Court is not entertainable,
in the light of existence of an alternative statutory remedy of filing an appeal under Section 107 of
the KGST r/w Section 20 of the IGST. Petitioner is granted 4 weeks time to file an appeal. In the
event, the appeal is preferred within 4 weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this order, the
Appellate Authority shall consider the issue on its merit, without reference to limitation.
34. The petitioner is at liberty to prefer an application before the Appellate Authority seeking release
of the confiscated material and if an application of the kind is filed before the Appellate Authority,
the Appellate Authority shall decide the application within an outer limit of one(1) week from the
date of its filing, in accordance with law, owing to the fact that the confiscated material is a
perishable commodity - Areca nut.
35. Till the application of the petitioner is considered, the confiscated goods shall not be auctioned,
it would be subject to the orders that would be passed by the Appellate Authority.
36. With the above observations and the liberty so granted to the petitioner, the petition stands
disposed.
Ordered accordingly.
SD/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 43
Slm Stationery vs Union Of India on 5 March, 2025
JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA Bkp
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/176800280/ 44
