Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti vs State Of U.P. on 31 January,
2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14453
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 2111 of 2025
Applicant :- Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Mahendra Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Mahendra Singh, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri R.P. Patel, learned State
Law Officer and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 292 of 2024, under Sections 85, 80, 115(2) of B.N.S. and
Section 3/4 of the D.P. Act Police Station Junawai, District Sambhal, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The son of the applicant is stated to have married the deceased person as per Hindu rites about
two years before her death. The applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15025751/ 1
Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
her to cruelty for demand of motorcycle as dowry thereby leading her to death on 07.11.2024 at
about 7 p.m. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and she has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. The applicant is the mother-in-law of the deceased person.
7. The applicant lives separately to the husband-wife duo.
8. The said fact stands fortified from Annexure-6 to the affidavit.
9. The cause of death has been found to be Asphyxia as a result of ante mortem hanging.
10. Two abrasions found on the forehead of the deceased person indicates that they might have been
caused at the time of putting the body down from the ceiling.
11. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
12. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
28.11.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
she will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE :
13. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
14. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
15. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
16. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15025751/ 2
Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
17. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
18. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
19. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
20. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
21. Let the applicant-Smt Kanta Devi Alias Dharwanti involved in aforementioned case crime
number be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against her in accordance
with law.
22. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
23. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025/Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15025751/ 3
