Smt. Pushpa Devi vs State Of U P And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
Smt. Pushpa Devi vs State Of U P And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
Author: Ajit Kumar
Bench: Ajit Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:70747
Court No. - 4
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 11480 of 2022
Petitioner :- Smt. Pushpa Devi
Respondent :- State Of U P And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Jitendra Nath Sharma,Pratik Kumar Sharma
Counsel for Respondent :- Bala Nath Mishra,C.S.C.,M.N. Singh
Hon'ble Ajit Kumar,J.
Learned Standing Counsel has obtained instructions and placed the same before this Court, which is
taken on record.
Heard Sri P.K.Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri B.N.Mishra, learned counsel for
respondent / U.P.Public Service Commission Petitioner who is a widow of Late Kamlesh Narayan an
ex employee of Public Service Commission has approached this Court by invoking extra ordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution for a relief in the nature of writ of mandamus
commanding respondents to pay arrears of pension and other dues including family pension as per
provision contained under U.P. Act No. 1 of 2021.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183374021/ 1
Smt. Pushpa Devi vs State Of U P And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
It is argued on behalf of the petitioner that since husband of the petitioner suffered from long
ailments and ultimately died in Kamla Nehrua Memorial Hospital, Prayagraj, he would not file
petition before this Court. This pleading has been raised in paragraph 17 of the petition, which is
reproduced hereunder:
"That petitioner's husband died on 6.10.2021 after the prolong illness in Kamla
Nehru Memorial Hospital Prayagraj and he could not be able to file Writ Petition
during his life time for payment of post requirement benefits after enactment of the
U.p. Act No. 1 of 2021 due to Covid-19 lockout before his death. Photostate copy of
the death certificate of her husband Late Kamlesh Narayan is being filed herewith
and marked as Annexure No. 12 to this petition. "
According to learned counsel for the petitioner, petitioner's husband was entitled to pension
computing the ad hoc service rendered by him in the respondent establishment w.e.f. 5th January,
1989 until he came to be regularized on 30th April, 2012 as typist and at the time of retirement he
was working as review officer. Thus, it is contended that petitioner's husband was wrongly denied
post retirement dues to which he was entitled as per qualifying service of ten years rendered by him
computing ad hoc period to make pension admissible.
Meeting the above submission, learned counsel appearing for the respondent Commission Mr.
Mishra submits that petitioner's husband was paid his post retirement dues and he was also paid
gratuity amount as per Civil Service Regulations as he continued in regular employment for more
than five years. It is further submitted that petitioner's husband was not entitled to pensionary
benefits as his service came to be regularized in the year 2012 only against substantive vacancy and
he submits that in view of amendment carried out in U.P. Retirement Benefits Rules, 1961 vide U.P.
Act No. 1 of 2021, with retrospective effect such ad hoc/temporary services are not to be counted
towards qualifying service of pension.
Learned Standing Counsel also submits before this Court that in matters of claim for old pension
benefits the amending act is already sub judice before the Supreme court as well as coordinate
benches of this Court in special appeal no. 797 of 2023. Thus as on date, it is argued, that amending
act shall prevail and petitioner would not entitled to such benefits as claimed in the present petition.
Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and having perused the records, I find there
to be specific stand taken by the respondent that petitioner's husband has been paid all the post
retirement dues including gratuity. From the pleadings raised, this fact is not denied in the petition
and pleading raised is only that petitioner's husband was entitled to pensionary benefits under old
pension scheme taking into account past service rendered as ad hoc employment with respondent
establishment since 1989.
I have perused the relevant provisions as contained under 3(8) of the U.P. Retirement Benefits
Rules, 1961 as well as amending provision brought into old act with retrospective effect by U.P. Act
No. 1 of 2021. Both the provisions are reproduced hereunder:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183374021/ 2
Smt. Pushpa Devi vs State Of U P And 3 Others on 1 May, 2025
"3. In these rules, unless is anything repugnant in the subject or context (8)
Qualifying service means service which qualifies for pension in accordance with the
provisions of Article 368 of the Civil Services Regulations:
Provided that continuous temporary or officiating service under the Government of
Uttar Pradesh followed without interruption by confirmation in the same or any
other post except
(i) periods of temporary or officiating service in a non-pensionable establishment;
(ii) periods of service in a work-charged establishment; and
(iii) periods of service in a post paid from contingencies shall also count as qualifying
service.
Note. If service rendered in a non-pensionable establishment work-charged establishment or in a
post paid from contingencies falls between two periods of temporary service in a pensionable
establishment or between a period of temporary service and permanent service in a pensionable
establishment, it will not constitute an interruption of service. "
Upon bare reading of the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that State legislature has
completely denied the service period rendered in temporary or officiating capacity in
a non pensionable establishment and work-charged establishment to be counted
towards qualifying service for pension. It is though stated that matter is engaging
attention of the Supreme court and even special appellate bench of this Court, the law
is well settled that a mere reference to a larger bench or merely because matter is
pending before a court of law, the effect of existing provision on statute will not get
obliterated.
In view of above, therefore, the claim as set up by the petitioner cannot be allowed.
Besides this, I find that paragraph 17 there is averment that husband of the petitioner
was ill and hence could not approach this Court earlier. In service jurisprudence
contract of employment makes rules binding upon the employer and employee.
Petitioner's husband was only entitled to the benefit incidental to the service
rendered by him as employee and if employee himself failed not approach this Court
praying for relief for pension even though he had retired in the year 2019, it would be
taken that he remained satisfied with whatever dues were paid to him. Since
petitioner's husband was not entitled to pension, petitioner automatically does not
become entitled to family pension.
In view of above, I do not find force in this petition. Petition fails and is accordingly
rejected.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 Sanjeev
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183374021/ 3
