Smt Sushma Alias Samantara vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Smt Sushma Alias Samantara vs State Of U.P. on 2 January,
2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:526
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 33985 of 2024
Applicant :- Smt Sushma Alias Samantara
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Deepak Kumar,Peeyush Kumar Pathak,Prateeyush Kumar Pathak
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Connected with
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 35598 of 2024
Applicant :- Suresh
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Deepak Kumar,Peeyush Kumar Pathak,Prateeyush Kumar Pathak
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Connected with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11493324/ 1
Smt Sushma Alias Samantara vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 35650 of 2024
Applicant :- Sunil
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Deepak Kumar,Peeyush Kumar Pathak,Prateeyush Kumar Pathak
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. The case of all the accused persons arising out of same FIR number are being heard and decided
by a common order.
3. Heard Sri Prateeyush Kumar Pathak, learned counsel for the applicants as well as Ms. Ifra Islam,
learned State Law Officer and also perused the material available on record.
4. Applicants seek bail in Case Crime No. 317 of 2024, under Sections 498A, 304B & 323 of I.P.C.
and Sections 3/4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station - Chandpur, District - Bijnor, during the
pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
5. The marriage of one Sunil was solemnized with the deceased person as per Hindu rites on
04.03.22, out of the wedlock, the deceased person had given birth to a baby girl 8 months before her
death.
6. The named accused persons are stated to have committed the murder of the deceased person
within the precincts of their house on 25.06.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANTS:
7. The applicants have been falsely implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. They have
nothing to do with the said offence as alleged in the FIR.
8. The FIR is delayed by about seven hours and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
9. The cause of death is asphyxia as a result of ante mortem hanging, as such, prosecution story of
committing murder stands falsified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11493324/ 2
Smt Sushma Alias Samantara vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
10. The deceased committed suicide as she wanted to live separately with her husband from her
in-laws.
11. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicants to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against them. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicants have also been touched upon at length.
12. The applicants are languishing in jail since 21.07.2024 and 11.07.2024 respectively, having no
criminal history to their credit, deserve to be released on bail. In case, the applicants are released on
bail, they will not misuse the liberty of bail and shall cooperate with trial.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE BY STATE LAW OFFICER:
13. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicants could not be disputed and also the fact that the applicants have no criminal history.
CONCLUSION:
14. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
15. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been reiterated by the Supreme Court
in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
16. Reiterating the aforesaid view, the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate
of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595, has again emphasized that the very well-settled principle of law
that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
17. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicants.
18. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicants fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
19. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, pending trial and considering the complicity of accused, severity
of punishment, at this stage, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11493324/ 3
Smt Sushma Alias Samantara vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
of the view that the applicants have made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
20. Let the applicants- Smt. Sushma @ Samantara, Suresh and Sunil, who are involved in
aforementioned case crime be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicants shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicants shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the
applicants is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial
Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against them in
accordance with law.
21. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
22. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicants shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Priya (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11493324/ 4
