Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28
February, 2019
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
S. B. : Hon'ble Shri Justice Rajendra Kumar Srivastava
Misc.Criminal Case No.35913/2018
Smt. Praveena Tiwari
Vs
The State of Madhya Pradesh & another
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Sharad Verma, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Akshay Namdeo, learned G.A. for the respondent
No.1/State.
None for the respondent No.2.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
ORDER
( .02.2019) This Miscellaneous Criminal Case has been filed by the applicant/petitioner under
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for quashing the FIR dated 29.06.2018 registered in Crime No.192/2018
at Police Station-Ratibadh, District-Bhopal, for an offence punishable under Section 306 read with
Section 34 of the IPC.
2. Applicant/petitioner's case in brief is that deceased Deepak Verma committed suicide by
consuming poisonous substance. Thereafter, a Marg report was registered bearing marg No.11/2018
at Police Station Ratibadh, District-Bhopal. During investigation, one suicidal note was found, in
which certain allegations were made by the deceased against the present applicant and other
co-accused persons, namely, Sudhir Bagade and J.K. Tyagi. According to the suicidal note, there was
some money lending issues between the deceased and the present applicant and other co-accused
persons, due to which, the deceased has committed suicide. Thereafter, the FIR was registered vide
Crime No.192/2018 for an offence punishable under Section 306 read with Section 34 of the IPC
against the present applicant and other co-accused persons, namely, Sudhir Bagade and J.K. Tyagi.
3. According to the petitioner/applicant the entire case is based upon suicidal note, but no
ingredients are available on record to establish the aforesaid offence. In the case, there is no prima
facie necessary ingredients to constitute offence punishable under Section 306 of the IPC against the
applicant.
4. Applicant/petitioner stated in his petition that the originally prior to the incident, first
information report was lodged by the applicant against the deceased vide Crime No.579/2017 at
Police Station Kamla Nagar, District Bhopal for an offence punishable under Section 420 of the IPC,
stating that deceased Deepak Verma had taken Rs.35,000/- from the present applicant on false
pretext of constructing a house and deceased used the aforesaid amount. Thereafter, when the FIR
was lodged by the applicant against the deceased, the deceased was sent to jail for a period of about
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 1
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
two months and after that, he has been released on bail and due to extreme conditions, he
consumed poisonous substance leaving suicidal note. Therefore, no prima facie case is made out
against the present applicant/petitioner for harassing, torturing and demanding money from the
deceased.
5. Learned Government Advocate for the respondent No.1/State opposes the petition by submitting
that the deceased committed suicide by consuming poisonous substance and a suicidal note of the
deceased is available on record. Therefore, there is prima facie material available on record for
abetment to commit suicide by the deceased. Therefore, he prays that petition be dismissed.
6. Heard both the parties and perused the record.
7. It is evident from the record that the petitioner/accused lodged the FIR against the deceased and
other co-accused person, namely, J.K. Tyagi on 28.04.2017 at Police Station-Kamla Nagar,
District-Bhopal in Crime No.0579/2017 wherein it is mentioned that the petitioner/accused was
working as contingency paid employee in the Municipal Corporation Bhopal. On 28.04.2017,
deceased and one co-accused J.K. Tyagi came to the house of the petitioner/accused and asked her
that the house was allotted for poor persons under the Scheme of "Pradhan Mantri and Mukhya
Mantri Awas Yojana" and she deposited the amount of Rs.35,000/- with them, but house was not
allotted to her under the aforesaid scheme. Therefore, the petitioner/accused demanded to return
back the amount which was paid by her to the deceased and co-accused J.K. Tyagi, but they refused
to return the aforesaid money. Thereafter, she filed a complaint case under Section 420 of the IPC at
Police Station- Kamla Nagar, District-Bhopal against the deceased and co-accused J.K. Tyagi.
During investigation, the statements of the witnesses i.e. Kiran Verma (wife of the deceased),
Abhinav Verma (son of the deceased), Vinay Verma, Sumit Sen, Ashok Sen, Rajesh Kumar, Ajad
Ahmed and Sahnawaz Ahmed have been recorded by the police. It is evident from the statements of
these witnesses that the deceased was employed at Nagar Nigam Bhopal and at the time of incident,
he left the service of Nagar Nigam as well as left his house. After one and half month, he returned to
his house then police officials came to his home and took the deceased and co-accused J.K.Tyagi in
custody and they were sent to jail. Thereafter, deceased asked his family members that he was
falsely implicated in this case by the present applicant and other co-accused persons. He did not get
any money from any person. At the time of incident, he had taken wine and he told his family
members that he was in tension and petitioner/accused and co-accused persons have falsely
implicated him in this case. Deceased abused his wife in filthily language then his wife told the
deceased that she will leave the house with her daughter then the deceased told her that I will leave
the house and thereafter he consumed the poisonous substance.
8. During investigation, a suicidal note of the deceased was recovered. The suicidal note of the
deceased is reproduced herein below :-
"lj EkSaus fdlh ls Hkh fdlh izdkj dk iSlk ugha fy;k gS eSa cgqr ijs'kku gks x;k gwaW
esjs cPps ijs'kku gks jgs gSA eSa vius ifjokj ds lkFk ugha jg ik jgk gwWaA ftlus Hkh
vkids ikl f'kdk;r djh gS muls iwfN, fd iSlk fdlds gkFk esa fn;k FkkA tks Hkh ysu&nsu
gS oks lqf/kj ckxMs U;w eYVh vEcsMdj uxj dksVjk lqYrkuk ckn lqf/kj ckxMs ds ikl
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 2
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
vf/kdkjh dh lhy] cVVs] eYVh ds vkoaVu rd fey tk,xsa vkSj izohuk frokjh >ksu&6 usg:
uxj es dk;Z djrh gS mlus Hkh dbZ yksx ls vkokl ds uke ij iSlk fy;k gS xksfoan lkgw dks
esMe us eq>ls feyk;k Fkk mlls 17000@& Hkh fy, Fks mlds vykok eq>s dksbZ ugha
tkurk 17000@& esa izohuk us ,d eksckby Hkh mlh oDr fy;k FkkA bl ysunsu dk iwjk
ftEek 1- izohuk frokjh fuoklh 17 Cykd 'kcjh uxjh usg: uxj >ksu&6 uxj fuxe esa dk;Zjr 2-
lqf/kj ckxMs fuoklh U;w eYVh vEcsMdj uxj dksVjk Hkksiky 3- J.K. R;kxh&buus Hkh
cgqr iSlk [kk;k eq>s /kks[kk fn;k esjh ekSr dk dkj.k ;s rhuks gSA esjs cPpks dks
ijs'kku er djuk bZ'oj rqedks NksMsaxk ughaA esjs ?kj dk uEcj&9752702005 fdj.k eSus
cgqr dksf'k'k dj yh ysfdu dgh dksbZ jkLrk ugha feyk esjs ikl flQZ ,d jkLrk gS oks gS
ekSr eS dSls vius dks lgh lkfcr d: gj dne ij iSlk pkfg, vkSj rqels vPNk dkSu tkusxk fd
esjs ikl D;k gSA lat; Jhokl lj ls eSus nks ckj cksyk Fkk fd gsejkt lksedqaoj th xyr dj jgs
gSA rks muus cksyk fd mldks t:jr gksxh ns nsxkA gsejkt lksedqaoj vkSj lqf/kj ckxMs
us cgqr xyr fd;kA vkSj eSa my> x;kA lat; Jhokl lj us tks Hkh ysu&nsu fd;k mldk iwjk
iSlk gsejkt vkSj lqf/kj ckxMs ds ikl gSA**
9. It is evident from the aforesaid suicidal note that the deceased had committed suicide due to
tension and torture by the petitioner and other co-accused persons. The Hon'ble Apex Court dealt
with the similar issue in the case of M.Mohan Vs. State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of
Police reported in (2011) 3 SCC 626 has held as under:-
"36. We would like to deal with the concept of 'abetment'. Section 306 of the Code
deals with 'abetment of suicide' which reads as under:
"306. Abetment of suicide - If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the
commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extent to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine."
37. The word 'suicide' in itself is nowhere defined in the Indial Penal Code, however, its meaning
and import is well known and requires no explanation. `Sui' means `self' and `cide' means `killing',
thus implying an act of self-killing. In short a person committing suicide must commit it by himself,
irrespective of the means employed by him in achieving his object of killing himself.
38. In our country, while suicide itself is not an offence considering that the successful offender is
beyond the reach of law, attempt to suicide is an offence under section 309 of I.P.C.
39. Abetment of a thing' has been defined under section 107 of the Code. We deem it appropriate to
reproduce section 107, which reads as under:
"107. Abetment of a thing - A person abets the doing of a thing, who -
First - Instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly - Engages with one or more
other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or
illegal omission takes places in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the
doing of that thing; or Thirdly - Intentionally aides, by any act or illegal omission, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 3
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
doing of that thing.'' Explanation 2 which has been inserted along with section 107
reads as under:
"Explanation 2 - Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act,
does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitate
the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act."
40. The Learned counsel also placed reliance on yet another judgment of this court in Ramesh
Kumar v. State of Chhattisgarh (2001) 9 SCC 618, in which a three-Judge Bench of this court had an
occasion to deal with the case of a similar nature. In a dispute between the husband and wife, the
appellant husband uttered "you are free to do whatever you wish and go wherever you like".
Thereafter, the wife of the appellant Ramesh Kumar committed suicide.
41.This Court in SCC para 20 of Ramesh Kumar (2001) 9 SCC 618: 2002 SCC(Cri) 1088 has
examined different shades of the meaning of "instigation'. Para 20 reads as under:
(SCC p. 629) "20. Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or encourage to
do "an act". To satisfy the requirement of instigation though it is not necessary that
actual words must be used to that effect. or what constitutes instigation must
necessarily and specifically be suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable
certainty to incite the consequence must be capable of being spelt out. the present
one is not a case where the accused had by his acts or omission or by a continued
course of conduct created such circumstances that the deceased was left with no
other option except to commit suicide in which case an instigation may have been
inferred. A word uttered in the fit of anger or emotion without intending the
consequences to actually follow cannot be said to be instigation."
In the said case this court came to the conclusion that there is no evidence and
material available on record wherefrom an inference of the accused-appellant having
abetted commission of suicide by Seema (appellant's wife therein) may necessarily be
drawn.
42. In State of West Bengal v. Orilal Jaiswal (1994) SCC (Cri) 107, this Court has cautioned that
(SCC p. 90, para 17), the Court should be extremely careful in assessing the facts and circumstances
of each case and the evidence adduced in the trial for the purpose of finding whether the cruelty
meted out to the victim had in fact induced her to end the life by committing suicide. If it appears to
the Court that a victim committing suicide was hypersensitive to ordinary petulance, discord and
difference in domestic life, quite common to the society, to which the victim belonged and such
petulance, discord and difference were not expected to induce a similarly circumstanced individual
in a given society to commit suicide, the conscience of the Court should not be satisfied for basing a
finding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of suicide should be found guilty.
43. This court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi) 2009 (16) SCC 605:
(2010)3 SCC (Cri) 367, had an occasion to deal with this aspect of abetment. The court dealt with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 4
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
dictionary meaning of the word "instigation" and "goading". The court opined that there should be
intention to provoke, incite or encourage the doing of an act by the latter.Each person's suicidability
pattern is different from the others. Each person has his own idea of self- esteem and self-respect.
Therefore, it is impossible to lay down any straight-jacket formula in dealing with such cases. Each
case has to be decided on the basis of its own facts and circumstances.
44. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in
doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in committing
suicide, conviction cannot be sustained.
45. The intention of the Legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this court are clear that in
order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear mens rea to commit the
offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit suicide seeing
no option and this act must have been intended to push the deceased into such a position that
he/she committed suicide."
10. The Hon'ble Apex Court dealt with the similar issue in the case of of S.S. Chhena Vs. Vijay
Kumar Mahajan and another reported in (1995) M.P.L.J. 458 has held as under:-
"25. Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally
aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of the accused
to instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. The
intention of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by this Court is clear
that in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be a clear mens
rea to commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act which led the
deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have been ntended to
push the deceased into such a position that he committed suicide.
26. In the instant case, the deceased was undoubtedly hypersensitive to ordinary
petulance, discord and differences which happen in our day-to-day life. Human
sensitivity of each individual differs from the other. Different people behave
differently in the same situation.
27. When we carefully scrutinize and critically examine the facts of this case in the
light of the settled legal position the conclusion becomes obvious that no conviction
can be legally sustained without any credible evidence or material on record against
the appellant. The order of framing a charge under section 306 IPC against the
appellant is palpably erroneous and unsustainable. It would be travesty of justice to
compel the appellant to face a criminal trial without any credible material
whatsoever. Consequently, the order of framing charge under section 306 IPC against
the appellant is quashed and all proceedings pending against him are also set aside."
11. It is revealed from the record that during investigation, statements of witnesses have been
recorded by the police. It is revealed from the record that due to tension and discomfort of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 5
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
deceased, he committed suicide by consuming poisonous substance because he left his service and
he was sent to jail. After getting released from the jail, he consumed wine and some dispute arose
between the deceased and his wife, thereafter, he committed suicide by consuming poisonous
substance.
12. It is revealed from the case diary that the petitioner/accused lodged the FIR against the deceased
for the offence punishable under Section 420 of the IPC in which it is alleged that the deceased had
taken money from the petitioner/accused and one J.K. Tyagi for allotting the house under the
Scheme of "Pradhan Mantri and Mukhya Mantri Awas Yojana" but no house was allotted to the
petitioner/accused by the deceased and co-accused J.K. Tyagi. Thereafter, she demanded her
money, but the deceased did not give any money. Thereafter, she lodged the FIR against the
deceased and co-accused J.K. Tyagi then police arrested the deceased and co-accused J.K. Tyagi.
Therefore, the deceased was in tension and discomfort. At the time of incident, he abused his wife in
filthy language and when his wife told him that she is going to leave the house, the deceased
committed suicide by consuming poisonous substance. Therefore, it cannot be said that the
petitioner/accused abated the deceased for committing suicide.
13. There is no material evidence of active instigation/abetment by the petitioner to the deceased to
commit suicide. There is no sufficient material to demonstrate that the petitioner was involved in
instigating the deceased to commit suicide or have intention to instigate to commit suicide. After
analyzing the provisions and facts of the case, this Court has found in the case that the deceased was
in tension, discomfort and left his service and the petitioner demanded her money from the
deceased but deceased had refused to give the aforesaid money and due to that the
petitioner/accused lodged the FIR against the deceased and co-accused J.K.Tyagi. Thereafter, police
has arrested the deceased and co-accused and they were sent to jail and after that, he has been
released on bail, due to extreme conditions, he consumed poisonous substance leaving suicidal note.
Occurrence of such type of incident would not fall under the purview of abetment for suicide.
14. In various other decisions such as in the case of Ashok Kumar Sawadiya v. State of M.P. [2001(I)
MPWN 93]; Abdul Hanif v. State of M.P. [2002 (II) MPWN 12]; Kashiram v. State of M.P. [2006 (I)
MPWN 106]; Prakashchand v. State of M.P. [2007 (I) MPWN 20}; Pramod Kumar and another v.
State of M.P. [2007 (II) MPWN 26]; Devendra Singh v. State of M.P. [2007 (III) MPWN 95]; and
Nirmal Jain and others v. State of M.P. [2008 (II) MPWN 66]. In all these decisions it is laid down
that if the instigation for commission of suicide is not proved by the prosecution then certainly the
charge under section 306 IPC cannot be framed.
15. It is a money lending dispute and the deceased did not give the money back to the petitioner, due
to which the petitioner lodged the FIR against the deceased. As per the statement of deceased's wife
and other witnesses, it is found that the deceased was in tension and discomfort because deceased
had left his service and some dispute took place between the deceased and his wife. Due to that, the
deceased consumed poisonous substance. Hence, no case for the offence punishable under Section
306 of the IPC is made out against the petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 6
Smt. Praveen Tiwari vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 February, 2019
16. Thus, on perusal of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court relied on in various decisions of this
Court and on perusal of the evidence available on record against the petitioner/accused, it is not
proved by the prosecution that the petitioner/accused had ever instigated the deceased for
commission of suicide. Consequently, the petition is allowed. The impugned order dated 29.06.2018
vide Crime No.192/2018 registered at Police Station- Ratibadh, District- Bhopal for the offence
punishable under Section 306 read with Section 34 of the IPC and criminal proceedings pursuant
thereto, are hereby set-aside against the present petitioner namely, Praveena Tiwari.
(Rajendra Kumar Srivastava) Judge sp
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108965583/ 7
