Smt Bhudevi And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Smt Bhudevi And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4
February, 2025
Author: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
Bench: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15375-DB
Court No. - 42
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 1016 of 2025
Petitioner :- Smt Bhudevi And Another
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Surya Prakash Yadav
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J.
Hon'ble Prashant Kumar,J.
1. Heard Sri Rai Sahab Yadav, advocate holding brief of Sri Surya Prakash Yadav learned counsel for
the petitioners, and learned A.G.A. for the State respondents.
2. The present writ petition has been preferred with prayer to quash the impugned First Information
Report dated 06-01-2025 registered as Case Crime No.0018 of 2024, under Section 137(2) B.N.S.,
P.S. Kasganj, District- Kasganj and for a direction to the respondents not to arrest the petitioners in
pursuance of impugned First Information Report.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105324106/ 1
Smt Bhudevi And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
3. While entertaining the writ petition the Co-ordinate Bench vide order dated 21-01-2025 had
directed the learned A.G.A. to seek instructions in the matter verifying the fact whether the victim is
a illiterate girl.
4. In response thereof an affidavit of compliance has been filed by the learned A.G.A., which is taken
on record and the learned A.G.A. on the strength of the affidavit states that the first petitioner was
enrolled in a Composite Centre (1-8) School, Nagla Bhandari, Kasganj. The Principal of the School
has certified the age of the victim (first petitioner) as 07-03-2006. He further states that
investigation is in progress.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that petitioner nos. 1 and 2 have solemnized their
marriage on 05-01-2025 at Arya Samaj, Civil Lines, Prayagraj. They have also moved an application
for registration of their marriage. They are living together as husband and wife and as such, the first
information report is liable to be quashed.
6. Learned A.G.A has given a nod to the said situation.
7. Learned A.G.A., on the instructions, states that till date the police report has not been submitted
in the present matter and he has no objection, if the matter is decided on merit.
8. It is jointly submitted that this being an offshoot of a matrimonial dispute, same has come to be
amicably resolved and as such, the pending proceedings would serve no purpose and the same are
liable to be quashed in the light of the judgements of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of B.S. Joshi
v. State of Haryana and others, 2003(4) SCC 675, and Gian Singh v. State of Punjab, 2012(10) SCC
303.
9. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of B.S Joshi (supra) has held that in case the matrimonial
dispute has come to an end, under a compromise/settlement, between the parties, then
notwithstanding anything contained under Section 320 IPC, there is no legal impediment for this
court to quash the proceedings of Section 498-A I.P.C etc, which has matrimonial flavour under its
inherent powers in view of the recorded settlement between the parties. The Apex Court in the case
of Gian Singh (supra) has held in para-61 that;
"the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences Under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105324106/ 2
Smt Bhudevi And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil favour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."
10. We have proceeded to examine the record in question and find that both the petitioners are
major and have performed marriageon 05-01-2025 at Arya Samaj, Civil Lines, Prayagraj. They have
also moved an application for registration of their marriage and they are enjoying their matrimonial
life and living together as husband and wife.
11. In view of the above discussion, we are of the considered view that no offence under Section 87
B.N.S is made out against the petitioners as both are enjoying their matrimonial life and living
together as husband and wife.
12. Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned First Information Report dated
06-01-2025 registered as Case Crime No.0018of 2024, under Section 137(2) B.N.S., P.S. Kasganj,
District- Kasganj as well as all consequential proceedings are hereby quashed.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 pks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105324106/ 3
