Smt. Sunita Gurjar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 September, 2019
Smt. Sunita Gurjar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26
September, 2019
1
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh
WP No. 20220/2019
Smt. Sunita Gurjar & Anr. Vs. State of MP and Ors.
Gwalior, dtd. 26/09/2019
Shri Arun Dudawat, Counsel for the petitioners.
Shri RK Soni, Govt. Advocate for the respondents/ State.
This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed against the order dated
30/8/2019 passed under Section 92 of the M.P. Panchayat Raj Awam Gram Swaraj, Adhiniyam,
1993 (in short "Adhiniyam").
It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioners that a show-cause notice dated 29/8/2018 was
issued to the petitioners under Section 92 of the Adhiniyam for recovery of Rs.2,88,000/-.The
show-cause notice was duly replied by the petitioners, however, without conducting any enquiry, the
impugned order has been passed. Challenging the order dated 30/8/2019, it is submitted by the
Counsel for the petitioners, that the respondents have already taken a final decision, which is bad
because the provision of Section 92 of Adhiniyam, is merely an execution provision, and unless and
until, an enquiry is conducted under Section 89 of Adhiniyam, no action can be taken against the
petitioners. To buttress his contentions, the Counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the
judgments passed by this Court in the case of Sumitra Dhurve Vs. State of M.P. reported in 2016(3)
MPWN 83 and Kadam Singh Vs. CEO & others reported in 2019(1) MPLJ 420.
Per contra, it is submitted by the Counsel for the State that the letter dated 30/8/2019 is not a final
order, but it is merely a show cause notice and no action under Section 92 of Adhiniyam would be
taken unless and until, an enquiry is conducted under Section 89 of Adhiniyam.
Considered the submissions made by the Counsel for the parties.
This Court in the case of Kadam Singh (Supra) has held as under :
''9. That the respondents have issued notice under section 92 of the Panchayat Act.
The proceeding of section 92 is like an execution proceeding. Before initiating the
execution proceeding there has to be an adjudication by the competent authority.
Section 89 provides for adjudication. Sections 89 & 92 of the Panchayat Act are
reproduced herein below:
89. Liability of Panch etc. for loss, misappropriation.- (1) Every Panch, member,
officebearer, officer or servant of Panchayat (or Gram Nirman Samiti and Gram Vikas
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139094680/ 1
Smt. Sunita Gurjar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 September, 2019
Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha) shall be personally liable for loss, waste or
misapplication of any money or other property of the Panchayat (or Gram Nirman
Samiti and Gram Vikas Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha) to which he has been a
party or which has been caused by him by misconduct or gross neglect of his duties.
The amount required for reimbursing such loss, waste, or misapplication shall be
recovered by the prescribed authority.
Provided that no recovery shall be made under this section unless the person concerned has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) If the person concerned fails to pay the amount, such amount shall be recovered as arrears of
land revenue and credited to the funds of the Panchayat (or Gram Nirman Samiti and Gram Vikas
Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha) concerned.
92. Power to recover records articles and money.-(1)Where the prescribed authority is of the opinion
that any person has un- authorisedly in his custody any record or article or money belonging to the
Panchayat (or Gram Nirman Samiti and Gram Vikas Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha), he may,
by a written order, require that the record of article or money be delivered or paid forthwith to the
Panchayat (or Gram Nirman Samiti and Gram Vikas Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha), in the
presence of such officer as may be appointed by the prescribed authority in this behalf.
(2) If any person fails or refuses to deliver the record or article or pay the money as directed under
sub-section (1) the prescribed authority may cause him to be apprehended any may send him with a
warrant in such form as may be prescribed, to be confined in a Civil Jail for a period not longer than
thirty days.
(3) The prescribed authority may- (a) for recovering any such money direct that such money be
recovered as an arrear of land revenue; and
(b) for recovering any such record or articles issue a search warrant and exercise all such powers
with respect thereto as may lawfully be exercised by a Magistrate under the provisions of Chapter
VII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (No.2 of 1974).
(4) No action under sub-section (1) or (2) or (3) shall be taken unless a reasonable opportunity has
been given to the person concerned to show cause why such action should not be taken against him.
(4-A) The case pertaining to recovery of any record or article or money initiated by the prescribed
authority shall be disposed of within six months from the date of initiation.
(5) A person against whom an action is taken under this section shall be disqualified to be member
of any Panchayat (or Gram Nirman Samiti and Gram Vikas Samiti) (or committee of Gram Sabha)
for a period of (six) years commencing from the initiation of such action.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139094680/ 2
Smt. Sunita Gurjar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 September, 2019
10. From bare perusal of section 89 it is clear that every Panch, member, office-bearer, officer or
servant of Panchayat shall be personally liable for the loss, waste or misappropriation of any money
or other property of the Panchayat to which he has been a party or which has been caused by him by
misconduct or gross neglect of his duties. The said amount is liable to be recovered by the prescribed
authority. As per the proviso to this section no recovery shall be made under this section unless the
person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. That every Panch,
member, office-bearer, officer or servant of Panchayat may be existing or ex or removed who has
caused loss to the Panchayat by misconduct or gross neglect of his duties and required for
reimbursing such loss, waste or misapplication and same can be recovered even after demitting
office by them, as the case may be. The section 89 specifically provides that an adjudication must be
done and as per the proviso reasonable opportunity of hearing ought to have been given to those
persons. In the present case there is no such adjudication under section 89 of the Act.
11. After adjudication under section 89, Section 92 gives power to prescribed authority to recover
the records, articles and money belonging to the Panchayat from the custody of any person. Under
subsection(2) of section 92 if any person fails or refuses to deliver the record or article or pay the
money then the prescribed authority may apprehend him with a warrant for sending him to civil jail
and under subsection (3) may recover such money as arrears of land revenue. As such under section
92 powers are given to the prescribed authority for execution of the order passed under section 89.
In the present case there is no adjudication under section 89, therefore, there cannot be any
execution proceeding or order order passed therein under section 92 of the Act. The prescribed
authority has straight away on the basis of ex-parte enquiry report initiated recovery under section
92. In view of the above, the impugned show cause notice as well as the final order dated 8.10.2015
are hereby set aside. Needless to say that still respondents/authority shall be at liberty to take
prompt action against the petitioner under section 89 & 92 of the Panchayat Act.'' Thus, the facts of
this case are fully covered by the judgment passed by this Court in the case of Kadam Singh(Supra).
Accordingly, it is directed that the respondents shall not effect any recovery or shall not take any
coercive step against the petitioners, unless and until an enquiry is conducted under Section 89 of
Adhiniyam.
As the letter dated 30/8/2019 is merely show cause notice, therefore, the respondents are directed
not to take any coercive steps against the petitioners on the basis of said show cause notice.
The respondents are directed to initiate an enquiry under Section 89 of Adhiniyam and decide the
same within a period of six months from today and thereafter, they may proceed further in
accordance with law.
With aforesaid observations, the petition succeeds and is hereby Allowed.
(G. S. Ahluwalia) Judge MKB MAHENDRA DN: c=IN, o=HIGH COURT OF M.P. KUMAR
postalCode=474011, st=Madhya Pradesh, 2.5.4.20=f592da990684fe30f8e1e29a4a1 BARIK
a9e3451ee450d883083a8e4cc8020eee6f 7cb, cn=MAHENDRA KUMAR BARIK Date: 2019.09.26
14:36:05 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139094680/ 3
