Smt. Suvidha Devi vs Deputy Director Of Consolidation / ... on 28 February, 2025
Smt. Suvidha Devi vs Deputy Director Of Consolidation / ... on
28 February, 2025
Author: Jaspreet Singh
Bench: Jaspreet Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12194
Court No. - 8
Case :- WRIT - B No. - 184 of 2025
Petitioner :- Smt. Suvidha Devi
Respondent :- Deputy Director Of Consolidation / Addl. Collector, Finance And Revenue, Sitapur And Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vimal Kishore Verma,Harsh Verma
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Jaspreet Singh,J.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner. Notice on behalf of respondent nos.1, 2 and 3 has been
accepted by the office of Chief Standing counsel.
Under challenge are the orders passed by the three consolidation courts whereby the D.D.C vide its
judgment and order dated 27.12.2024 dismissed the revision of the petitioner, as a consequence, the
order passed by the S.O.C dated 31.10.2023 was affirmed which in turn upheld the order dated
22.12.2022 passed by the C.O. Submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the dispute
relates to the property of Sri Lalla, the father of the petitioner.
It is urged that upon commencement of consolidation operations, objections were filed on the
premise that the an alleged Will dated 23.09.2000 said to have been executed by Lalla in favour of
his four real brothers namely Ram Villas, Pyare Lal and Babu Ram and Chandrika was bad and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7359243/ 1
Smt. Suvidha Devi vs Deputy Director Of Consolidation / ... on 28 February, 2025
could not have been acted upon and in absence of the Will, the petitioner being the sole daughter of
deceased Lalla would inherit the property.
Submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the said Will was not proved in terms of
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act read with Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act. Further,
submission is that in mutation proceedings at the behest of the predecessor in interest of the private
respondent, the Will was proved, certified copies of the said statements of the attesting witnesses
who were examined in the mutation proceedings were brought on records in the consolidation
proceedings. The Consolidation Officer has erred in law by mechanically relying upon the
statements in summary proceedings and there was no proof of the Will independent of the
statement in the mutation proceedings and for the said reason, the Will cannot be treated to have
been proved in accordance with Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act.
It has further been submitted that Riyaz Ahmad who was one of the attesting witnesses of the Will,
was examined in the consolidation proceedings, who did not state that the said Will was first signed
by Lalla, and, thereafter, it was the other attesting witnesses who had put their signatures/thumb
impressions on the said Will. It is also urged that there is recital that the said Will was read out to
Sri Lalla specially when he was completely illiterate man and therefore the Will was shrouded in
suspicious circumstances, accordingly, in absence of any cogent evidence, the Will could not be
treated to be proved merely on the basis of the statement which were recorded in mutation case, as
such the orders impugned are bad.
It is urged that this order of C.O was challenged by the petitioner by filing an appeal as well as it was
carried further in a revision and the D.D.C also echoed the same sentiments which were expressed
by the C.O. Accordingly, the impugned order is bad in the eyes of law. Learned counsel for the
petitioner has also relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in Lalitaben Jayantilal Popat vs
Pragnaben Jmnadas Kataria and Ors; 2009 (107) RD page 425.
Having considered the aforesaid submissions and from perusal of the material on record, it is
undisputed that the Will dated 23.09.2000 is registered. It the case of the petitioner that the said
Will was not executed by Sri Lalla, however, the record indicates that the same was put to proof by
getting the thumb impressions of Sri Lalla examined by an handwriting expert who submitted his
report and concluded that the thumb impressions on the Will dated 23.09.2000 is that of Sri Lalla.
As far as the submission regarding that the Will was not proved in accordance with Section 63 of the
Indian Succession Act, if this aspect is seen, it would reveal that Riyaz Ahmad had filed his
examination in chief in shape of affidavit, a copy of which has been brought on record as Annexure
5. In paragraph-5, it has categorically been stated by the said attesting witness that the Will was
drawn up in presence of attesting witness. It was, thereafter, read out to the testator and it is only,
thereafter, that the testator had put his thumb impression which was followed by the
signatures/thumb impressions of the said two attesting witnesses namely Riyaz Ahmad and the
other attesting witness Sri Hasib Khan.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7359243/ 2
Smt. Suvidha Devi vs Deputy Director Of Consolidation / ... on 28 February, 2025
Considering the aforesaid statement in examination in chief the Court has also examined tentatively
the cross examination of Riyaz Ahmad which has been brought on record as part of Annexure 5 and
in his examination too he has affirmed the due execution and attestation of the Will. It will further
be relevant to mention that it is now well settled that in a Will which is required to be proved in
accordance with Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act read with Section 68 of Indian Evidence
Act requires at least one of the attesting witnesses to enter into witness box to prove the Will. This
compliance has already been made. Apparently, the petitioner who was assailing the said Will ought
to have shown certain suspicious circumstances which shrouded the due execution or attestation
and having laid such a basis, then the burden to prove and dispel the suspicious circumstances
would be on the propounder of the Will (See: H. Venkatachala Iyengar Vs B. N. Thimmajamma &
Ors; AIR 1959 SC 443).
It is also relevant to notice that very recently the Apex Court in Chinu Rani Ghosh vs. Shubhash
Ghosh; 2024 SCC Online SC 4070 has had the occasion to review the decisions on the execution and
attestation of Will wherein it has affirmed the judgment of H. Venkatachala Iyengar (supra) and
further has held that a Will is not to be mechanically proved or with mathematical precision. In light
of the aforesaid as well as the statements including the cross examination of the attesting witness, it
cannot be said that the Will was not proved in accordance with law. As far as the statement of the
attesting witnesses recorded in mutation proceedings has not been made the basis of the judgments
passed by the Consolidation Authorities though there is reference to the same but that does not
partake the nature of sole proof, accordingly, considering the over all circumstances where the Will
has been proved in accordance with law and there are concurrent findings by three consolidation
courts, this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not
tempted to enter into the field of reappraisal of evidence to tinker with findings of fact.
However, before parting it may be noticed that the decision relied upon by the learned counsel for
the petitioner in Lalitaben Jayantilal Popat (supra) relied (supra), the proposition which has been
laid cannot be disputed but the fact remains that the compliance as required in law has been made
and there is nothing which has been pointed out which makes Will suspicious which has been
proved in accordance with law, hence, the said decision does not come to the aid of the petitioner.
Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons, this Court does not find that there is any merit in the
petition, which is accordingly, dismissed at the admission stage.
Order Date :- 28.2.2025/Harshita
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7359243/ 3
