Smt. Sukhdevi vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Smt. Sukhdevi vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:638
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 29290 of 2024
Applicant :- Smt. Sukhdevi
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Ajeet Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Arvind Kumar Sahu,G.A.,Praveen Kumar Srivastava
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. Heard SriAjeet Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Arvind Kumar Sahu,
learned counsel for the informant as well as Sri Jai Kishan Chaurasiya, learned State Law Officer
and perused the material placed on record.
2. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 75 of 2024, under Sections 498A, 323, 328, 304B I.P.C.
and Section 3/4 of D.P. Act, Police Station Bilsi, District Budaun, during the pendency of trial.
3. Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that the applicant is absolutely innocent and has
been falsely implicated in the present case. The FIR is delayed by about nine days and there is no
explanation of the said delay caused. It is further stated that the applicant is the mother-in-law of
the deceased person and lives separately to the deceased person and her husband and she has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121411558/ 1
Smt. Sukhdevi vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
nothing to do with the said offence. Learned counsel has further stated that the applicant and the
family members of the deceased person were present at the time of inquest proceeding.
4. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against her. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
5. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 09.05.2024
and she is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, she will not misuse
the liberty of bail.
6. Learned State Law Officer has vehemently opposed the bail application.
7. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for the
parties, the evidence on record, and taking into consideration the settled law of the Supreme Court
passed in Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690 and
Manish Sisodia vs. Directorate of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595 and without expressing any opinion
on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The
bail application is allowed.
8. Let the applicant-Smt. Sukhdevi, who is involved in aforementioned case crime be released on
bail on her furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the
sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against her in accordance
with law.
9. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
10. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/121411558/ 2
