Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
Author: Abhay S. Oka
Bench: Abhay S. Oka
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 18TH DAY OF AUGUST 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. ABHAY S. OKA, CHIEF JUSTICE
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ASHOK S. KINAGI
WRIT PETITION NO.9205 OF 2020 (GM-RES-PIL)
BETWEEN:
SMT. GEETHA MISRA
AGED 50 YEARS
D/O KAILASHNATH MISRA, ADVOCATE
R/AT NO.135, 47TH CROSS,
3RD BLOCK, RAJAJINAGAR
BENGALURU-560 010.
...PETITIONER
(BY SRI. G R MOHAN, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY ITS CHIEF SECRETARY
VIDHANSOUDHA
BENGALURU-560 001.
2. THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREST
ECOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
VIDHANA SOUDHA, BENGALURU-560 001.
3. THE SECRETARY
KARNATAKA POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
2
CHURCH STREET
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 1
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
BENGALURU-560 001.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. C.M. POONACHA, AGA FOR R-1 AND R-2)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226
AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, PRAYING TO
QUASH THE GUIDELINES VIDE GOVERNMENT ORDER DATED
19.06.2020 AS PER ANNEXURE-B AS THE SAME IS
ULTRAVIRES OF THE CONSTITUTION IN RELATION TO
ARTICLES 21, 48A AND 51A OF THE CONSTITUTION.
THIS WRIT PETITION COMING ON FOR ORDERS THIS
DAY, CHIEF JUSTICE MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner.
2. This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is filed in public interest for
challenging the annexure to the Government Order dated 19th June 2020 (Annexure-B).
Annexure-B contains guidelines for nomination, the terms and Conditions of service of the
Chairman, the Members and the Member Secretary of the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board
(for short 'KSPCB').
3. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has strong objection to Clause (5) of the said
guidelines which provides that the Chairman shall be selected by a Search-cum- Selection
Committee consisting of the Hon'ble Chief Minister as the Chairman, the Hon'ble Minister for
Forest, Ecology and Environment as the Vice Chairman and Member, and the Chief Secretary to the
Government as the Secretary and Convenor of the Committee. He submitted that in what manner
the appointment of Chairpersons and Members of KSPCB is to be made is laid down by the Apex
Court in the judgment and order dated 22nd September 2017 in Civil Appeal No.1359 of 2017 in the
case of TECHI TAGI TARA vs RAJENDRA SINGH BHANDARI AND OTHERS. He further
submitted that in many cases like the Police Complaints Authority, Human Rights Commission and
other similar statutory bodies, there are separate Search Committees and Selection Committees. His
submission is that in the present case, the Search Committee and the Selection Committee are the
same. His further submission is that ideally, the Search Committee should be entrusted with the job
of shortlisting the eligible candidates and the selection shall be left to another Selection Committee.
He submitted that paragraph 33 of the aforesaid decision of the Apex Court lays down that if a
person who is not qualified is appointed as the Chairperson or a Member of a State Pollution
Control Board, any public spirited person can always approach the Constitutional Court for seeking
a writ of quo warranto. He further submitted that if the Search Committee and the Selection
Committee are one and the same, there is every likelihood that the person who does not meet the
statutory or constitutional requirements will be appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
State Pollution Control Board. He invited our attention to paragraphs 30 to 33 of the aforesaid
decision of the Apex Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 2
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
4. We have carefully considered the submissions. Section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974 (for short 'Water Act') provides for constitution of State Boards. Section 4 of the
Water Act reads thus:
"4.Constitution of State Boards -(1) The State Government shall, with effect from
such date as it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, constitute a State
Board, under such name as may be specified in the notification, to exercise the
powers conferred on and perform the functions assigned to that Board under this
Act.
(2) A State Board shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of matters relating to environmental protection or a person
having knowledge and experience in administering institutions dealing with the
matters aforesaid, to be nominated by the State Government:
[Provided that the chairman may be either whole-time or part-time as the State
Government may think fit;]
(b) "five officials" to be nominated by the State Government to represent that
Government;
(c) "five persons" to be nominated by the State Government from amongst the
members of the local authorities functioning within the State;
(d) "three non-officials" to be nominated by the State Government to represent the
interests of agriculture, fishery or industry or trade or any other interest which, in the
opinion of the State Government, ought to be represented;
(e) two persons to represent the companies or corporations owned, controlled or
managed by the State Government, to be nominated by that Government;
[(f) a full-time member-secretary, possessing qualifications, knowledge and experience of scientific,
engineering or management aspects of pollution control, to be appointed by the State Government]
(3) Every State Board shall be a body corporate with the name specified by the State Government in
the notification under sub-section(1), having perpetual succession and a common seal with power,
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and
may, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State Board shall be constituted for a
Union territory and in relation to a Union territory, the Central Board shall exercise the powers and
perform the functions of a State Board for that Union territory:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 3
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
Provided that in relation to any Union territory the Central Board may delegate all or
any of its powers and functions under this sub-section to such person or body of
persons as the Central Government may specify."
(underline supplied)
5. Hence, it follows that the power to appoint the Chairman has to be exercised by the State
Government by nomination. The same is the case for the Members and the full-time Member
Secretary of KSPCB. Therefore, the power to appoint the Chairman and the Members including the
full- time Secretary vests with the State Government. At this stage, we must refer to the aforesaid
decision of the Apex Court in the case of TECHI TAGI TARA (supra). Paragraphs 30, 32 and 33 of
the said decision read thus:
"30. All these suggestions and recommendations are more than enough for making
expert and professional appointments to the SPCBs being geared towards
establishing a professional body with multifarious tasks intended to preserve and
protect the environment and consisting of experts. Any contrary view or compromise
in the appointments would render the exercise undertaken by all these committees
completely irrelevant and redundant. Surely, it cannot be said that the committees
were not constituted for the purpose of putting their recommendations in the
dustbin.
32. The concern really is not one of a lack of professional expertise - there is plenty of
it available in the country - but the lack of dedication and willingness to take
advantage of the resources available and instead benefit someone close to the powers
that be. With this couldn't-care-less attitude, the environment and public trust are
the immediate casualties. It is unlikely that with such an attitude, any substantive
effort can be made to tackle the issues of environment degradation and issues of
pollution. Since the NGT was faced with this situation, we can appreciate its
frustration at the scant regard for the law by some State Government, but it is still
necessary in such situations to exercise restraint as cautioned in State of U.P. v. Jeet
S. Bisht.15.
33. Keeping the above in mind, we are of the view that it would be appropriate, while
setting aside the judgment and order of the NGT, to direct the Executive in all the
States to frame appropriate guidelines or recruitment rules within six months,
considering the institutional requirements of the SPCBs and the law laid down by
statute, by this Court and as per the reports of various committees and authorities
and ensure that suitable professionals and experts are appointed to the SPCBs. Any
damage to the environment could be permanent and irreversible or at least
long-lasting. Unless (2007) 6 SCC 586 corrective measures are taken at the earliest,
the State Governments should not be surprised if petitions are filed against the State
for the issuance of a writ of quo warranto in respect of the appointment of the
chairperson and members of the SPCBs. We make it clear that it is left open to public
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 4
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
spirited individuals to move the appropriate High Court for the issuance of the writ of
quo wattanto if any person who does not meet the statutory or constitutional
requirements is appointed as a Chairperson or a member of any SPCB or is presently
continuing as such."
6. Hence, the Apex Court laid emphasis on the fact that the State Pollution Control Boards must
consist of suitable professionals and experts. The Apex Court observed that any compromise in the
appointment would render the exercise undertaken by the State Boards irrelevant and redundant. It
is further observed that due to the failure to appoint experts in the field and professionals on the
body like SPCBs, there is a likelihood of damage to the environment which could be permanent. The
Apex Court made it clear that in the event the Chairman or the Members of SPCBs appointed by the
State Government do not meet the statutory or constitutional requirements, it is always open for a
public spirited person to seek a writ of quo warranto.
7. Perusal of the order dated 19th June 2020 passed by the State Government shows that in the
preamble, there is a specific reference to the aforesaid judgment and order of the Apex Court dated
22nd September 2017 which lays down the requirement of the State Government framing
appropriate guidelines. Clause (2) of the guidelines which are impugned in this writ petition shows
that the State Government is conscious of the qualifications required for the post of Chairman
prescribed by Clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Water Act. Even Clause (3) of the
guidelines which specifically lays down the qualifications shows that the qualifications laid down in
the Water Act as well as in the aforesaid decision of the Apex Court have been taken into
consideration.
8. As stated earlier, the Chairman is to be appointed by the State Government by nomination. There
is nothing in the statute which lays down that the Search Committee and the Selection Committee
cannot be one and the same. Therefore, per se, there is no illegality in Clause (5) of the guidelines
even though the Search-cum-Selection Committee is headed by the Hon'ble Chief Minister. It is
obvious that the Committee will be bound by the guidelines laid down in the aforesaid decision of
the Apex Court as well as the qualifications laid down in Clause
(a) of sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Water Act. We are sure that the Search-cum-Selection
Committee will select only those candidates who are well qualified and are possessing the
qualifications as laid down by the Apex Court as well as the aforesaid provisions of the Water Act. If
the Committee recommends appointment of a person who is not eligible in terms of the order of the
Apex Court or who does not fulfill the qualifications laid down in Clause (a) of sub-section (2) of
Section 4 of the Water Act, as held by the Apex Court, a public spirited person can always seek a writ
of quo warranto. We, therefore, do not find anything illegal in the guidelines laid down by the State
Government.
9. Subject to what is observed above, this is not a case where interference can be made with the
guidelines issued by the State Government in terms of the decision of the Apex Court. Accordingly,
the writ petition is disposed of.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 5
Smt Geetha Misra vs State Of Karnataka on 18 August, 2020
Sd/-
CHIEF JUSTICE Sd/-
JUDGE TL
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90704968/ 6
