Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August,
2019
Author: Vivek Agarwal
Bench: Vivek Agarwal
1
Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
BENCH AT GWALIOR
SINGLE BENCH
BEFORE JUSTICE VIVEK AGARWAL
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 455/2014
Suresh Dhakad
Versus
State of M.P.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Pradeep Katare, Advocate for the appellant.
Shri R.K. Upadhyay, Public Prosecutor for respondent/State.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CRIMINAL APPEAL No. 595/2014
Smt. Mamta Bai
Versus
State of M.P. & Another
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
None for the appellant.
Shri R.K. Upadhyay, Public Prosecutor for respondent No.1/State.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 1
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
Shri Pradeep Katare, learned counsel for the respondent No.2.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUDGMENT
(21/08/2019) Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 Per Vivek Agarwal, J.
These appeals have been filed respectively by the convicted accused and the prosecutrix being
aggrieved by the judgment dated 11.03.2014 passed by Third Additional Sessions Judge, Guna in
Sessions Case No. 246/2013, whereby learned Additional Session Judge has acquitted Kasumal Bai
(accused No.2) from the charges under Sections 109 and 323 IPC but, convicted the
appellant--Suresh Dhakad under Section 376 (1) of IPC with 10 years' R.I. and fine of Rs. 10,000/-
and in default of payment of fine, further R.I. of 6 months. He has also been convicted under Section
323 IPC with 6 months R.I. and fine of Rs. 1000/- and in default of payment of fine, one month's
additional R.I. The trial was conducted against two accused, namely, Suresh Dhakad (present
appellant) and his wife Smt. Kasumal Bai. Thus, Criminal Appeal No. 455/2014 has been filed by the
appellant-Suresh Dhakad seeking acquittal from the aforesaid charges and Criminal Appeal No.
595/2014 has been filed by the prosecutrix under Section 372 Cr.P.C. challenging the acquittal of
accused No.2-Smt. Kasumal Bai.
[2] Brief facts leading to present appeal are that, as per prosecution story Proseuctrix PW-1 is a Asha
Karyakarta at village Jamnai. On 29.05.2013, there was a call for mass strike of Asha worker at
Guna, and therefore, she traveled to Guna along with accused No.2 Kasumal, a Asha Karyakarta at
village Pareva and her Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 husband Suresh Dhakad on their
motor cycle. After such show of mass strike was over, they were returning to their respective villages
between 7-8 pm on the motor cycle of convicted appellant, when at about 10 pm when such motor
cycle reached dhodra puliya then Suresh had taken a bypass and had parked his motor cycle on a
'kachha rasta'. There convicted appellant had taken the prosecutrix to a nearby field where acquitted
accused caught hold of her hands and then when prosecutrix shouted for help convicted accused had
slapped her on her face and then committed rape on her. After such act was over, acquitted accused
caught hold of her hand and brought her to the motor cycle and then she was dropped in village
Pareva at her house with instructions, not to inform about such incident but only to tell she had
fallen down from motor cycle. On the next day of incident i.e. 30.05.2013 at about 9:30, FIR was
lodged at Police Station Jamner which is 5 km away. Copy of such FIR is Exhibit P-1 which was
taken by Basant Naik (PW-8).
[3] Learned counsel for the convicted accused/appellant submits that this is a case of false
accusation. There is overwriting in the FIR as to the date of incident. It is submitted that it is a
glaring case of caste rivalry and convicted appellant and acquitted accused have been falsely
implicated. It is unnatural that wife of a accused shall help her husband in violating the privacy of a
lady. It is submitted that in fact it is a case where prosecutrix had competition with the wife of the
convicted appellant as she is also a Asha Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 Karyakarta
and with a view to get her out of the picture, such case has been framed so that acquitted accused is
relieved of her responsibility as Asha Karyakarta. Learned counsel for the appellant has drawn
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 2
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
attention of this court towards the MLC of prosecutrix and statements of doctor PW-1 who
conducted such MLC on the prosecutrix, who noted her age to be 35 years and also a fact that she
was brought by Ajay Sharma and had come along with her father. There were four bruises and six
abrasions on her body which were all termed to be simple in nature caused by hard and blunt object
within 14 hours of such MLC which was carried out at 10 am. Reading such MLC, it is pointed out
that hymen of the prosecutrix was ruptured, vagina was transmitting one finger easily, cervix was
transmitting little figure easily and samples were collected, sealed packed and handed over to the
constable for chemical examination but doctor had not given any opinion about recent intercourse
opining that victim seems to be habitual of sex. It is submitted that in the FSL report (Exhibit P-12),
semen was found on article 'A' i.e. petticoat of the prosecutrix, 'C' slide of the prosecutrix and 'D'
slide obtained from the convicted accused. No semen or sperms were found on Exhibit B i.e. pubic
hair of the prosecutrix.
[4] It is submitted that merely on the basis of semen marks on the petticoat of the prosecutrix,
conviction has been recorded whereas no confirmatory test has been applied as to whose semen was
Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 available on the petticoat of the prosecutrix. Thus, on
the basis of shaky evidence, out of professional jealousy and caste rivalry convicted accused has been
falsely implicated.
[5] Learned counsel for the appellant has read over evidence of PW-1 Prosecutrix to point out that
she has admitted in her cross- examination that besides the acquitted accused, other Asha Karyarkat
of neighboring village had also visited Guna to participate in such strike of Asha workers. She has
also admitted that besides Asha Karyakarta, Nurses and Contract Managers were also present in
such strike. She has also admitted that prior to alleged incident, she had travelled with the accused
persons on their motor cycle on two-three occasions and she had good acquaintance with accused
persons, and therefore, she had traveled to Guna on their motor cycle. Earlier she had visited
Jamner and Raghogarh on their motor cycle. She also admitted that she is staying at Pareva in her
maternal home where house of the accused is situated at some distance from the house of her father.
She admitted that Kasumal is working as Asha Karyakarta prior to prosecutrix. She also admitted
that Kasumal is Asha Karyakarta at village Pareva. It is also pointed out that prosecutrix admitted
that Mangilal Dhakad, Shivcharan and Hariprasad are teachers and are also involved in local
politics of the village. Mangilal is a teacher in the school in which Kasumal is working as a cook. She
also admitted that Shivcharan and Hariprasad are brothers of Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 &
595/2014 Mangilal. She denied suggestion that Kasumal had lodged a report against Mangilal,
Shivcharan and Hariprasad but admitted that the society which was preparing mid-day meals in the
school was headed by Kasumal and prosecutrix is a member of such society. It is also admitted that
after alleged incident Kasumal and Suresh had dropped her to the village on their motor cycle and
also admitted that she had not narrated such incident to any of the members of the village. She
admits that she had narrated this fact to the Police while lodging FIR Exhibit P-1, but a fact that she
was threatened with life by such accused persons is not mentioned in the FIR, then she cannot give
any reason for such omission. She admits that her clothes were not torned and she did not narrate
this incident to anybody in the village as she was not knowing any person in the village, then said
her own that she is posted in village Jamnai. She also admitted in Para 14 of her cross- examination
that when Suresh Dhakad had pushed her, she had fallen down on her face, but had not sustained
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 3
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
any injury on her face because of such push, and thereafter, she was dropped by the accused persons
at her home. She had straight away gone to her home and had not met anybody on the way, then she
said that she did not narrate this incident to anybody at home as everybody had gone to sleep. It is
submitted that this is contrary to her statement in examination in chief, where she has mentioned
that she could not report the matter because of lack of conveyance and has mentioned that since her
family members had Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 gone to sleep, she could not
narrate any fact to anybody and had not reported the matter immediately.
[6] It is also submitted that witnesses of recovery are Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2), father of the
prosecutrix, and Kamlesh son of Ramesh Tiwari i.e. brother of prosecutrix and no independent
witness has been examined as a witness of recovery of certain pieces of jewelry from alleged place of
incident. It is also pointed out that statement of prosecutrix that she could not narrate anything to
her family members as everybody had gone to sleep is contrary to statements of her father Ramesh
Prasad Tiwari (PW-2), who has mentioned that at about quarter to 11, when her daughter had
arrived at home he had seen her face to be swollen and had also seen bleeding from nose and mouth.
He had asked his daughter as to what happened, then she had narrated about the incident.
[7] It is submitted that Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2) has admitted that he had given permission to
his daughter to travel to Guna along with accused persons. He also admitted that his daughter had
travelled to Guna prior to the incident on two-three occasions along with the accused persons. It has
also come on record that proscutrix is working at Jamnai whereas acquitted accused was working at
village Pareva where exists maternal home of the prosecutrix. It is pointed out that this witness has
admitted in Exhibit P-2, that mehrun color kangan with white color gems were seized from her on
being presented by the prosecutrix. It is also submitted Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014
that Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2) has admitted that at about 9:30 he had a talk with the
prosecutrix when she had informed that they have reached Pipalkhedi. This witness has admitted
that distance between Pipalkhedi to village Pareva can be traveled in ½ hour's time on a motor
cycle. This witness has admitted that despite getting information from his daughter about the
incident, he had not informed anybody in the village in the night. This witness has improvised his
statement that he was also threatened by the accused after he had reported the matter to the police.
[8] Santosh Dhakad (PW-4) has given a contrary statement in cross examination. He has submitted
that when he had heard some voice from the house of prosecutrix, he visited house of the
prosecutrix at about 11 in the night, when she had narrated the incident to him in the night. This is
contrary to the statements of PW-1 and PW-2.
[9] Similarly, Shivcharan Dhakad (PW-6) has stated that when he had come to know about the
incident on 29.05.2013, he had visited house of Ramesh Prasad Tiwari who had given him
intimation on his phone asking him to visit his house. This too is contrary to the statement given by
prosecutrix and her father i.e. PW-1 and PW-2. [10] Basant Naik (PW-8) who had taken the FIR has
admitted that prosecutrix had not given any reason for delay in lodging the FIR and he too had not
asked any reason for delay in lodging the FIR. This Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014
witness has admitted that he has not shown place from where earring, anklet (payal) and pieces of
jewelry were collected in the spot map (Exhibit P-4), however, he has admitted that he had not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 4
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
shown these three things in the spot map because they were brought by the prosecutrix at the police
station and were not seized from the place of the incident. This is a major lapse on the part of
prosecution. It is apparent from Exhibit P-3 that such items have been shown to be seized from the
place of the incident i.e. todra pavera kachi sarak puliya ke pass, therefore this seizure memo Exhibit
P-3 is fake and contrary to the evidence of I.O. (PW-8) of the case. [11] Basant Naik (PW-8) has also
admitted that place of incident is a nala which was uneven and if anybody is subjected to rape then
injuries will be sustained in back and while recording FIR prosecutrix did not report any injury on
her back. Even in the MLC Exhibit P-5, only one abrasion has been shown over the back which was
not reported by the prosecutrix to the I.O. (PW-8).
[12] PW-11 Dr. Mukesh Sharma who had examined the accused did not find any injury mark on his
private parts. PW-12 though noted 10 injuries on the body of the prosecutrix but termed them to be
simple in nature. No injury was found on her private part and refused to give any opinion as to
commission of rape as prosecutrix was habitual of intercourse. This witness has admitted that such
injuries could have been sustained to a persons falling down Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 &
595/2014 from a motor cycle on path full of pebbles (kankar). She also admitted that there were no
injuries on the private parts of the prosecutrix. [13] Learned trial Court has recorded a finding of
conviction qua Suresh Dhakad on the ground that there was no enmity between the proseuctrix and
the accused person and her statements are corroborated from the FIR (Exhibit P-1) in addition
presence of sperm marks on petticoat and vaginal swab are sufficient to convict the accused person.
Learned Court noted that in case of Vinod Kumar Yadav Vs. State of M.P., 2013 Part I ANJ Page 30,
finding material contradictions in the evidence of prosecutrix and her husband and that being not
corroborated with the medical evidence, acquittal of Vinod Kumar Yadav was recorded. In case of
State of Rajasthan Vs. Babu Meena, 2013 MPWN Note 66, there was ambiguity in the timing of the
incident as narrated by the prosecutrix and that was not corroborated by the medical evidence so
also it was not supported by the so called eye witness, therefore, acquittal was confirmed. In case of
Bharat Singh vs. State of M.P., 2006 Part-2 MPLJ 141, explanation given by the prosecutrix that she
was sleeping inside the house with her three children keeping the door open was not accepted and
acquittal was recorded. But in case of Ganga Singh vs State of M.P. 2013 Cr.L.J 3966, wherein it has
been held that proseuctirx is not a co-accused and there is no need for correlation of her evidence
and at all cost her evidence should be accepted. Human sperms were Criminal Appeal Nos.
455/2014 & 595/2014 found on the private parts of the prosecutrix when Supreme Court had
maintained the finding of conviction of the accused. Thus, it is evident that learned trial Court has
noted a fact that there was an abrasion on the back of the prosecutrix and one bruise on the breast of
the prosecutrix besides presence of human sperms on petticoat and vaginal swab and such evidence
of the prosecution was supported by PW-2, 3, 4 & 6, therefore, in the light of law laid down in case of
Ganga Singh (Supra) conviction of Suresh Dhakad has been recorded. However, acquittal of
Kasumal has been recorded in the light of judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Priya Patel Vs.
State of M.P., AIR 2006 SC 2639. Similarly reliance has been placed on the judgment of Arjun Singh
vs. State of H.P., AIR 2009 SC 1568.
[14] Learned Public Prosecutor has supported the judgment and submits that both the appeal need
to be dismissed as learned trial Court appreciated the facts of the case in correct prospective, and
therefore, that judgments do not call for any interference. [15] Heard learned counsel for the parties
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 5
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
and perused the record.
[16] There are certain glaring omissions which have not been taken note of by the learned trial
Court. Prosecutrix PW-1 in her Court statement has categorically mentioned in Para 14 that she had
not met anybody on way to her house and had not narrated the incident to Criminal Appeal Nos.
455/2014 & 595/2014 anybody at night as all had gone to sleep. Similarly, PW-2 her father Ramesh
Prasad Tiwari has also admitted in para 7 of his cross examination that despite receiving intimation
from his daughter at night he had not given such intimation to anybody from his village which is
contrary to the evidence of PW-4 Santosh Dhakad who admitted that he had reached house of the
prosecutrix which is at a distance of 5-6 houses. He has admitted that he had received intimation of
such incident at about 11 pm, as he was at his home and had heard certain voice coming from house
of prosecutrix and then he had asked prosecutrix about the incident in that very night when such
incident was narrated to him in presence of Shivcharan, Amol Singh and parents of the prosecutrix.
This witness also admitted in para 4 of cross-examination that 2-4 persons of the village had
collected at the house of the prosecutrix. Similarly, PW-6 Shivcharan Dhakad has also admitted in
para 5 of his cross-examination that at night itself Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2), had called him to
his house by making a call on his mobile and when he had reached house of Ramesh, he had seen
Santosh, Amol Singh and other persons of the village and then such incidence was narrated to them.
This is a material omission in the testimony of the prosecutrix and Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2),
father of the prosecutrix which has been ignored by the learned trial Court. Basant Naik (PW-8) I.O.
of the case admitted that earrings, payal and pieces of kangan were produced by the prosecutrix at
the police Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 station and they were not seized from the
place of the incident. Such admission by the I.O. in para 5 of the cross-examination belies the
seizure memo Exhibit P-3. In fact in Exhibit P-3, it is clearly mentioned that seizure of such material
was made from the place of the incident, where as contrary to this I.O. has mentioned that such
items were produced by the prosecutrix at the police station. Thus, belying the story of the
prosecution that while such rape was committed by the accused on prosecutrix she had lost such
items at the place of the incident. This piece of corroborative evidence when eroded causes damage
to the prosecution story.
[17] Another omission which has been overlooked by learned trial Court is that there is a consistent
suggestion to the prosecutrix so also other prosecution witnesses that there was a rivalry with the
accused No.2 inasmuch as she was heading the society supplying mid- day meal in the school where
Mangilal, Shivcharan and Hariprasad are teachers and who happens to be relative of each other
inasmuch as they wanted to dislodge accused No.2 Kasumal from the responsibility of presidentship
of such society, and therefore, the trial Court's contention that 'there is no material to point out that
there was any element of previous enmity between the prosecutrix and the accused', is factually
incorrect. In fact, PW-1 has admitted that Kasumal is the president of the society and she is a
member, though she has denied that Gram Sabha had passed a resolution to remove Kasumal and to
lodge Mamta Dhakad as president of the society but this suggestion of Criminal Appeal Nos.
455/2014 & 595/2014 the prosecution witnesses clearly suggests rivalry between the parties
overlooked by the trail Court. The trail Court has also overlooked another aspect that clothes of the
prosecutrix were not seized, because if story of the prosecutrix is to be believed then there would
have been damage to the clothes worn by the prosecutrix at the time of the incident, namely, a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 6
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
yellow color saree and a blouse of red color. [18] Learned trial court has also not adverted to another
important aspect, that is reported by PW-12, that such injury could have been sustained by
prosecutrix on falling from a motor cycle. It has overlooked the fact that there were no injury mark
on the private parts of the prosecutrix to substantiate the charge of rape. Mere presence of sperms
marks on petticoat or vaginal slide are not sufficient to record finding of conviction. In fact FSL
report (Ex.P-12) fails to report whether sperm was intact or its tail had separated and also number
of such sperms and their motility rate which would have given sufficient idea as to time of
intercourse.
[19] It is true as has been held in case of Sudhanshu Sekhar Sahu Vs. State of Orissa, 2003 SCC
Criminal 1484 that a sole testimony of the victim of a sexual offence can be made basis for
conviction provided it is safe, reliable and worthy of acceptance. It is also true that in case of
Bhupendra Sharma Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh, as reported in, AIR 2003 SC 4684, Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that to insist on corroboration except in the rarest of the rare cases and
discarding the evidence of a girl or a woman complaining Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 &
595/2014 rape or sexual molestation with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses, tested with doubt,
disbelieved in suspicion cannot be appreciated and it amounts to adding insult to injury of a woman.
The plea about of lack of corroboration has no substance. [20] It is also true that an unmerited
acquittal has not good for the society if prosecution has succeeded in making out a convincing case
for recording a finding as to the accused being guilty, the court should not lean in favour of acquittal
by giving weight to irrelevant or insignificant circumstances or by resorting to technicalities or by
assuming doubts and giving benefit thereof where none reasonably exists will encourage wolves in
the society being in the prowl for easy pray more so when the victims of crime are helpless females
or minor children, as has been held in State of Punjab vs. Ramdev Singh, AIR 2004 SC 1290.
[21] It is also well settled that absence of the injury on the person of the prosecutrix could not by
itself be sufficient to discard the prosecution case. Injury on the body of the person of the victim is
not a sign qua non to prove the charge of rape, as has been held in case of Dastgir Sab Vs. State of
Karnataka, 2004 (3) SCC 106, but facts of that case were that rape was committed at a spot where
dried up cotton plants were lying and accused made prosecutrix to lie on a land where there were
cotton plants and thus it was natural that she would not sustain any visible injury, but in the present
case since there is only Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 one witness and defence has
given a suggestion that she was also working as Asha Karyakarta, prosecutrix was working in a
society supplying mid-day meal under the wife of the convicted accused and no injury marks were
found on the body of the convicted accused and other accused was not examined medically to show
that she sustained any injury when resistance was offered by the prosecutrix, then court is duty
bound to examine all the circumstances leading to the offence starting from the motive of the
accused.
[22] It has come on record that prosecutrix was knowing the accused and had moved on their motor
cycle on previous occasions also with the consent of their relative. This fact has been admitted by
Ramesh Prasad Tiwari (PW-2). It has also come on record that accused are staying in the same
moholla in which exists maternal house of the prosecutrix. It has also come on record that PW-2 had
a talk with the prosecutrix on her mobile at about 9:30 pm when she was just half an hour away
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 7
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
form her residence yet no attempt was made by PW-2 to contact her when she had not reached her
home by 10 pm. [23] Another aspect is that PW-1 and PW-2 have deposed that despite prosecutrix
giving information about such incident, they had not contacted anybody from the village which is a
material omission/contradiction vis a vis evidence of PW-4 and PW-6 who have not been declared
hostile, therefore, when testimony of PW-4 and PW-6 is examined then delay in lodging the FIR is
required to be explained by the prosecution though in other cases it may not be so Criminal Appeal
Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 fatal. There could have been a plan to frame the accused persons
specially when there is suggestion that Shivcharan is brother of Mangilal and they are teachers in
the school in which accused no.2 was heading a mid-day meal society and though denied suggestion
that she had lodged a complaint against Mangilal and his brothers, therefore, if prosecution story
could have been as plain and simple as has been accepted by the trial Court then there was no
occasion for them to have suppressed presence of PW-4 and PW-6 in the night of the incident at
their residence. Amol Singh has not been examined though his presence has been shown by both
PW-4 and PW-6. Learned trial court has glossed over a fact that there was a motive of framing the
accused persons inasmuch as PW-6 has admitted in para 7 of his cross-examination that Kasumal
had given a report to the S.P. against them and SDOP had conducted enquiry on such report. This
witness has though denied that on 14.06.2013 a proposal was made to remove Kasumal from the
society and in her place nominate Mamta Dhakad wife of Rameshwar Dhakad as president of the
society. Such report was made to the S.P. Guna prior to lodging of the FIR by the prosecution, a fact
which has not been controverted by any of the prosecution witnesses and circumvented by the I.O.
of the case which provide sufficient material to accept contention of the accused persons that they
have been falsely implicated because of earlier rivalry of the parties. These suggestions and failure of
the prosecution to produce Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 the complaint made by
Kasumal to S.P., Guna on which SDOP had conducted enquiry and given his enquiry report clearly
substantiate the allegation that there was a rivalry between accused party and complainant party so
also prosecution witnesses, though denied by PW-1, 2, 4 & 6, and that resulted in false accusation
after making a plan, else reason for delay in FIR would have been given by the prosecutrix while
lodging FIR. Basant Naik (PW-8) has accepted that no reason for delay was assigned by the
prosecutrix. In light of these facts, statements of I.O. also becomes important that he had not seized
broken bangle or anklet (payal) or earring from the spot, and therefore, had not shown them in the
spot map because they were not seized from the spot but were produced by the proseuctrix at the
police station. This circumstance cannot be overlooked merely because no woman would like to
castigate anybody falsely at the cost of her own chastity and if such presumption is drawn then it will
amount to treating such a woman, victim of a crime to be an accomplice in crime. Such lofty ideals
and realistic social conditions are to be dovetailed looking to the local socio-cultural background of
this particular geographical area which is otherwise known for false accusation.
[24] Kasumal Bai (DW-2) in her cross examination has submitted that she had lodged a complaint
against Mangilal Dhakad, Shivcharan Dhakad and Hariprasad Dhakad for demand of money and
she has produced a photocopy of such complaint against them that Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014
& 595/2014 they are harassing her for quite sometime. This witness has also admitted that this
incident is used as a ploy to get them i.e. she and her husband removed from their respective posts
and there is no denial or rebuttal from the prosecution side to such facts. [25] In view of such facts,
prosecution has not been able to complete the chain as they have not been able to substantiate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 8
Smt.Mamta Bai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 August, 2019
seizure of missing jewelry from the place of the incident i.e. a vital missing link in the chain of
circumstances and in view of such vital missing link, coupled with the fact that there are several
omissions in the prosecution story so to point out towards singular guilt of the accused, this court is
of the opinion that it is a clear case of false accusation to settle scores with the wife of the convicted
accused for which accused has been made a pawn and trial court having overlooked so many
inconsistencies in the prosecution story, this court extends benefit of doubt to the accused - Suresh
Dhakad and directs that he be acquitted from the charges under section 376 (1) and 323 IPC as
prosecution has failed to prove such charges beyond reasonable doubt and mere presence of a spot
on petticoat of the prosecutrix is not sufficient to record finding of conviction.
[26] Thus, Criminal Appeal No.455/2014 is allowed, conviction and sentence of accused Suresh
Dhakad under Section 376 (1) & 323 of IPC is set aside. Appellant-Suresh Dhakad is in jail. He be
released forthwith, if not required in any other case. [27] Criminal Appeal No.595/2014 is dismissed
for the failure Criminal Appeal Nos. 455/2014 & 595/2014 of the prosecution to prove its case
beyond reasonable doubt. [28] Copy of the judgment be sent to the trial Court for information and
compliance.
(Vivek Agarwal) Judge Aman Aman Tiwari 2019.08.21 18:23:15 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96900440/ 9
