Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur
Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
[1]
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM
KPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2023.02.17 IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DA SINGH 14:46:26 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
W.P. (C) No. 925 of 2021
1. Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi, aged about 64 years, W/o Oinam
Kunjakeshor Singh, resident of Wangkhei Hijam Leikai, P.O. &
P.S. Porompat, Imphal East District, Manipur - 795005.
Mobile No.: 9856169424.
2. Nongthombam Bhanu Devi, aged about 62 years, W/o Sougaijam
Ranjit Singh, resident of Naoremthong khulem Leikai, P.O. & P.S.
Lamphelpat, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795001.
Mobile. No.: 9862270492.
... Petitioners
-Versus-
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Commissioner
(Transport), Government of Manipur, Old Secretariat, Babupara,
Imphal West District - 795005, Manipur.
2. The Director (Transport), Government of Manipur, Manipur State
Transport (MST) Complex, Moirangkhom, Imphal West District -
795001, Manipur.
... Respondents
B E F O R E HON'BLEMR. JUSTICE AHANTHEMBIMOL SINGH For the Petitioners :: Ms. Ph.
Sarvodaya Lakshmi, Advocate For the respondents :: Mr. A. Vashum, Govt. Advocate Date of
Hearing :: 01-02-2023 Date of Judgment & Order :: 17-02-2023 JUDGMENT & ORDER [1] Heard
Ms. Ph. Sarvodaya Lakshmi, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. A. Vashum,
learned GA appearing for the respondents.
The present writ petition had been filed with the prayer for directing the respondents to release the
salaries due payable to the petitioners along with interest w.e.f. the date of their engagement on
contract basis as Office Assistant and Machine Operator in the Office of the Passenger Reservation
System (PRS) Location, Imphal, Moirangkhom till the shutdown of the said office w.e.f. February,
2020. [2] The case of the petitioners is that they were engaged on contract basis as Office Assistant
and Machine Operator respectively in the Office of the PRS Location, Imphal, Moirangkhom w.e.f.
28-08-2012 and 23-12-2011 respectively and until further orders vide orders dated 28-08-2012 and
23-12-2011 issued by the Director of Transport, Manipur. After their engagement, the petitioners
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 1
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
discharged their official duties sincerely and without any break until they were prevented from
attending office due to global disruption caused by the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic in the month
of March, 2020. The grievance of the petitioners is that even though their service were utilized by
the authorities, their monthly salaries were not paid to them from the date of their engagement till
the shutdown of their office in the month of February, 2020 without any valid and justifiable reason.
Having been aggrieved by the non-payment of their salaries, the petitioners made several
representations to the concerned authorities demanding to release their monthly salaries due
payable to them, however without any success. Hence the petitioners approached this court by filing
the present writ petition for redressing their grievances. [3] The stand taken by the respondents in
their counter affidavit is that the PRS at Imphal and Churachandpur were manned by 14 (fourteen)
contractual staff of MSRTC and staff engaged for PRS and that the salary components and all other
outstanding/anticipated expenditures pertaining to operation and maintenance of the PRS was
booked under the 4% commission on sale proceeds receivable from the railway. It has also been
submitted that in the year 2012, five contractual staff of PRS Imphal and Churachandpur, namely (i)
W. Ranjit Singh (ii) W. Gyaneshor Singh
(iii) O. Jadumani Singh (iv) I. Dorendro Singh and (v) Y. Kennedy Singh misappropriated the
money for sale of railway tickets amounting to (cid:128) 69,82,824/- (Rupees sixty nine lakh eighty two
thousand eight hundred and twenty four) and that a vigilance case was registered by the State
Vigilance Commission, Director of Vigilance & Anti-Corruption, Manipur and FIRs were registered
against the defaulters for misappropriation of Government money. It has also been submitted that
the authorities have filed Original (Money) Suit against the aforesaid defaulting persons for recovery
of the said money.
[4] In the counter affidavit, it has also been stated that the Government conveyed its approval to
shutdown the PRS Offices as the Transport Department was not in a position to sustain the PRS
Offices and after considering all the circumstances involving PRS matters, the Transport
Department issued an order dated 04-02-2021 informing all the PRS staff that the PRS Offices at
Imphal and Churachandpur are shutdown w.e.f. February, 2020. The respondents also take the
stand that a proposal was submitted by the Directorate Office of Transport to the Administrative
Department showing the detailed statement of the total outstanding salaries of all PRS staff and the
required additional fund to be borne by the Government for payment of outstanding salaries of all
PRS and that the Administrative Department directed that the proposal for release of additional
fund for payment of outstanding salaries to the PRS staff may be submitted only after the recovery
of the misappropriated Government money from the aforesaid defaulter staffs. It has also been
stated that the current available PO charges are not sufficient to pay the outstanding salaries of all
the staff of PRS and that the payment of the outstanding salaries of the present petitioners from the
available fund of PO charges may rise complicacies if other staff of PRS request for the same. The
respondents also stated that the Transport Department never intended to withhold the salary of the
PRS staff and that the registration of vigilance case by the Vigilance Department against the
aforesaid defaulting staff for misappropriation of Government money led to the delay in payment of
salary/ remuneration of the petitioners and other contractual PRS staff. [5] In connection with the
RTI application filed by the present petitioners, the Deputy Director of Transport, Manipur wrote a
letter dated 18-02-2021 addressed to the Deputy Registrar (Judl.-I), Manipur Information
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 2
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
Commission stating, inter alia, that as per order dated 04-02-2021, the remuneration/ salary of the
contractual staff of the PRS will be calculated upto the month of February, 2020, however in respect
of the present petitioners their remuneration/ salary were calculated only upto the date of their
attaining the age of superannuation. As per the said letter, the outstanding salary/ remuneration of
the petitioners were estimated as (cid:128). 4,34,000/- (Rupees four lakh thirty four thousand) in respect of
petitioner No. 1 and (cid:128). 5,67,000/- (Rupees five lakh sixty seven thousand) in respect of petitioner
No. 2 by calculating their salary/ remuneration at the rate of Rs. 7,000/- per month.
In their counter affidavit, the respondents took the stand that the request of the petitioners for
payment of their outstanding salaries till the time of closure of the PRS Offices despite of exceeding
their superannuation ages and without issuing re-engagement order by the Government cannot be
entertained. It has been stated that the retirement of Government servant or employee or staff on
ad-hoc or contract basis cannot be allowed to continue in their service beyond the age of their
superannuation. It has further been stated that until and unless there is Government approval, the
petitioners cannot go on working beyond 60 years even if their engagement order mentioned that
their service will be effective immediately till further order and that they will be treated to be
terminated automatically on attaining the age of superannuation. The learned Government
Advocate accordingly submitted that the petitioners are entitled to get their salaries only upto the
date of their superannuation and not upto the date of shutdown of their office.
[6] The learned counsel for the petitioners strenuously submitted that after their engagement as
Office Assistant and Machine Operator, the petitioners have been discharging their official duties
sincerely and without any break and the authorities utilized their service until they were prevented
from attending their office due to lockdown imposed by the Government on account of the outbreak
of Covid-19 pandemic in the month of March, 2020. The learned counsel also submitted that the
petitioners were not involved in misappropriation of the Government money and that without any
valid and justifiable reason, the authorities withhold the entire salary due payable to the petitioners
from the date of their engagement till the date of shutdown of their office in a most arbitrary, illegal
and inhuman manner thereby depriving their means of livelihood guaranteed by Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. The learned counsel vehemently submitted that non-payment of the salary of
the petitioners is in contravention of their right guaranteed by Article 300A of the Constitution of
India and it also amounts to depriving their livelihood guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.
It has also been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the authorities have
wrongly calculated the salary due payable to the petitioners only from the date of their engagement
till their attaining the age of superannuation whereas, the petitioners are entitled to get their salaries
till the date their office was shutdown and specially when the petitioners were made to work beyond
the age of superannuation and no order effecting termination of their service had been issued. [7]
The learned counsel also submitted that the petitioners have been denied their salaries since their
engagement for more than 10 years and thus they have been subjected to harassment and that the
petitioners have been made to suffer grievous financial crises throughout their service period since
their engagement till date and their rights to earn livelihood had been denied. The learned counsel
accordingly submitted that the petitioners are entitled to get their salaries due payable to them
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 3
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
along with interest for the delay in payment of their salaries. In support of her contentions, the
learned counsel cited the following judgments:-
(i) Judgment dated 15-01-2015 passed by a Division Bench of Allahabad High Court
in the case of "Shiv Shankar Mishra Vs. State of U.P. & ors." reported in (2015) 3 ADJ
302:
(2015) 3 AllLJ 551, wherein it has been held as under:-
"6. In the case of State of Kerala and Others Vs. M. Padmanabhan Nair, the Supreme
Court held as follows:
"Pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government
to its employees on their retirement but have become, under the decisions of this
Court, valuable rights and property in their hands and any culpable delay in
settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with the penalty of payment of
interest at the current market rate till actual payment."
"7. In a more recent decision in D.D. Tewari Vs. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam
Ltd., the Supreme Court observed that any culpable delay in settlement and
disbursement thereof is to be visited with penalty of payment of interest. Hence,
interest @ 9% on delayed payment was awarded to be paid within six weeks failing
which interest @ 18% p.a. would need to be paid. An erroneous withholding of
gratuity amount to which the employee is legally entitled, entails penalty on the
delayed payment.
"8. We, therefore, have come to the conclusion that the learned Single Judge was not
justified in declining the prayer for the payment of interest. Insofar as the payment
which was made to the appellant on 18 March 2014 is concerned, the appellant was
clearly entitled to the payment of interest from the date of the filing of the writ
petition in 2010 (Writ -A No. 47141 of 2010). The appellant would also be entitled to
the payment of interest on the pensionary payment which was unlawfully withheld
from March 2014 until actual payment is made. We direct that interest shall be
admissible to the appellant at the rate of 9% per annum from the date on which the
respective payments on account of arrears of salary, or as the case may be, towards
pensionary dues became due and payable as directed earlier. Interest shall be
computed in terms of the aforesaid directions within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order. The order of the learned Single
Judge declining interest shall to that extent stand set aside and be substituted by the
aforesaid directions.
The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of. There shall be no order as to costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 4
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
(ii) Judgment and order dated 11-08-2020 passed by a Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court in the case of "Dinavahi Lakshmi Kameswari Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh" reported in (2020)
5 ALT;(2020) 3 SCT 154, wherein it has been held as under:-
"46. Payment of salary or pension to the employees is only to eke out their livelihood
during their service by way of salary and after retirement by way of pension. If, whole
or part of the salary or pension is deferred, it amounts to denial of right to life
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Initially, right to livelihood
was not recognized as fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
But, later it was recognized as Fundamental Right by judicial interpretation to Article
21 of the Constitution of India."
"47. Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees right to life. The right to life
includes the right to livelihood. Time and again the Courts in India held that Article
21 is one of the great silences of the Constitution. The right to livelihood cannot be
subjected to individual fancies of the persons in authority. The sweep of the right to
life conferred by Article 21 is wide and far reaching. An important facet of that right is
the right to livelihood because, no person can live without the means of living, that is,
the means of livelihood. If the right to livelihood is not treated as a part of the
constitutional right to life, the easiest way of depriving a person of his right to life
would be to deprive him of his means of livelihood to the point of abrogation."
"53. Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in various judgments
(referred supra), widening the meaning of word 'right to life' includes 'right to
livelihood', right to livelihood is a fundamental right, and it is an integral part of right
to life guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore,
non-payment of part of eligible salary and pension to the employees in service and to
the employees retired from service by issuing G.O.Ms.No.26 dated 31.03.2020 and
G.O.Ms.No.37 dated 26.04.2020 is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India."
"54. The major contention of the petitioner from the beginning is that, deferment of
part of salary and non-payment of pension as stated above, is contravention of Article
300 of the Constitution of India. No doubt, as per Article 300-A of the Constitution of
India, no citizen of India be deprived of his/her right to property, except by authority
of law. As salary and pension form part of property of an individual to attract Article
300-A of the Constitution of India, such right cannot be taken away except by
authority of law."
"55. On a bare look at Article 300-A of the Constitution of India, any citizen of India
cannot be deprived of their right to property, except by authority under law. That
means a property of any citizen of India cannot be taken unless the State is
authorized to do so. In Shapoor M. Mehra v Allahabad Bank, (2012) 3 MhLJ 126,
wherein Bombay High Court opined that retiral benefits including pension and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 5
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
gratuity constitute a valuable right in property."
"57. Thus, both salary and pension payable to the employees in service or retired
from service falls within the definition of property under in Article 300-A of the
Constitution of India."
"58. Though the Constitution of India permits the State to deprive any person's right
in property by authority of law, the respondents were unable to show any provision
which authorized the State to defer payment of part of salary/pension to the
employees in service or retired from service. In the absence of any statute governing
deferment of salary or pension, deprivation of right to property by employees in
service or retired employees would amount to violation of constitutional right
guaranteed under Article 300-A of the Constitution of India. In this regard, it is
profitable to mention few judgments of the Apex Court and other Courts with regard
to right of the state to defer payment of salary, pension etc."
"66. No doubt, as discussed above, right to livelihood of a person can be deprived by
authority of law. Article 300-A of the Constitution of India, protects right of an
individual, but such right in the property can be deprived of save by authority of law."
"67. The right to property is now considered to be not only a constitutional or a
statutory right, but also a human right. Though, it is not a basic feature of the
constitution or a fundamental right, human rights are considered to be in realm of
individual rights, such as the right to health, the right to livelihood, the right to
shelter and employment etc. Now, human rights are gaining an even greater multi
faceted dimension. The right to property is considered, very much to be a part of such
new dimension (Vide:
Tukaram Kanna Joshi Vs. M.I.D.C., (2013) AIR SC 565."
"70. In the instant case on hand, except reduction of pensionary benefits under Rule
9 of the Andhra Pradesh Revised Pension Rules and reduction of salary in terms of
C.C.A Rules, if the government servant is found guilty of misconduct after conducting
necessary enquiry, no other procedure is available in any statute to defer payment of
salary, pension or defect of salary or pension in part or in full. But the question of all
the employees in the state guilty of any misconduct to defer payment of salary or
pension in the present case does not arise.
Therefore, deferring payment of part of salary to employees in service and pension to
retired employees is deprivation of a citizen in right to property. Such deprivation is
violative of fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21 and Constitutional Right
to property under Article 300-A of the Constitution of India and Human Rights of
livelihood as per Article 25(1) of Universal Declaration of Human Rights, since the
government servants after retirement being pensioners would be deprived of their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 6
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
livelihood, though they are under obligation to meet different expenses, including
maintaining their health condition for the rest of their life. Similarly, the employees
in service are bound to face certain difficulties, if salary payment is deferred either in
full or part for the reason that sometimes most of the employees would be under
obligation to repay housing loans and would be having other financial commitments,
their regular maintenance, besides deduction of income tax and other tax liabilities.
If, part of the amount is appropriated toward those liabilities, hardly the balance
amount which the employees would be receiving would not be sufficient for their
livelihood. While deciding such an issue, the Court has to take into consideration the
common man's and middle class employee's lifestyle and decide the case in a proper
perspective. If, an ordinary employee is maintaining minimum standard of life, he is
bound to incur different expenses towards education of his/her children, discharging
different liabilities etc. In those circumstances, it is difficult for any ordinary
employee to maintain himself/herself. Therefore, such deferment of part of salary or
pension creates dent on the financial condition of an ordinary employee or a
pensioner who is getting meagre income as a salary or pension. That would
temporarily deprive right to property, though not authorized by law, certainly
violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21 and Constitutional Right
to property under Article 300-A of the Constitution of India and Human Rights of
livelihood as per Article 25(1) of Universal Declaration of Human Rights and such
deprivation is illegal and impermissible."
"80. No doubt, on account of lockdown, there was no business activity in the State, as
a matter of fact, in the Country as well as State's generation of income or taxes by the
Government is reduced to minimum extent. Merely because the Government is
without any resources to meet the liability to pay full salary or pension to the
employees, the State employees cannot be deprived of their right to property in the
absence of any authority of law. But, when the State is under any obligation to pay the
salary to employees and pension to retired employees, the financial constraints is not
relevant for disowning the liability to pay the full salary and pensions to the
employees of the State and retired employees."
"81. Justice Krishna Iyer in Municipal Council Ratlam v. Shri Vardichand, (1980) AIR
SC 1622, while rejecting the plea of financial difficulty of the Municipal Council in
effectively protecting the Right to Health of the citizens, had observed as follows:
"Affirmative action to make the remedy effective is of the essence of the right which
otherwise becomes sterile. A responsible municipal council constituted for the precise
purpose of preserving public health and providing better finances cannot run away
from its principal duty by pleading financial inability. Decency and dignity are
non-negotiable facets of human rights". Of course, I agree that law is realistic and not
idealistic. What cannot be performed under given circumstances cannot be
prescribed as a norm to be carried out. From that angle, the progressive taxation
system of the country gives enough powers to the government to make its revenue
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 7
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
systems workable. However, in a Constitutional Democracy, it cannot be accepted
that the financial difficulties of the government can override the rights of the
citizens."
"82. Applying the principle laid down in the above judgment to the present facts of
the case, the State's dried up financial resources to meet the liability to pay salaries
and pensions is not a ground and the State cannot run away from discharging its duty
to pay salaries having extracted work from the employees and such act is violative of
the fundamental right guaranteed under Articles 21 and 300-A of the Constitution of
India and Human Right under Article 25(1) of Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Hence, the plea of lack of financial resources to meet the liability is not a
ground to defer payment of salary or pension."
"83. The deferred salaries for the month of March and April, 2020 are not yet paid to
the State Government employees on the ground of lack of financial resources. As
discussed above, it is not a ground to defer the salaries, pensions and for the delay in
payment of salary or pension, the respondent-State Government is liable to pay
interest on deferred part of salary and pension, as held by the Apex Court in Union of
India v. Justice S.S. Sandhawalia (Retd.) and others, (1994) 2 SCC 240, D.D. Tewari
(dead) through LRs v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and others, (2014) 8
SCC 894. In view of the law declared by the Apex Court in the judgments referred
supra, the State employees are entitled to claim interest on the deferred part of salary
and pension @ 12%. Though no interest is claimed, since the jurisdiction in public
interest litigation is equitable and the Court has to render justice to the public at
large. Hence, by examining equity jurisdiction interest @ 12% on the deferred salary
or pension is awarded."
"87. In the result, writ petition is allowed declaring G.O.Ms.No.26 dated 31.03.2020
and G.O.Ms.No.37 dated 26.04.2020 as illegal and arbitrary and consequently
set-aside. The State Government/Respondent Nos. 1 & 2 are directed-
i) To pay deferred salary/wage/remuneration /Honoraria on gross basis to all cadres
of State Government employees, including all PSUs/Government aided Institutions
/Organizations/ Universities/ Societies/ Autonomous bodies, semi-autonomous
bodies for the months of March and April, 2020, payable in the months of April and
May, 2020 respectively, within two months from today, together with interest @ 12%
per annum on the deferred salary.
ii) To pay deferred pension to the pensioners retired from State Government service
for the month of March, 2020 payable in the month of April, 2020, within two
months from today, together with interest @ 12% per annum on the deferred
pension."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 8
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
The above judgement and order dated 11-08-2020 passed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the
case of Dinavahi Lakshmi Kameswari was challenged by the State of Andhra Pradesh by filing an
SLP before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The challenge in the said SLP was restricted only to the
component of interest which had been imposed by the High Court. The said case was disposed of by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court by an order dated 08-02-2021 passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of "State of Andhra Pradesh & anr. Vs. Dinavahi Lakshmi Kameswari"
reported in (2021) 11 SCC 543, wherein it has been held as under:-
"14. We accordingly order and direct that in substitution of he interest rate of 12%
p.a. which has been awarded by the High Court, the Government of Andhra Pradesh
shall pay simple interest computed @ 6% p.a. on account of deferred salaries and
pensions within a period of thirty days from today. This direction shall, however in
the facts and circumstances, be confined to Caegories (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of GOMs
No. 26 dated 31-3-2020. We clarify that interest shall be paid to all pensioners of the
State @ 6% p.a. on the deferred portion, fo the period of delay. Having regard to the
prevailing bank interest, the rate of 12% p.a. which has been fixed by the High Court,
would need to be and in accordingly reduced."
[8] In the present case, there is no dispute with regard to the fact that both the petitioners were
engaged as Office Assistant and Machine Operator in the Office of the PRS Location, Imphal,
Moirangkhom on contract basis w.e.f. 28-08-2012 and 23-12-2011 respectively and until further
orders and that after their engagement, the petitioners discharged their official duties sincerely and
without any break and the authorities utilized their service till the month of February, 2020 when
their office was shutdown. The respondents also admitted the fact that the petitioners were not
given their remuneration/ salary during the entire period of their contract service only on account of
paucity of fund. The only exception taken by the respondents is that the petitioners are only entitled
to get their remuneration/ salary w.e.f. the date of their engagement till the date of their attaining
the age of superannuation, which falls on 28-02-2017 and 31-05-2019 respectively. There is also no
dispute as to the amount of monthly salary of the petitioners which have been fixed at Rs. 7,000/-
per month.
[9] In the orders dated 28-08-2012 and 23-12-2011 issued by the Director of Transport, Manipur, it
is clearly mentioned that the petitioners were engaged on contract basis with immediate effect and
until further orders. It is also an undisputed fact that except for the order dated 04-02-2021 issued
by the Director (Transport), Manipur shutting down the PRS at Imphal and Churachandpur w.e.f.
February, 2020, there is no other order terminating the service of the petitioners. In view of the
above undisputed fact and as the authorities utilized the service of the petitioners till the shutdown
of their office w.e.f. the month of February, 2020, the stand taken by the respondents that the
petitioners are entitled to get their remuneration/ salary only for the period w.e.f. the date of their
engagement till the date they attain their age of superannuation cannot countenance, specially in
view of the stand of the respondents that as per order dated 04-02-2021, the remuneration /salary
of all the contractual staff will be calculated upto February, 2020.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 9
Smt. Wahengbam Prava Devi vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 17 February, 2023
[10] After hearing the submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties and on careful
examination of the materials available on record, this Court is of the considered view that the
respondents withhold the entire salary due payable to the petitioners without any authority of law
and in complete violation of the constitutional provisions under Articles 21 and 300A of the
Constitution of India. The respondents have totally failed to discharge their obligations and they
cannot wash off their hands of the responsibility and liability of paying monthly salary to the
petitioners on account of paucity of fund and that paucity of fund cannot be a ground for denying
payment of salaries to the petitioners, which is the basis of subsistence for them and their
dependents. As the petitioners have been denied their salaries since their engagement for more than
ten years and as the petitioners have been made to suffer grievous financial crisis throughout their
service period since their engagement on contract basis till date and as their right to earn livelihood
had been denied by the respondents without any authority of law, this Court is of the considered
view that the petitioners are not only entitled to get their salaries due payable to them for the period
w.e.f. the date of their engagement till the month of February, 2020 but they are also entitled to get
interest for the delay payment of their salaries/ remuneration. Taking into consideration the
judgments cited hereinabove by the learned counsel for the petitioners, the present writ petition is
allowed with the following directions:-
(a) The respondents are directed to release the remuneration/ salaries due payable to
the petitioners for the period w.e.f. the date of their engagement i.e., 28-08-2012 in
respect of petitioner No. 1 and 23-12-2011 in respect of petitioner No. 2, till the
month of February, 2020 along with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date the monthly salary of the petitioners are due payable till the actual payment of
the entire amount; and
(b) The payment should be made within a period of two months from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order.
With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition is disposed of. Parties are to bear their own
costs.
JUDGE FR / NFR Devananda
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30675339/ 10
