Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28
February, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 294, 2020 (2) AKR 342, 2020 (2)
AKR 432
Author: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
Bench: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
1
®
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 28TH DAY OF FEBRUARY 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE N.S.SANJAY GOWDA
M.F.A.No.3600/2017
BETWEEN:
1. SMT. NARASAMMA,
W/O LATE GOVINDAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 57 YEARS,
2. MR. THIMMAIAH G,
S/O LATE GOVINDAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 24 YEARS,
3. MR. VENKATESH
S/O LATE GOVINDAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS,
ALL ARE R/AT KADUTHIPURU VILLAGE,
BAKTHARAHALLI POST,
DODDBELAVANGALA HOBLI,
DODDABALLAPUR TALUK,
BANGALORE RURAL DISTRICT.
PIN 561 203. ... APPELLANTS
(BY SRI. A.S. GIRISH, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. M/s MAGMA HDI GEN. INS.
CO. LTD., NO.36, H.M.ASTRID,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 1
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
2ND FLOOR, J.C.ROAD,
MINERVA CIRCLE, BANGALORE-02,
(INSURER OF LORRY BEARING No.KA-53-135)
BY ITS MANAGER.
2
2. MR. SURESH B.C., S/O CHANARAYAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS,
R/AT No.35, BETTAHALLI VILLAGE,
MANDIGERE POST, GOLDEN PALM ROAD,
NELAMANGALA TALUK, BANGALORE-562 123.
(OWNER OF LORRY BEARING NO.KA-53-135)
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. H.N. KESHAVA PRASHANTH, ADVOCATE
FOR R-1, R-2 SERVED)
THIS APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 173(1) OF MV
ACT AGAINST THE JUDGMENT AND AWARD
DATED:04.01.2017 PASSED IN MVC NO.60/2014 ON THE
FILE OF THE IV ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS
JUDGE, MEMBER, MACT, DODDABALLAPURA, BENGALURU
RURAL DISTRICT, PARTLY ALLOWING THE CLAIM PETITION
FOR COMPENSATION AND SEEKING ENHANCEMENT OF
COMPENSATION.
THIS APPEAL, HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR JUDGMENT, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT, THIS
DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
1. Being dissatisfied with the award of compensation of Rs.5,52,000/- for the death of one
Govindappa and challenging the exoneration of liability of the Insurance Company, the claimants
are in appeal.
2. It was contended before the Tribunal that Govindappa was traveling as a coolie on 05.02.2014 in
a lorry bearing registration No.KA-53-1035 towards Rayarapalya for loading of wooden poles and at
about 9.45 a.m., when the driver of the lorry took a turn at a high speed, Govindappa fell down from
the truck and as a result of which, he sustained grievous injuries and ultimately, succumbed to the
injuries. It was stated that deceased was aged 55 years and was working as a coolie in the lorry when
he suffered the unfortunate accident. It was stated that the lorry belonged to respondent No.2
therein and he was paying the deceased Rs.10,000/- per month and sought for compensation for the
death Govindappa.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 2
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
3. The said claim petition was resisted by the Insurance Company. As usual, it denied all the
averments. It also put forth the plea that Govindappa was standing in the carriage of the lorry and
was not proceeding as a coolie. It was contended that he was gratuitous passenger traveling in the
rear of the lorry and when the lorry took a sudden turn, Govindappa, who was standing in the
extreme rear of the lorry, fell down. It was contended that the policy issued by it did not cover the
risk of it and therefore, it was not liable to indemnify the 2nd respondent - owner.
4. The 2nd respondent - owner did not appear, despite service of notice. Hence, he was placed
exparte.
5. The Tribunal, on consideration of evidence adduced before it, came to the conclusion that
Govindappa was traveling in the lorry and he was thrown from the lorry when the lorry turned
abruptly and his death occurred due to the injuries sustained in the accident. The Tribunal also
recorded a finding that deceased was a gratuitous passenger and the Insurance Company was,
therefore, not liable to saddle with compensation.
6. The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the claimants had failed to prove that Govindappa had
been employed by the 2nd respondent for loading the wooden poles in the lorry and it also came to
the conclusion that had Govindappa been inside the cabin of the lorry, he would not have thrown
away from the cabin as the cabin was covered with doors. The Tribunal proceeded to record a
finding that Govindappa was gratuitous passenger in the lorry and since the lorry cannot carry any
passengers by virtue of Rule 100 of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 (for short, 'the
Rules'), the Insurance Company would not be liable to pay compensation. In order to support its
reasoning, the Tribunal placed reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court in the case of NATIONAL
INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED Vs. CHOLLETI BHARATAMMA AND OTHERS - AIR 2008 SC
484 and THOKCHOM ONGBI SANGETA & ANOTHER - 2008 ACJ 6.
7. The Tribunal, as regards compensation, determined the monthly income of the deceased at
Rs.6,000/- and proceeded to award the following compensation:
1 Loss of dependency 5,28,000/-
2 Loss of love and affection 10,000/-
3 Funeral expenses 8,000/-
4 Transportation charges 6,000/-
TOTAL 5,52,000/-
8. Learned counsel for the claimants submitted that there was clear evidence on
record that deceased was in fact traveling in the lorry as a coolie and he was in fact
sitting in the left side of the front cabin. He stated that eye witness examined by the
claimant, i.e., Ravikumar (P.W.2) categorically asserted this fact and nothing was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 3
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
elicited in the cross-examination to disbelieve his evidence.
9. Learned counsel also contended that liability of the Insurance Company would still
lie in view of the fact that the vehicle in question was covered under 'commercial
vehicle class package policy' under which the Insurance Company had collected
separate premium under Employees Compensation Act for the
driver/cleaner/employee in a sum of Rs.50/-. He further contended that since there
was clear evidence that deceased was an employee, engaged for loading and
unloading, the Insurance Company could not have been exonerated of its liability.
10. On the contrary, learned counsel for the Insurance Company contended that the
sums awarded by the Tribunal were just and proper and exoneration of liability on
the Insurance Company could not be found fault with. He also contended that the
finding of the Tribunal that deceased was a gratuitous passenger was based on cogent
evidence and should not be upset by this Court.
11. I have considered the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties and
perused the materials on record.
12. The claim put forth in the petition was that deceased was traveling as a coolie in
the lorry and he fell down from the lorry when the lorry took a sudden turn.
13. The respondent - Insurance Company took up the contention that deceased was
traveling in the rear of the lorry and they could not, therefore, be saddled with the
liability.
14. By implication, the contention was that had the deceased traveled within the
cabin of the lorry, there could be the possibility of Insurance Company being saddled
with the liability, if it was proved that deceased was traveling as an employee.
15. It is not in dispute that the lorry was a commercial vehicle and a package policy
was issued by the respondent -
Insurance Company, under which, apart from basic own damage covered and basic third party
cover, personal accident cover to the owner/driver and the legal liability arising under Employees
Compensation Act for the driver/cleaner/employee was also covered.
16. The contention of the learned counsel for the Insurance Company that since the vehicle in
question was a goods vehicle, no person could have been carried in the said vehicle and if any such
person was carried, their liability would not arise, is incorrect. Even according to the package policy,
carrying capacity of persons in the vehicle including the driver was stated to be 3.
17. Rule 100 of the Rules provides for carriage of persons in goods vehicle. It reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 4
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
"100. Carriage of persons in goods vehicle.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this rule,
no person shall be carried in a goods vehicle:
Provided that the owner or the hirer or a bona fide employee of the owner or the hirer
of the vehicle carried free of charge or a police officer in uniform traveling on duty
may be carried in a goods vehicle, the total number of persons so carried,-
(i) in light transport goods vehicle having registered laden weight less than 990 kgs.
not more than one;
(ii) in any other light transport goods vehicle not more than three; and
(iii) in any goods vehicle not more than seven:
Provided that the provisions of sub-clauses (ii) and
(iii) of the above proviso shall not be applicable to the vehicles plying on inter-State
routes or the vehicles carrying goods from one city to another city.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule
(i), but subject to the provisions of sub-rules (4) and (5), a Regional Transport
Authority may, by an order writing permit that a larger number of persons may be
carried in the vehicle, on condition that no goods at all are carried, free of charge in
connection with the work for which the vehicle is used, and that such other
conditions as may be specified by the Regional Transport Authority are observed, and
where the vehicle is required to be covered by a permit, the conditions of the permit.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
rules (1) and (2), but subject to the provisions of sub- rules (4) and (5),-
(a) for the purpose of celebrations in connection with the Republic Day or
Independence Day or any other public congregation, the Regional Transport Officer;
(b) for the purpose of enabling of co-operative society or class of co-operative
societies owning or hiring a goods vehicle to carry its members under its authority in
such goods vehicle when used for the purpose of carrying goods of the society in the
ordinary course of its business, the Secretary of the Regional Transport Authority;
(c) where it considers expedient in public interest in respect of vehicles owned or
hired by it, and in respect of other vehicles on such inescapable grounds of urgent
nature to be specified in the order, the State Government may, by general or special
order, permit goods vehicle to be used for the carriage of persons for the purposes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 5
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
aforesaid, and subject to such conditions, as may be specified in the order.
(4) No persons shall be carried in any goods vehicle,-
(a) unless an area of not less than 0.40 square metre of the floor of the vehicle is kept
open for each person; and
(b) in such manner-
(i) that such person when carried on
goods is otherwise in danger of falling
from the vehicles;
(ii) that any part of his body, when he is
in a sitting position is at a height
exceeding three metres from the
surface upon which the vehicle rests.
(5) The provisions of this rule shall not apply to motor vehicles registered under
Section 60.
(6) No person other than an attendant or attendants required by Rule 226 shall be
carried on a trailer which is a goods vehicles."
18. As could be seen from Rule 100 of the Rules, as a general rule, no person is allowed to be carried
in a goods vehicle. However, a proviso has been appended to the said rule, which states that the
owner or the hirer or a bonafide employee of the owner or the hirer of the vehicle could be carried
free of charge in the goods vehicle and the total number of persons so carried would be not more
than one (in light transport goods vehicle having registered laden weight less than 990 kgs.), not
more than three (in any other light transport goods vehicle) and not more than seven (in any goods
vehicle). It is, therefore, clear that in respect of goods vehicle also, by virtue of the proviso, a
bonafide employee of the owner or the hirer of the vehicle can be carried free of charge, so long as
number of people do not exceed the limits specified in Sub-clause (i) to (iii) of sub-rule (1) of Rule
100.
19. The manner in which the persons can be carried in goods vehicle is however not indicated in
sub-rule (1). However, sub-rule (2) starts with a non-obstante clause which states that
notwithstanding what is stated in sub-rule (1), the Regional Transport Authority may by an order in
writing, permit larger number of persons to be carried in the vehicle, of course, on condition that no
goods at all be carried in connection with the work for which the vehicle is used. Sub-rule (2),
therefore, indicates that if no goods are being carried, the number of persons in excess of one
specified in Sub-rule (1) can be carried subject to special permission from the Regional Transport
Officer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 6
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
20. Sub-rule (3) further goes on to say that for the purpose of celebrations in connection with the
Republic Day or Independence Day or any other public congregation, the Regional Transport
Officer, may, by general or special order, permit goods vehicle to be used for carriage of persons for
the purposes mentioned in sub-clause (a) to (c) of sub-rule (3).
21. Sub-rule (4) thereafter specifies the limitations in respect of carriage of persons. It states that no
person shall be carried in any goods vehicle, unless an area of not less than 0.40 square metre of the
floor of the vehicle is kept open for each person and there is no danger of falling down from the
vehicle.
22. A complete reading of Rule 100 of the Rules indicates that notwithstanding the general dictum
of not allowing carriage of persons in a goods vehicle, the law does permit a number of people to be
carried in a goods vehicle. Sub-rules (2) to (4) indicate that the persons so carried can actually be
carried in the goods vehicle. A goods vehicle by its very definition does not have permit of carrying
passengers. This would obviously mean that the persons to be carried would be in the area where
the goods are to be stored. In other words, the Rule itself provides for carriage of passengers in the
area reserved for carrying goods, under special conditions, depending on the weight of the vehicle
and as a matter of right, the owner or the hirer or the bonafide employee of the owner or the hirer
can travel in a goods vehicle. It, therefore, follows that if an employee of the owner of the vehicle is
being carried in a goods vehicle, it cannot be illegal and such a person cannot be construed as a
gratuitous passenger.
23. Since the rule itself permits carriage of persons in the vehicle, it is not material whether the
person travels within the cabin or outside the cabin. So long as number of people traveling in the
goods vehicle is specified under Rule 100 of the rules, the goods vehicle is permitted to carry
passengers.
24. Viewed from this legal background, it has to be now seen whether the deceased was traveling in
the goods vehicle as an employee of the owner of the vehicle.
25. The owner of the vehicle was placed exparte. A co- employee was examined as P.W.2. He sated
that along with two other coolies including deceased, he was traveling in the lorry as coolies/loaders
and they have been working as such for past two years. He stated that they were going from their
village towards Rayarapalya for loading wooden poles. It is thus clear that there was clear evidence
of co-employee as to the deceased being traveling as an employee i.e., as a coolie and he fell down
from the lorry actually when he was sitting in the left side of the front cabin.
26. The assertion of P.W.2, the co-employee that they were traveling in the lorry as coolies/loaders
was not really assailed by the Insurance Company during the course of cross- examination. In my
view, since the assertion of the claimants in the claim petition and the evidence of co- employee
went without any denial from the owner of the lorry and the assertion of the co-employee was not
really assailed during the course of cross-examination, it will have to be held that deceased was in
fact an employee in the goods vehicle.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 7
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
27. As stated above, since the goods carriage vehicle does permit carriage of passengers, so long as
they were employees and further more since in the instant case the Insurance Company has taken
extra premium to cover the legal liability under the Employees Compensation Act for
driver/cleaner/employees, the Insurance Company would be liable to cover all employees carried in
the goods carriage vehicle, subject to the condition that maximum number of persons carried in the
goods carriage does not exceed the number specified in Rule 100 of the Rules.
28. In the instant case, it is nobody's case that the goods vehicle was carrying passengers in excess of
the limits specified in Rule 100 of the Rules. Therefore, it follows that the Insurance Company would
be liable to satisfy the award in respect of deceased who was an employee/coolie traveling in the
goods vehicle.
29. Learned counsel for the Insurance Company contended that in view of the decision of the Apex
Court in the case of NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED Vs. CHOLLETI
BHARATAMMA AND OTHERS - AIR 2008 SC 484, which was followed by this Court in
MFA.No.40/2010 disposed of on 08.06.2012, the Insurance Company would not be liable. In the
said case, the Apex Court has dealt with a case in relation to an which accident which had occurred
in Andhra Pradesh and in those cases, there was no rule similar to Rule 100 of the Karnataka Motor
Vehicles Rules in operation. The Apex Court interpreting Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act
rendered a decision that the owner of the goods means only the person who travels in the vehicle.
30. Since in the State of Karnataka, Rule 100 of the Rules provides for carriage of passengers even in
goods vehicle, the Insurance Company would have to cover the liability in respect of those persons
who were permitted to be carried in the goods vehicle. Since there is no absolute bar in Karnataka
for carriage of passengers in a goods vehicle, I hold that the Insurance Company would be liable to
satisfy the liability in this case.
31. As far as compensation is concerned, the Tribunal has determined the monthly income of the
deceased at Rs.6,000/- per month since there was no credible evidence to establish the actual
income of the deceased. In my view, in such a situation, the notional income of Rs.8,500/- as
determined by the Karnataka Legal Services Authority for the motor vehicle accident victims of the
year 2014 would have to be adopted. Since it is a case of death, the future prospects of 10% would be
required to be added to the monthly income, which makes the monthly income of deceased to
Rs.9,350/-. Out of which, 1/3rd is required to be deducted towards his personal expenses, which in
turn makes his monthly income to Rs.6,234/-. Having regard to the age of the deceased i.e., 55
years, the multiplier of 11 is required to be adopted. Thus, the claimants would be entitled to loss of
dependency at Rs.8,22,888/- (6234 X 12 X 11).
32. The 1st claimant being the widow, she alone would be entitled for loss of consortium in a sum of
Rs.44,000/- and a further sum of Rs.33,000/- is also awarded under conventional heads.
33. In the result, the appeal is allowed in part. The claimants are held entitled to compensation of
Rs.8,99,888/-. The enhanced compensation shall carry interest at 6 % p.a.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 8
Smt Narasamma vs M/S Magma Hdi Gen Ins Co Ltd., on 28 February, 2020
34. The Insurance Company is directed to deposit the amount within six weeks from the date of
receipt of a certified copy of this judgment.
Sd/-
JUDGE PKS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82877523/ 9
