Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March,
2025
Author: K.Somashekar
Bench: K.Somashekar
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 26TH DAY OF MARCH, 2025
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE K.SOMASHEKAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VENKATESH NAIK T
REGULAR FIRST APPEAL NO.1759 OF 2020 (PAR-POS)
BETWEEN:
SMT. S.SAVITHRAMMA
D/O LATE Y.SUBBA RAO
AGED ABOUT 65 YEARS
R/AT YADAVANAHALLI VILLAGE
ATTIBELE HOBLI, ANEKAL TALUK
BANGALORE RURAL DISTRICT
BENGALURU - 562 107.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI. K.G.RAGHAVAN, SR. COUNSEL FOR
SRI. SHREERAM T. NAYAK, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. SMT.S.PADMAVATHAMMA
D/O LATE Y. SUBBA RAO
AGED ABOUT 62 YEARS
R/AT YADAVANAHALLI VILLAGE
ATTIBELE HOBLI, ANEKAL TALUK
BANGALORE RURAL DISTRICT
BENGALURU 562107.
2. SRI S. VENKATARAM
S/O LATE Y.SUBBARAO
AGED ABOUT 78 YEARS
R/AT NO.181/1
B.S.V. REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
2
3. SRI S. SHIVASHANKARAIAH
S/O LATE Y. SUBBARAO
AGED ABOUT 73 YEARS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 1
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
R/AT NO.181/1
B.S.V.REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
4. SRI S. MURALIDHAR
S/O LATE Y. SUBBA RAO
AGED ABOUT 67 YEARS
R/AT NO.181/1
B.S.V. REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
5. SMT. NAGARATHNAMMA
W/O S. VENKATARAM
AGED ABOUT 58 YEARS
R/AT NO.181/1
B.S.V. REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
SINCE DEAD BY LR'S
DIED ON 17-08-2018
5A. SRI S. V. SURESH
S/O S. VENKATARAM
AND LATE NAGARATHNAMMA,
AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS,
R/AT NO.181/1, 2ND CROSS
B.S.V. REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
5B. SMT. VANI
D/O S. VENKATARAM
AND LATE NAGARATHNAMMA
AGED ABOUT 46 YEARS
3
R/AT NO.181/1, 2ND CROSS
B.S.V. REDDY LAYOUT
RAMAMURTHY NAGAR
BANGALORE 560016.
6. MR. NAZEER AHMED
S/O SHEIK KASIM SAB
AGED ABOUT 74 YEARS
R/AT NO.53/1, 1ST MAIN
NAGARBHAVI ROAD
CAUVERY LAYOUT, VIJAYANAGAR
BANGALORE - 560 040.
7. SRI. S. P. JAYAPALA
S/O LATE S. PAPANNA
SINCE DEAD BY LR'S
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 2
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
7A. SMT. SUMANGALA
W/O LATE S.P.JAYAPALA
AGED ABOUT 55 YEARS
7B. SMT. SHWETHA
D/O LATE S. P. JAYAPALA
AGED ABOUT 34 YEARS
7C. SMT. SOURABHA
D/O LATE S. P. JAYAPALA
AGED ABOUT 32 YEARS
RESPONDENT NO.7a TO 7c ARE
R/AT BRAHMARAMBHA NILAYA,
NO.132, 1ST MAIN ROAD
6TH CROSS, BAPUJI LAYOUT
CHADNRA LAYOUT, BANGALORE 40.
8. SRI GURUNANJAMURTHAPPA
S/O LATE D. N. RUDRAIAH
R/AT NO.53/1, 1ST MAIN
NAGARBAVI ROAD, CAUVERI LAYOUT
VIJAYANAGAR, BANGELROE 560040.
4
9. SMT. B. ESHWARAMMA
W/O LATE P. NATARAJ
AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS
10. SRI. N. MANJUNATH
S/O LATE P. NATARAJ
AGED ABOUT 40 YEARS
11. SRI. P. N. VISHWANATH REDDY
S/O LATE P. NATARAJ
AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS
12. SMT. N. USHA
D/O LATE P. NATARAJ
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS
RESPONDENTS NO.9 TO 12 ARE
R/AT NO.181, R.V.ROAD
V.V.PURAM, BANGALORE 560004.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. PRAKASH B.N., ADV. FOR R7(A) TO (C), R8;
SRI. V.N.SHANKAR GOWDA, ADV. &
SRI. MURALI B.D., ADV. FOR R1;
SRI. N.K.RAMESH, ADV. FOR R9 TO R12;
R2, R5(A), R5(B), R11-SERVED AND UNREPRESENTED)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 3
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
THIS RFA IS FILED UNDER SECTION 96 R/W ORDER 41,
RULE 1 OF THE CPC, PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT
AND DECREE DATED 07.02.2020 PASSED IN OS NO.2653/2006
ON THE FILE OF THE SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE AND JMFC., AT
ANEKAL BANGALORE RURAL DISTRICT.
THIS RFA HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR
JUDGMENT ON 17.03.2025 COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, K. SOMASHEKAR J., DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
5
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE K.SOMASHEKAR
AND
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VENKATESH NAIK T
CAV JUDGMENT
(PER: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE K.SOMASHEKAR) The appellant Smt. S. Savitharamma has
preferred this Regular First Appeal under Section 96 read with Order 41 Rule 1 CPC, being aggrieved
by the judgment and decree dated 07.02.2020 passed in O.S.No. 2653/2006 by the Senior Civil
Judge and JMFC, Anekal, Bangalore Rural District, dismissing the suit for partition and separate
possession.
2. Heard the learned Senior Counsel Shri K.G. Raghavan representing the learned counsel Sri
Shreeram T Nayak for the appellant / plaintiff. Further, we have heard the learned counsel Sri V.N
Shankar Gowda and Learned counsel Sri Murali B.D. representing Respondent No.1;
learned counsel Shri N.K. Ramesh who is representing Respondent nos.9 to 12 and Shri Prakash
B.N. representing Respondent nos. 7 (A) and (C ) and Respondent No.8.
Respondent Nos. 2, 5(A), 5(B) and 11 remain absent and unrepresented.
3. The facts of the case leading up to this appeal are as under:
The present appeal arises from a dispute regarding the ownership and sale of land
bearing Survey No. 50/4, measuring 6 acres 16 guntas, located in Yadavanahalli
Village, Attibele Hobli, Anekal Taluk. The property originally belonged to late Y.
Subbarao, who purchased it under a registered sale deed in the year 1948-49. On
February 15, 1973, he executed a Will, bequeathing the property to his daughters,
Smt. Savithramma / Appellant herein, and Smt. Padmavathamma / Respondent No.1
herein, each receiving a 3-acre share. Upon his death, both sisters inherited the
property under the terms of the Will. The property was converted from agricultural to
non-agricultural use on March 18, 1989, under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 4
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
4. On January 20, 1995, the Appellant herein / Savithramma executed a registered General Power of
Attorney (GPA) in favour of her sister-in-law, Smt. S. Nagarathnamma / Respondent No.5, granting
her authority, including the power to sell her portion of the share measuring 3 acres. On September
13, 1995, the Appellant herein / Savithramma also executed a notarized but unregistered GPA in
favour of Respondent No.6 / Nazeer Ahmed, in respect of her undivided share in the 6-acre land. On
the same day, Respondent No.1 / Padmavathamma, similarly executed a GPA in favour of Nazeer
Ahmed for her undivided share in the 6 acre land.
5. Simultaneously, the Appellant and the first Respondent entered into separate agreements, to sell
their respective shares. The Appellant agreed to sell her share to one R.K. Govindaraj for a sum of
Rs.39,00,000/- and received an advance of Rs.1,00,000/-, while the first Respondent agreed to sell
her share to one R. Ashok Kumar for the same price, also receiving Rs.1,00,000/- as advance. Over
the next two years, both the Appellant and Respondent No.1 received additional payments. On
September 14, 1995, each received a sum of Rs.4,00,000/-
as further advance, followed by the Appellant receiving Rs.20,00,000/- on March 10, 1997.
Respondent No.1 received a sum of Rs.20,00,000/- on March 5, 1996, and an additional sum of
Rs.10,00,000/- on June 8, 1997. On September 15, 1996, the agreement holders, R.K. Govindaraj
and R. Ashok Kumar, nominated N.R. Ramesh as their nominee to purchase the land through a
Deed of Nomination.
6. On September 21, 2002, Respondent No.6, acting as the power of attorney holder, executed two
sale deeds:
one for 2 acres in favour of Respondent No.8 and another 2 acres in favour of
deceased Respondent No.7.
Subsequently, on October 11, 2002, the Appellant issued a legal notice cancelling the
GPA given to Respondent No.5 / Nagarathnamma, followed by a registered
cancellation deed dated October 17, 2002. However, there was no proof of service of
cancellation of notice on Respondent No.5.
7. Despite the cancellation, on December 28, 2005, the first Respondent and Respondent No.5,
acting as the Appellant's power of attorney holder, executed further sale and consent deeds. They
executed a sale deed for 1 gunta and 15 guntas of 'A' category phut kharab land in favour of deceased
Respondent No.7, along with consent deeds confirming the earlier sale dated 21.09.2022 made to
Respondents No.7 and 8. Based on these transactions, mutation entries were updated in favour of
the purchasers.
8. On November 25, 2006, the Appellant filed a suit in O.S.No.2653/2006 seeking declaration,
injunction, and partition, challenging the validity of the GPA executed in favour of Respondent
No.6, the sale deeds executed by him, and the consent deeds executed by Respondent No.5 after the
alleged cancellation of the GPA. The Appellant / plaintiff argued that the GPA in favour of
Respondent No.6 was fraudulent and that she never intended to sell her share of the property.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 5
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
9. In response to the summons defendants / respondents appeared and filed their written
statement.
Respondent Nos.1 and 5 / Defendants No.1 and 5 in their written statement, admitted that father of
the appellant / plaintiff executed a Will on 08.01.1973. They further contended that appellant and
Respondent No.1 only acquired the right over the suit schedule property. They further contended
that Respondent No.1 and appellant had jointly executed an agreement of sale on 18.08.1998 and on
30.10.2003 in favour of one Gopal. The suit for specific performance of the contract is pending
before the Trial Court. Respondent No.5 admitted that appellant had executed a GPA in her favour
and same was cancelled on 08.10.2002. Respondent No.1 and 5 had almost supported the case of
the appellant.
10. Respondent No.2 had filed written statement admitting the plaint averments and submitted that
the suit may be decreed. Legal heirs of Respondent Nos.7 and 8 had jointly filed written statement
stating that they had purchased the suit schedule property from Respondent No.6 under the sale
deed dated 08.10.2002. They also admitted that one Subba Rao, the father of the appellant, was the
owner of the suit schedule property and he bequeathed the suit schedule property to the appellant
and Respondent No.1 through a Will dated 08.01.1973. They contended that the appellant had
appointed Respondent No.6 by name Nazeer Ahmed as the GPA dated 13.09.1995. They further
contended that the appellant gave authority to the Respondent No.6 to execute the sale deed on her
behalf in respect of the suit schedule property.
11. The Respondents further contended that Respondent No.6 had produced the original Will before
them and on verifying the GPA and Will they purchased the suit schedule property from Respondent
No.6 who acted on behalf of the Respondent No.1. Respondent No.1 did not challenge the GPA and
the sale deed. However, the appellant has made false claim over the suit schedule property. These
Respondents further contended that the appellant has executed a registered GPA in favour of
Respondent No.5 and that she has also executed the consent deed in their favour.
12. Respondent Nos.9 and 11 had filed written statement supporting the claim of the appellant. They
were the legal heirs of one Nataraj who was a party to the Tri-
party agreement. Hence, they supported the appellant.
13. Based on the pleadings, the Trial Court had framed the following issues and additional issues:
"1. Whether the plaintiff proves that herself and 1st defendant are the absolute
owners of the suit property?
2. Whether the plaintiff further proves that, defendant No.6 is in no way concerned
with the suit property and he created the power of attorney and fraudulently executed
sale deed dated 08.10.2002 in favour of defendants No.7 and 8?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 6
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
3. Whether the plaintiff further proves that defendant No.6 has fraudulently obtained
power of attorney holder and has sold 2 acres of land in the suit property in favour of
defendant No.7 and another 2 acres of land in favour of defendant No.8?
4. Whether the defendant Nos.9 to 12 prove that Late Sri. P. Nataraj purchased 1 acre
of land out of 6 acres 1 guntas in Sy.No.50/4 by another registered sale deed
dated:31.10.2006?
5. Whether the defendants No.9 to 12 further prove that the registered sale deed
dated:28.02.2005 and two consent deeds dated:28.12.2005 are null and void?
6. Whether the defendant Nos.9 to 12 further prove that the tri-party agreement is
executed by plaintiff, 1st defendant and others?
7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the relief as sought for?
8. Whether order to decree?
Addl Issue
1. Whether defendant No.8 and legal heirs of defendant No.7 prove the deceased
defendant No.7 was the absolute owner of the suit schedule property?
2. Whether legal heirs of defendant No.7 and defendant No.8 prove that they have
been in possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property ?"
14. The appellant / Plaintiff examined herself as P.W.1 and got marked 46 documents as Exhibits P.1
to P.46.
Legal heirs of the Respondent No.7 / defendant No.7 examined himself as D.W.1; Respondent No.8
/ Defendant No.8 examined himself as D.W.2 and Respondent No.11 / Defendant No.11 examined
himself as D.W.4. Respondents / Defendants side marked 82 documents as Exhibits D.1 to D.82.
Respondents / Defendants had examined one witness as D.W.3.
15. The Trial Court, on hearing the arguments of both the parties and on an examination of the
material on record including the various rulings relied on by the counsel for the respective parties,
proceeded to delete Issue No.3 and answered Issue Nos.1, 2, 4 to 7 in the negative, Addl Issue Nos.1
and 2 in the affirmative and consequently dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff / appellant with
costs. The trial court ruled against the Plaintiff namely the Appellant / Savithramma, holding that
she failed to prove fraud in the execution of the GPA in favour of Respondent No.6 and that the
transactions were legally valid. The court affirmed the validity of the power of attorney, sale deeds,
and consent deeds, and dismissed the suit. It is the said judgment and decree which is under
challenge in this appeal urging various grounds.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 7
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
16. The learned Senior counsel for the appellant Shri K.G. Raghavan contends that that the Trial
court has erroneously framed the issues in the case. He contends that the foremost issue should
have focused on Exhibits D7 and D8, the Powers of Attorney. Instead, the court framed the issues
incorrectly by questioning whether Defendant No.6 fraudulently executed sale deeds based on a
fabricated power of attorney. The burden of proof should have been placed on the beneficiaries of
the sale transactions, especially since Defendant No.6 neither appeared nor filed a written
statement. Section 102 of the Indian Evidence Act mandates that the party asserting the execution of
a document must prove its authenticity. The law does not recognize the concept of a negative
burden, and it is unfair to expect the appellant to prove that she did not execute the document. Once
a document is disputed, the party asserting its execution must establish its validity. Moreover, the
trial court recorded findings on the consent deed without framing a proper issue, further vitiating
the judgment and necessitating interference. In support of his contention, the learned Senior
counsel for the Appellant has relied on a judgment in the case of Wali Mohammad Chaudhari and
others v. Jamal Uddin Chaudhari (AIR 1950 All 524), the relevant portion of which is extracted thus:
"4. Under Section 85 of the Evidence Act, there is presumption that every document
purporting to be a power of attorney, and to have been executed before and
authenticated by, a notary public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, British Counsel or
Vice-Counsel or representative of Her Majesty or of the Central Government, was so
executed and authenticated. The authentication is not merely attestation, but
something more. It means that the person authenticating has assured himself of the
identity of the person who has signed the instrument as well as the fact of execution.
It is for this reason that a power of attorney bearing the authentication of a notary
public or an authority mentioned in S. 85 is taken as sufficient evidence of the
execution of the instrument by the person who appears to be the executant on the
face of it. The presumption, no doubt, is rebuttable. But unless rebutted the
presumption stands and the document can be admitted in evidence as a document
executed by the person alleged to have executed it without any further proof: vide
Haggitt v. Ineff, (1855) 24 L.J. Ch. 120 : (3 W.R. 141) and Performing Right Society
Ltd. v. Indian Morning Post Restaurant, A.I.R. (26) 1939 Bom. 347."
17. The learned counsel for the Appellant clearly asserted that the appellant never executed the
power of attorney on the basis of which the Defendant No.6 / Sri Nazeer Ahmed, had purported to
sell the property to Defendants No.7 and No.8. The Appellant never claimed that the power of
attorney was executed fraudulently or under voidable circumstances. However, the Trial court
erroneously emphasized the requirement for extensive pleadings on fraud. The court misdirected
itself by treating the dispute as one involving fraud, rather than recognizing that the Appellant
simply denied executing the power of attorney. If the Appellant proves non-execution, the sale deeds
automatically stand void. It is contended that the Trial court's focus on fraud-related pleadings was
unnecessary and misplaced.
18. The learned counsel for the Appellant contends that the Trial court disregarded established legal
precedents while delivering its judgment. Both parties cited as many as 37 judgments, yet the Trial
Court failed to analyze or apply any of them. Courts are duty-bound to examine cited precedents and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 8
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
assess their relevance to the facts of the case. Instead, the Trial Court merely noted the precedents
without explaining whether they were applicable or not. This blatant disregard for precedent,
violates the principles of judicial discipline, rendering the judgment legally unsustainable and
warranting interference.
19. The learned counsel for the Appellant denied executing the power of attorney marked as Exhibits
D7 and D8. Defendant No.6, the alleged power of attorney holder, did not appear before the Court
or file a written statement. Defendants No.7 and No.8 made no effort to secure his testimony, which
was crucial since they derived their claim from him. The appellant consistently denied executing the
document during cross-examination, even when confronted with it. The legal representatives of
Defendant No.7 merely asserted that the property was purchased based on the power of attorney but
failed to establish its authenticity. In support of their claim, the Learned counsel for the Appellant
has relied on the judgment in the case of Electric Construction & Equipment Company Ltd. V. Jagjit
Electric Works (AIR 1984 DEL 363), wherein the relevant portion of the judgment reads thus:
"11. It is useful to note that Section 85 raises a presumption about the execution of a
Power of attorney, provided two conditions are satisfied. Firstly, it must be executed
before a Notary Public and secondly, it must be authenticated by a Notary Public. In
this case, there is no authentication at all. There is no statement of facts by the
Notary Public regarding the manner of execution or the persons executing the
document. If reference is made to the judgments cited before us, the contrast is
striking. In the Case of the City bank, the authentication made by the Notary Public
in New York covers nearly two printed pages of the Report and quotes extensively the
circumstances in which the General Power of Attorney was executed. Similarly, in the
case of the National & Grindlays Bank Ltd., the authentication shows that the seal of
the Bank was impressed on the power of attorney in the presence of the Notary and
the same was the genuine seal of the Bank. Thus, it Was the authentication that
proved both the execution as well as the due execution of the power of attorney and,
therefore, satisfied the test laid down in Section 85 of the Evidence Act.
14. These cases are very different from the one before us. Here, we have a document
stated to be a power of attorney purported to have been executed by the Electric
Construction and Equipment Company Ltd. It states that the common seal has been
affixed in the presence of a Director and Chief Accountant and it also states that these
persons have been authorised by a resolution of the Board of Directors to
authenticate this. However, it does not state that it was executed before a Notary
Public and nor does it bear any authentication by a Notary Public regarding the
manner of execution, etc. It is, therefore, very essential to stress the two ingredients
which are contained in Section 85 of the Evidence Act, viz., execution before the
Notary Public and the authentication by the Notary Public. The words are "executed
before, and authenticated by". Both these conditions must be satisfied. It appears
that neither condition is satisfied in this case because the common seal was affixed on
27th November, 1973, and there is merely an attestation by a Notary Public on 13th
December, 1973. There is no authentication at all. So, Section 85 of the Evidence Act
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 9
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
does not apply to raise any presumption in favour of this power of attorney."
20. The learned counsel for the Appellant further contended that the Cross-examination revealed
that Exhibits D7 and D8 lacked signatures from the parties, containing only a thumb impression on
the last page. The witness could not confirm whether the thumb impression belonged to the
appellant. Furthermore, it emerged that the son-in-law of a key witness (DW1) was a director of
Urban Space Projects and Home Land Resorts Private Limited (Exhibit P48). The appellant
demonstrated that these companies had previously filed a suit over the same property, which was
dismissed. This strongly suggests that Home Land Resorts Private Limited and Urban Space
Projects fabricated the power of attorney, using the names of Nazeer Ahmed and Defendant No.7 to
fraudulently claim ownership.
21. Defendants No.7 and No.8 failed to establish consideration for the sale transaction. Defendant
No.8 (DW2) admitted purchasing the property based on the power of attorney but feigned ignorance
regarding the involvement of Urban Space Projects and Home Land Resorts Private Limited. The
cross-examination further revealed that he did not know where Nazeer Ahmed resided and had not
verified his identity when executing the sale deed. Defendant No.7's legal representative (DW3), a
purported witness to the power of attorney, had close ties to Home Land Resorts Private Limited
and lacked independent credibility. He admitted working as a security guard for the company and
expressed ignorance regarding the notary who allegedly notarized the document. These
inconsistencies establish that the power of attorney was fabricated, and the trial court erred in
accepting the defendants' claims. In this regard, the learned Counsel for the Appellant has relied on
a judgment in the case of Bharpur Singh and Others v. Mukhtiar Singh and Others (2024 SCC
OnLine P&H 2973), the relevant portion of which reads thus:, "26. A perusal of the evidence also
shows that even though the documents were exhibited before the trial Court, however, the mode of
proof and due execution was objected to by the appellant- appellants in RSA 1886 of 1987 and that
no observation/finding has been recorded by the Courts below with regard to the objections raised
pertaining to the mode of proof. The execution of the General Power of Attorney dated 20.12.1978 is
undisputedly before the Public Immigration Officer, who is not any of the authorities/officers as
stipulated under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the only document which would
fulfill the said requirement, would be the document executed on 28.09.1982, however, the
proponent of the said document (General Power of Attorney) dated 28.09.1982 is, however, not in a
position to reflect as to how and under what circumstances the same was received by him and how
the same was delivered to him. It is not the case of the appellant-appellant, Shamsher Singh in RSA
No. 1886 of 1987 that he had gone to Burma and that the said document was executed in his
presence. He has made no disclosure also, as to whether any person had handed over the same to
him at any point in time. Even though an explanation has been made by Shamsher Singh (appellant-
appellant in RSA No. 1379 of 1987) that the said General Power of Attorney was received by him by
way of post, however, the envelope, in which the said General Power of Attorney is stated to have
been received by him, has not been produced or exhibited before the trial Court. Hence, the manner
in which the said document had been received by the appellant-appellant in RSA No. 1379 of 1987
has not been established. Further, a perusal of the aforesaid document shows that the vital
particulars of the attesting witnesses of the abovesaid document have not been disclosed so as to
determine their identity. It is also noticed that even if the said document is accepted, the executant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 10
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
would be deemed to be of 103 years as on the date of execution of the said document. Given such
advanced stage, the burden lays upon the proponent of the document to dispel that the executant
was in good health at that point of time; a burden, which he has failed to discharge and to
satisfactorily repel.
27. It is also noticed that there have been repeated attempts made by the appellants and their family
in RSA no. 1379 of 1987 to take possession of the land in dispute and they have been propagating
different documents for substantiating their own claim. While the claim was initially lodged on the
basis of a General Power of Attorney executed by Sunder Singh in favour of Sewa Singh on
24.03.1976, on the strength whereof a sale deed was executed on 04.05.1979 in favour of his own
sons, a second General Power of Attorney was allegedly executed in quick succession on 20.12.1978
by Sunder Singh in favour of Shamsher Singh, who was the vendee of the same suit land on the
strength of a General Power of Attorney executed in favour of his father. Further, another document
was thereafter executed in 1981 i.e. within a period of three years as regards the Living Certificate
and followed by a separate General Power of Attorney on 28.09.1982. It is again a suspicious
circumstance as to what prompted execution of a separate General Power of Attorney in favour of
Shamsher Singh, once a General Power of Attorney had already been executed in favour of Sewa
Singh father of Shamsher Singh in the year 1976 and a sale deed with respect to the same land had
already been executed. Besides, notwithstanding that the General Power of Attorney is claimed to
have been executed in favour of Sewa Singh, the appellants-appellants in RSA No. 1379 of 1987 do
not impress upon their rights to flow from the execution of sale deed, on the strength of General
Power of Attorney executed in favour of Sewa Singh, in favour of Shamsher Singh, their vendor,
rather, they devised a novel method of seeking a fresh General Power of Attorney dated 20.12.1978
in favour of Shamsher Singh son of Sewa Singh who is a beneficiary under the earlier sale deed and
that even this document is evidently not executed before the Competent Authority which is later
sought to be ratified by the document executed on 28.09.1982. The mode and manner of execution
of the said documents and the background necessitating such execution of these General Power of
Attorneys having not been explained and even the advanced age of Sunder Singh coupled with the
fact that the Expert evidence led by the appellants- appellants in RSA No. 1886 of 1987 clearly
established that the signatures affixed on the sale deed dated 23.05.1909 and on the General Power
of Attorney executed on 28.09.1982 are not by the same person and are in different handwriting."
22. The learned counsel for the Appellant further relied on a judgment in the case of Vikky v.
Navbharat Press, Nagpur (2022 SCC OnLine Bom 713), the relevant portion of which reads thus:
"12. Under the Powers-of-Attorney Act, 1882 section 1-A defines a power of attorney
to include any instrument empowering a specified person to act for and in the name
of the person executing it, thereby indicating the POA is also an instrument and
would thus require a document in writing to be executed for the purpose of
authorizing the donee to act in consonance to the powers conferred thereupon, upon
the donee, by the donor. Such a POA, in case it relates to an immovable property,
would be an instrument which would compulsory require registration under section
32/33 of the Registration Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 11
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
13. However, the word "attestation", when used in terms of what the Notary
appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 is required to do would take it out from the
ambit of being a witness to the instrument/document, as contemplated by section 3
of the Transfer of Property Act for the reason that when a Notary Public attests a
document or a POA for that matter, he bears witness not to the statements in the
documents/POA, but to the fact of the making of those statements, and therefore, the
attestation by a witness, cannot be equated with the attestation by the notary.
14. That takes me to the requirement of section 85 of the Evidence Act vis-a-vis a
POA regarding the presumption to be made. What is material to note, is the nature of
presumption, which is permissible to be made and on what ground such presumption
can be made. The nature of the presumption is spelt out from section 85 of the
Evidence Act, which is about the execution and authentication of the POA, however,
such presumption would be available only in case, if the document purporting to be a
POA is executed before and authenticated by a Notary Public or the authorities stated
therein. What is also material to note is the effect of such presumption, which once
drawn results in presuming the existence of a particular state of things and does away
with the mode or manner, in which such thing/act is to be proved in a normal way, by
either examining the executant/s or the witness/es.
15. The word "authenticated", as held in Wali Mohammad Chaudhari (supra) would
mean that the person authenticating, has assured himself of the identity of the
person, who has signed the instrument as well as the fact of the execution, and only
in case, this is spelt out from the endorsement made, that the presumption under
section 85 of the Evidence Act can be invoked.
16. Wharton's Law Lexicon 1976 defines authentication, to mean an attestation made
by a proper officer by which he clarifies that a record is in "due form of law and that
the person who certifies it is the officer appointed so to do".
17. In Citibank N.A., New Delhi (supra), it has been held that the authentication is not merely
attestation but something more and words "due form of law" are very important and would include
the competence of the person executing the power-of- attorney in respect of which, the
notary/public has to satisfy himself, and in the absence of section 85 of the Evidence Act, any party
relying upon a power-of- attorney would have to prove it like any other document by producing in
the witness box, the executant of the document or the person in whose presence it was so executed
or the person acquainted with the signature of the executant etc., as the case may be and in case the
doner is a company, it would be further required to prove that the person/s executing the
power-of-attorney on its behalf had been duly authorized by means of a resolution duly passed in
accordance with law and the Articles of Association.
18. In Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar, 3rd Edition, 2005, 'authenticate' and 'authentication'
have been defined as under:--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 12
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
"Authenticate:-- To give legal validity to; to establish the genuineness of; to make an
authentication i.e., an attestation made by a proper officer by which he certified that
the record is in due form of law, and that the person who certifies it is the officer
appointed to do so.
Authentication:-- 1, Broadly, the act of proving that something (as a document) is
true or genuine, esp. so that it may be admitted as evidence; the condition of being so
proved (authentication of the handwriting).
2. Specific, the assent to or adoption of a writing as one's own.
Authentication is the process of validation the identity of someone or something.
(Information Technology) The Act of authenticating.
A process used to confirm the identity of a person or to prove the integrity of the
specific information. (Information Technology) Statement that something, is true,
such as an auditor's signature on a company's accounts."
19. Section 33 of the Registration Act, 1908 delineates which power-of-attorneys are recognizable
for the purposes of acts to be done under section 32 of the Registration Act. Section 33 of the
Registration Act, 1908 reads as under:
"33. Power-of-attorney recognizable for purposes of section 32. -- (1) For the
purposes of section 32, the followed powers-of-attorney shall alone be recognised,
namely:--
(a) if the principal at the time of executing the power-of-attorney resides in any part
(India) of in which this Act is for the time being in force, a power-
of-attorney executed before and authenticated by the Registrar or Sub-Registrar within whose
district or sub-district the principal resides;
(b) if the principal at the time aforesaid [resides in any part of India in which this Act is not in
force], a power-of-attorney executed before and authenticated by any Magistrate;
(c) if the principal at the time aforesaid does not reside in (India), a power-of-attorney executed
before and authenticated by a Notary Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, (Indian) Consul or
Vice- Consul, or representative of the Central Government:
Provided that the following persons shall not be required to be to attend at any
registration office or Court for the purpose of executing any such power- of-attorney
as is mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of this section, namely:--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 13
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
(i) persons who by reason of bodily infirmity are unable without risk or serious
inconvenience so to attend;
(ii) persons who are in jail under civil or criminal process; and
(iii) persons exempt by law from personal appearance in Court.
2. In the case of every such person the Registrar or Sub-Registrar or Magistrate, as the case may be,
if satisfied that the power-of-attorney has been voluntarily executed by the person purporting to be
the principal may attest the same without requiring his personal attendance at the office or Court
aforesaid. 3. To obtain evidence as to the voluntary nature of the execution, the Registrar or
Sub-Registrar or Magistrate may either himself so to the house of the person purporting to be the
principal, or to the jail in which he is confined, and examine him, or issue a commission for his
examination.
4. Any power-of-attorney mentioned in this section may be proved by the production of it without
further proof when it purports on the face of it to have been executed before and authenticated by
the person or Court herein before mentioned in that behalf."
20. Clauses (a) to (c) of section 33(1) of the Registration Act clearly indicate the requirement of an
authentication to be there in case a POA is to be recognized for the purposes of section 32 of the
Registration Act. Sub-section (2) of section 33' further indicates the requirement of the
Registrar/Magistrate of having been satisfied as to the voluntary execution of the POA by the person
purporting to have executed the same, and section 33(4) indicates that such POA may be proved by
its production without any further proof if, on the face of it, it indicates to have been 'executed
before and authenticated' by the person as stated in section 33(1)(a) of the Registration Act. Thus,
even under the provisions of section 33 of the Registration Act mandate that (a) the POA has to be
'executed before and authenticated by' the person as indicated in section 33(1)(a) i.e. the Registrar
or Sub Registrar, the Magistrate [section 33(1)(b)] and a Notary Public, Court, Judge, Magistrate,
Consul or Vice- Consul, or representative of the Central Government [section 33(1)(c)], (b) the
execution of such POA has been voluntary by the Principal, (c) satisfaction as to the identity of the
Principal and (d) the endorsement on the POA should disclose (a) to (c) above.
21. In this context, section 34(3) of the Registration Act, which casts a duty upon the registering
officer to make an enquiry regarding the person presenting the documents for registration before
him being material is reproduced as under:
"34(1)...........
(2) .............
(3) The registering officer shall thereupon--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 14
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
(a) enquire whether or not such document was executed by the persons by whom it
purports to have been executed:
(b) satisfy himself as to the identity of the persons appearing before him and alleging
that they have executed the document; and
(c) in the case of any person appearing as a representative, assign or agent, satisfy
himself of the right of such persons so to appear."
23. The learned counsel for the Appellant contends that the Trial Court misapplied the burden of
proof. The respondents / defendants asserted the existence of a valid power of attorney and sale
deed, making it their responsibility to prove these documents' authenticity.
Established legal principles, including the Supreme Court's ruling in the case of Anil Rishi v.
Gurbaksh Singh, (2006 (5) SCC 558), state that when fraud is alleged, the party asserting the
document's validity must prove its execution.
The appellant denied executing the power of attorney and refuted the signatures, shifting the burden
to the defendants to establish its legitimacy. The learned counsel for the appellant contends that the
Trial Court's approach in requiring the appellant to prove a negative assertion, was legally flawed.
The learned counsel for the Appellant further relied on the following judgments in support of his
case:
i) Kamla Rani and Ors v. M/s. Texmaco Ltd (AIR 2007 Del 147, wherein the relevant
portion reads thus:
"32. It is not in dispute that the notarised power of attorney in favour of the person
who had signed and verified the eviction petition as also who had filed the same was
produced at the trial and copy thereof was assigned an exhibit mark. The only
question which arises for consideration is, whether in absence of the notary public
being produced as a witness or the executant thereof being not produced as a witness
to prove the same, was the document proved as per law.
33. Authentication by a notary public is a solemn act performed by the notary public
whose duty is to ensure that the executant is the person before him and is identified
to his satisfaction. Once a document is authenticated by a notary public, it will be
presumed that the document was duly executed and was in order. The use of the
expression 'shall presume' shows that the section is mandatory and the Court has to
presume that all necessary requirements for the proper execution of the power of
attorney were duly fulfilled before the notary public. As observed in AIR 1984 (363)
(sic) E. C. and E.Co. Ltd. v. J. E. Works, if two conditions are satisfied, firstly the
power of attorney being executed before a notary public and secondly it being
authenticated by a notary public, a presumption would arise under Section 85 about
the executant of the power of attorney.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 15
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
34. Onus would thus lie on the opposite party to prove to the contrary.
35. It is well settled that authentication would mean more than mere execution.
Where proof of authentication surfaces, benefit of Section 85 has to be granted."
ii) H.K. Taneja and others v. Bipin Ganatra ((2009) 2 Mah LJ 855) "5. The procedure relating to
notarization under the Notaries Rules, 1956 framed under the Notaries Act, 1952 has not been
followed. Under Rule 11(2), the notary is required to maintain a notarial register in prescribed form
No. XV. The form shows 11 columns, including the column of the Serial number, Date, Name of the
Notarial act, Name of the executant, Contents of documents, Notarial fee, Signatures of the
executant and the Notary. The purpose of this rule is to relate each notarized document to the serial
number in the notarial register required to be maintained by each notary in the prescribed form.
Hence the serial number of the entry must be put on the document to collate the entry with the
document. In case of dispute the factum of notarization would have to be separately proved by the
applicant since, unlike registration, there is no presumption of execution of a notarized document. It
is seen that in this case the notary has not shown the serial number and the register number in
which the entry is made. It would be for the applicant to prove the notarization in view of the
dispute. The applicant has not got produced the relevant notarial register of the notary, kept in the
normal course of his conduct as such notary, to prove the execution of the document before him.
The document being otherwise unregistered and inadmissible in evidence is, therefore, not even
prima facie shown to be notarized."
iii) Ajay Constructions, Bangalore v. New India Assurance Company Ltd., Bangalore and Others
((2020) 5 KCCR 959)) "20. Though on issue No. 3 a passing reference has been made by the learned
trial Judge in the course of judgment, there was no cause of action for the suit against first
defendant vide paragraph 21, we supplant additional reasons for the proposition that suit as
brought, is not maintainable for the reason that PW 1 is not an authorized signatory on behalf of the
appellant. Undisputedly, appellant claims to be a partnership firm. None of the partners of the firm
have verified or affixed their signature to the plaint. The general power of attorney holder-PW 1 has
affixed his signature to the plaint and also has verified the contents of plaint on the strength of
power of attorney executed by the partnership firm. Said document has been marked as Ex. P-1
through PW 1. Power of attorney is creation of an agency whereby the grantor authorizes the grantee
to do the acts specified therein, on behalf of grantor, which when executed will be binding on the
grantor as if done by him. The power of attorney in question Ex. P-1 would clearly indicate that it is
not duly authenticated or verified. A plain reading of Section 85 of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
would indicate that a presumption of a document being power of attorney can be raised in the event
of same having been executed before, and authenticated by, a notary public, or any Court, judge,
magistrate, Indian consul or Vice-consul, or representative of the Central Government, was so
executed and authenticated. The power of attorney in question namely, Ex. P-1 having not been
authenticated by a notary public, no presumption can be drawn as provided under Section 85 of The
evidence Act. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Jugraj Singh v. Jaswant Singh, (1970) 2 SCC 386 :
AIR 1971 SC 761 has held to the following effect:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 16
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
"7. The short question xxxx it for registration. That power of attorney was not
authenticated as required by Section 33 of the Indian Registration Act which in the
case of an Indian residing abroad, requires that the document should be
authenticated by a Notary Public. The document only bore the signature of a witness
without anything to show that he was a Notary Public. In any event there was no
authentication by the Notary Public (if he was one) in the manner which the law
would consider adequate. The second power xxxxx Indian Registration Act."
24. The learned counsel for the Appellant contends that the Trial Court recorded findings regarding
the alleged confirmation deed despite not framing an issue on the subject. The 5th defendant,
allegedly acting as a power of attorney holder, purportedly executed a consent deed in favour of
Defendants No.7 and No.8. The appellant contended that this consent deed never existed at the time
the power of attorney was executed. The 5th defendant also filed written statement denying
execution of the consent deed. Despite these clear disputes, the Trial Court recorded findings
without framing a proper issue. The power of attorney, a registered document, was canceled through
another registered document (Ex.P20). Since the validity of the confirmation deed itself was
disputed, the Trial Court erred in recording findings on it without a properly framed issue.
iv) North Eastern Railway Administration Gorakpur v. Bhagawan Das, (2008 (8) SCC 511). The
relevant portion of the said judgment is extracted thus:
"13. Though the general rule is that ordinarily the appellate court should not travel
outside the record of the lower court and additional evidence, whether oral or
documentary is not admitted but Section 107 CPC, which carves out an exception to
the general rule, enables an appellate court to take additional evidence or to require
such evidence to be taken subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
prescribed. These conditions are prescribed under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC.
Nevertheless, the additional evidence can be admitted only when the circumstances
as stipulated in the said Rule are found to exist. The circumstances under which
additional evidence can be adduced are:
(i) the court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence
which ought to have been admitted [clause (a) of sub-rule (1)], or
(ii) the party seeking to produce additional evidence, establishes that
notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, such evidence was not within the
knowledge or could not, after the exercise of due diligence, be produced by him at the
time when the decree appealed against was passed [clause (aa), inserted by Act 104 of
1976], or
(iii) the appellate court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be
examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause
[clause (b) of sub-rule (1)].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 17
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
14. It is plain that under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 27 Order 41 CPC, with
which we are concerned in the instant case, evidence may be admitted by an appellate
authority if it "requires" to enable it to pronounce judgment "or for any other
substantial cause". The scope of the Rule, in particular of clause (b) was examined
way back in 1931 by the Privy Council in Parsotim Thakur v. Lal Mohar Thakur [AIR
1931 PC 143] . While observing that the provisions of Section 107 as elucidated by
Order 41 Rule 27 are clearly not intended to allow litigant, who has been unsuccessful
in the lower court, to patch up the weak parts of his case and fill up omissions in the
court of appeal, it was observed as follows : (AIR p. 148) "... Under clause (1)(b) it is
only where the appellate court 'requires' it (i.e. finds it needful) that additional
evidence can be admitted. It may be required to enable the court to pronounce
judgment or for any other substantial cause, but in either case it must be the court
that requires it. This is the plain grammatical reading of the sub-clause. The
legitimate occasion for the exercise of this discretion is not whenever before the
appeal is heard a party applies to adduce fresh evidence, but 'when on examining the
evidence as it stands some inherent lacuna or defect becomes apparent'."
15. Again in K. Venkataramiah v. A. Seetharama Reddy [AIR 1963 SC 1526 : (1964) 2
SCR 35] a Constitution Bench of this Court while reiterating the aforenoted
observations in Parsotim case [AIR 1931 PC 143] pointed out that the appellate court
has the power to allow additional evidence not only if it requires such evidence "to
enable it to pronounce judgment" but also for "any other substantial cause". There
may well be cases where even though the court finds that it is able to pronounce
judgment on the state of the record as it is, and so, it cannot strictly say that it
requires additional evidence "to enable it to pronounce judgment", it still considers
that in the interest of justice something which remains obscure should be filled up so
that it can pronounce its judgment in a more satisfactory manner. Thus, the question
whether looking into the documents, sought to be filed as additional evidence, would
be necessary to pronounce judgment in a more satisfactory manner, has to be
considered by the Court at the time of hearing of the appeal on merits.
16. Insofar as the principles which govern the question of granting or disallowing
amendments under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC (as it stood at the relevant time) are
concerned, these are also well settled. Order 6 Rule 17 CPC postulates amendment of
pleadings at any stage of the proceedings. In Pirgonda Hongonda Patil v. Kalgonda
Shidgonda Patil [AIR 1957 SC 363] which still holds the field, it was held that all
amendments ought to be allowed which satisfy the two conditions : (a) of not working
injustice to the other side, and (b) of being necessary for the purpose of determining
the real questions in controversy between the parties.
Amendments should be refused only where the other party cannot be placed in the same position as
if the pleading had been originally correct, but the amendment would cause him an injury which
could not be compensated in costs. (Also see Gajanan Jaikishan Joshi v. Prabhakar Mohanlal
Kalwar [(1990) 1 SCC 166] .)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 18
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
17. These are the broad principles to be kept in view while dealing with applications under Order 41
Rule 27 and Order 6 Rule 17 CPC.
18. It is manifest that in the present case, the High Court did not examine the record of the case with
the thoroughness which was expected at the time of disposal of the pending applications. On a
perusal of the impugned decisions, it is clear that the High Court was not even aware of the
pendency of the application under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC seeking leave to adduce additional
evidence. A perusal of the documents, which came to light pursuant to the directions given by the
High Court on 3-4-2002, prima facie, goes to show that these are likely to widely affect the decision
of the Court in one way or the other.
19. If the stand of the appellant, which, according to them, is borne out from the documents now on
record, is found to be correct, then obviously these will have material bearing on the core issue,
namely, whether the decree dated 13-3-2001 is a nullity, having been allegedly obtained by
concealing material facts and playing fraud on the court. It is trite that a judgment or decree by the
first court or by the highest court--obtained by playing fraud on the court is a nullity and non est in
the eye of the law. (See S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu v. Jagannath [(1994) 1 SCC 1] and India
Household and Healthcare Ltd. v. LG Household & Healthcare Ltd. [(2007) 5 SCC 510] )
20. In any event, had the Court found the additional documents, sought to be admitted, necessary to
pronounce the judgment in the appeal, in a more satisfactory manner, it would have allowed the
application and, if not, the application would have been dismissed. Nonetheless, it was bound to
consider the application before taking up the appeal. We say no more at this stage, as the
aforementioned applications are yet to be considered by the High Court on merits in the light of the
legal position, briefly set out hereinabove. In view of the aforenoted factual scenario, we are of the
opinion that the impugned judgment and the orders are erroneous and cannot be sustained."
v) Union of India v. Ibrahim Uddin, ((2012) 8 SCC
14)) "36. The general principle is that the appellate court should not travel outside the record of the
lower court and cannot take any evidence in appeal. However, as an exception, Order 41 Rule 27
CPC enables the appellate court to take additional evidence in exceptional circumstances. The
appellate court may permit additional evidence only and only if the conditions laid down in this
Rule are found to exist. The parties are not entitled, as of right, to the admission of such evidence.
Thus, the provision does not apply, when on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate court
can pronounce a satisfactory judgment. The matter is entirely within the discretion of the court and
is to be used sparingly. Such a discretion is only a judicial discretion circumscribed by the limitation
specified in the Rule itself. (Vide K. Venkataramiah v. A. Seetharama Reddy [AIR 1963 SC 1526] ,
Municipal Corpn. of Greater Bombay v. Lala Pancham [AIR 1965 SC 1008] , Soonda Ram v.
Rameshwarlal [(1975) 3 SCC 698 : AIR 1975 SC 479] and Syed Abdul Khader v. Rami Reddy [(1979)
2 SCC 601 :
AIR 1979 SC 553] .)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 19
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
37. The Appellate Court should not, ordinarily allow new evidence to be adduced in order to enable a
party to raise a new point in appeal. Similarly, where a party on whom the onus of proving a certain
point lies fails to discharge the onus, he is not entitled to a fresh opportunity to produce evidence, as
the Court can, in such a case, pronounce judgment against him and does not require any additional
evidence to enable it to pronounce judgment. (Vide: Haji Mohammed Ishaq Wd. S. K. Mohammed &
Ors. Vs. Mohamed Iqbal and Mohamed Ali and Co., AIR 1978 SC 798).
38. Under Order XLI, Rule 27 CPC, the appellate Court has the power to allow a document to be
produced and a witness to be examined. But the requirement of the said Court must be limited to
those cases where it found it necessary to obtain such evidence for enabling it to pronounce
judgment. This provision does not entitle the appellate Court to let in fresh evidence at the appellate
stage where even without such evidence it can pronounce judgment in a case. It does not entitle the
appellate Court to let in fresh evidence only for the purpose of pronouncing judgment in a particular
way. In other words, it is only for removing a lacuna in the evidence that the appellate Court is
empowered to admit additional evidence. [Vide: Lala Pancham & Ors. (supra) ].
39. It is not the business of the Appellate Court to supplement the evidence adduced by one party or
the other in the lower Court. Hence, in the absence of satisfactory reasons for the non- production of
the evidence in the trial court, additional evidence should not be admitted in appeal as a party guilty
of remissness in the lower court is not entitled to the indulgence of being allowed to give further
evidence under this rule. So a party who had ample opportunity to produce certain evidence in the
lower court but failed to do so or elected not to do so, cannot have it admitted in appeal. (Vide: State
of U.P. vs. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, AIR 1957 SC 912; and S. Rajagopal vs. C.M. Armugam & Ors.,
AIR 1969 SC 101).
40. The inadvertence of the party or his inability to understand the legal issues involved or the
wrong advice of a pleader or the negligence of a pleader or that the party did not realise the
importance of a document does not constitute a "substantial cause" within the meaning of this rule.
The mere fact that certain evidence is important, is not in itself a sufficient ground for admitting
that evidence in appeal.
41. The words "for any other substantial cause" must be read with the word "requires" in the
beginning of sentence, so that it is only where, for any other substantial cause, the Appellate Court
requires additional evidence, that this rule will apply, e.g., when evidence has been taken by the
lower Court so imperfectly that the Appellate Court cannot pass a satisfactory judgment.
42. Whenever the appellate Court admits additional evidence it should record its reasons for doing
so. (Sub-rule 2). It is a salutary provision which operates as a check against a too easy reception of
evidence at a late stage of litigation and the statement of reasons may inspire confidence and disarm
objection. Another reason of this requirement is that, where a further appeal lies from the decision,
the record of reasons will be useful and necessary for the Court of further appeal to see, if the
discretion under this rule has been properly exercised by the Court below. The omission to record
the reasons must, therefore, be treated as a serious defect. But this provision is only directory and
not mandatory, if the reception of such evidence can be justified under the rule.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 20
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
43. The reasons need not be recorded in a separate order provided they are embodied in the
judgment of the appellate Court. A mere reference to the peculiar circumstances of the case, or mere
statement that the evidence is necessary to pronounce judgment, or that the additional evidence is
required to be admitted in the interests of justice, or that there is no reason to reject the prayer for
the admission of the additional evidence, is not enough comp1iance with the requirement as to
recording of reasons.
44. It is a settled legal proposition that not only administrative order, but also judicial order must be
supported by reasons, recorded in it. Thus, while deciding an issue, the Court is bound to give
reasons for its conclusion. It is the duty and obligation on the part of the Court to record reasons
while disposing of the case. The hallmark of order and exercise of judicial power by a judicial forum
is for the forum to disclose its reasons by itself and giving of reasons has always been insisted upon
as one of the fundamentals of sound administration of the justice - delivery system, to make it
known that there had been proper and due application of mind to the issue before the Court and
also as an essential requisite of the principles of natural justice. The reason is the heartbeat of every
conclusion. It introduces clarity in an order and without the same, the order becomes lifeless.
Reasons substitute subjectivity with objectivity. The absence of reasons renders an order
indefensible/unsustainable particularly when the order is subject to further challenge before a
higher forum. Recording of reasons is principle of natural justice and every judicial order must be
supported by reasons recorded in writing. It ensures transparency and fairness in decision making.
The person who is adversely affected must know why his application has been rejected. (Vide: State
of Orissa v. Dhaniram Luhar, AIR 2004 SC 1794; State of Uttaranchal & Anr. Vs. Sunil Kumar Singh
Negi, AIR 2008 SC 2026; The Secretary & Curator, Victoria Memorial Hall vs. Howrah Ganatantrik
Nagrik Samity & Ors., AIR 2010 SC 1285; and Sant Lal Gupta & Ors. Vs. Modern Cooperative Group
Housing Society Limited & Ors., (2010) 13 SCC 336).
46. In The Land Acquisition Officer, City Improvement Trust Board, Bangalore vs. H. Narayanaiah
etc. etc., AIR 1976 SC 2403, while dealing with the issue, a three judge Bench of this Court held as
under:
"We are of the opinion that the High Court should have recorded its reasons to show
why it found the admission of such evidence to be necessary for some substantial
reason. And if it found it necessary to admit it an opportunity should have been given
to the appellant to rebut any inference arising from its insistence by leading other
evidence." (Emphasis added) A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in
Basayya I Mathad vs. Rudrayya S. Mathad and Ors., AIR 2008 SC 1108.
47. A Constitution Bench of this Court in K. Venkataramiah (Supra), while dealing with the same
issue held:
"It is very much to be desired that the courts of appeal should not overlook the
provisions of clause (2) of the Rule and should record their reasons for admitting
additional evidence..... The omission to record reason must, therefore, be treated as a
serious defect. Even so, we are unable to persuade ourselves that this provision is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 21
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
mandatory." (Emphasis added) In the said case, the court after examining the record
of the case came to the conclusion that the appeal was heard for a long time and the
application for taking additional evidence on record was filed during the final hearing
of the appeal. In such a fact-situation, the order allowing such application did not
vitiate for want of reasons.
48. Where the additional evidence sought to be adduced removes the cloud of doubt over the case
and the evidence has a direct and important bearing on the main issue in the suit and interest of
justice clearly renders it imperative that it may be allowed to be permitted on record such
application may be allowed.
To sum up on the issue, it may be held that application for taking additional evidence on record at a
belated stage cannot be filed as a matter of right. The court can consider such an application with
circumspection, provided it is covered under either of the prerequisite condition incorporated in the
statutory provisions itself. The discretion is to be exercised by the court judicially taking into
consideration the relevance of the document in respect of the issues involved in the case and the
circumstances under which such an evidence could not be led in the court below and as to whether
the applicant had prosecuted his case before the court below diligently and as to whether such
evidence is required to pronounce the judgment by the appellate court. In case the court comes to
the conclusion that the application filed comes within the four corners of the statutory provisions
itself, the evidence may be taken on record, however, the court must record reasons as on what basis
such an application has been allowed. However, the application should not be moved at a belated
stage.
Stage of Consideration :
49. An application under Order XLI Rule 27 CPC is to be considered at the time of hearing of appeal
on merits so as to find whether the documents and/or the evidence sought to be adduced have any
relevance/bearing on the issues involved. The admissibility of additional evidence does not depend
upon the relevancy to the issue on hand, or on the fact, whether the applicant had an opportunity for
adducing such evidence at an earlier stage or not, but it depends upon whether or not the Appellate
Court requires the evidence sought to be adduced to enable it to pronounce judgment or for any
other substantial cause. The true test, therefore is, whether the Appellate Court is able to pronounce
judgment on the materials before it without taking into consideration the additional evidence sought
to be adduced. Such occasion would arise only if on examining the evidence as it stands the court
comes to the conclusion that some inherent lacuna or defect becomes apparent to the Court. (Vide:
Arjan Singh vs. Kartar Singh & Ors., AIR 1951 SC 193; and Natha Singh & Ors. Vs. The Financial
Commissioner, Taxation, Punjab & Ors., AIR 1976 SC 1053)."
vi) Sugandhi v. P. Rajkumar, ((2020) 10 SCC 706) "9. It is often said that procedure is the handmaid
of justice. Procedural and technical hurdles shall not be allowed to come in the way of the court
while doing substantial justice. If the procedural violation does not seriously cause prejudice to the
adversary party, courts must lean towards doing substantial justice rather than relying upon
procedural and technical violation. We should not forget the fact that litigation is nothing but a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 22
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
journey towards truth which is the foundation of justice and the court is required to take
appropriate steps to thrash out the underlying truth in every dispute. Therefore, the court should
take a lenient view when an application is made for production of the documents under sub-rule
(3)."
vii) Kumar Singh v. State of Jharkhand, ((2022) 7 SCC 247)) "7. It is true that the general principle
is that the appellate court should not travel outside the record of the lower court and cannot take
any evidence in appeal. However, as an exception, Order 41 Rule 27CPC enables the appellate court
to take additional evidence in exceptional circumstances. It may also be true that the appellate court
may permit additional evidence if the conditions laid down in this Rule are found to exist and the
parties are not entitled, as of right, to the admission of such evidence. However, at the same time,
where the additional evidence sought to be adduced removes the cloud of doubt over the case and
the evidence has a direct and important bearing on the main issue in the suit and interest of justice
clearly renders it imperative that it may be allowed to be permitted on record, such application may
be allowed. Even, one of the circumstances in which the production of additional evidence under
Order 41 Rule 27CPC by the appellate court is to be considered is, whether or not the appellate court
requires the additional evidence so as to enable it to pronounce judgment or for any other
substantial cause of like nature.
8. As observed and held by this Court in A. Andisamy Chettiar v. A. Subburaj Chettiar [A. Andisamy
Chettiar v. A. Subburaj Chettiar, (2015) 17 SCC 713 : (2017) 5 SCC (Civ) 514] , the admissibility of
additional evidence does not depend upon the relevancy to the issue on hand, or on the fact,
whether the applicant had an opportunity for adducing such evidence at an earlier stage or not, but
it depends upon whether or not the appellate court requires the evidence sought to be adduced to
enable it to pronounce judgment or for any other substantial cause. It is further observed that the
true test, therefore is, whether the appellate court is able to pronounce judgment on the materials
before it without taking into consideration the additional evidence sought to be adduced."
The learned counsel for the Appellants contends that the appellant unequivocally denied executing
the power of attorney and consequently rejected the sale deeds' validity. The 5th defendant also
denied executing any document in favor of Defendants No.7 and No.8. The defendants failed to
explain the circumstances under which these documents allegedly came into existence. During trial,
it was demonstrated that the defendants conspired to deprive the appellant of her rightful share in
the property.
The learned counsel for the Appellant submits that the core question remains whether any
consideration was passed to the appellant in this transaction. The defendants did not establish that
they paid any amount to the appellant. No sale transaction can be deemed valid if it deprives a
person of their immovable property without compensation. The entire transaction appears
suspicious, and the trial court ignored key evidence that demonstrated fraudulent intent. The court's
dismissal of the suit was unjustified and warrants appellate intervention.
Thus, the learned counsel for the Appellant contends that the trial court fundamentally misdirected
itself in framing the issues, interpreting pleadings, evaluating evidence, and applying binding legal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 23
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
principles. The failure to properly place the burden of proof, the reliance on fabricated documents,
and the disregard for legal precedents render the judgment unsustainable. The appellate court must
set aside the erroneous judgment and grant appropriate relief to the appellant."
viii) Sajjan Kumar v. Ram Kishan, ((2005) 13 SCC
89)) "5. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that the appeal deserves to
be allowed as the trial court, while rejecting the prayer for amendment has failed to exercise the
jurisdiction vested in it by law and by the failure to so exercise it, has occasioned a possible failure of
justice. Such an error committed by the trial court was liable to be corrected by the High Court in
exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction, even if Section 115 CPC would not have been strictly
applicable. It is true that the appellant-appellant ought to have been diligent in promptly seeking the
amendment in the plaint at an early stage of the suit, more so when the error on the part of the
appellant was pointed out by the defendant in the written statement itself. Still, we are of the
opinion that the proposed amendment was necessary for the purpose of bringing to the fore the real
question in controversy between the parties and the refusal to permit the amendment would create
needless complications at the stage of execution in the event of the appellant-appellant succeeding
in the suit."
ix) Rajesh Kumar Aggarwal v. K.K. Modi, ((2006) 4 SCC 385)) "16. Order 6 Rule 17 consists of two
parts. Whereas the first part is discretionary (may) and leaves it to the court to order amendment of
pleading. The second part is imperative (shall) and enjoins the court to allow all amendments which
are necessary for the purpose of determining the real question in controversy between the parties.
18. As discussed above, the real controversy test is the basic or cardinal test and it is the primary
duty of the court to decide whether such an amendment is necessary to decide the real dispute
between the parties. If it is, the amendment will be allowed; if it is not, the amendment will be
refused. On the contrary, the learned Judges of the High Court without deciding whether such an
amendment is necessary have expressed certain opinions and entered into a discussion on merits of
the amendment. In cases like this, the court should also take notice of subsequent events in order to
shorten the litigation, to preserve and safeguard the rights of both parties and to subserve the ends
of justice. It is settled by a catena of decisions of this Court that the rule of amendment is essentially
a rule of justice, equity and good conscience and the power of amendment should be exercised in the
larger interest of doing full and complete justice to the parties before the court.
19. While considering whether an application for amendment should or should not be allowed, the
court should not go into the correctness or falsity of the case in the amendment. Likewise, it should
not record a finding on the merits of the amendment and the merits of the amendment sought to be
incorporated by way of amendment are not to be adjudged at the stage of allowing the prayer for
amendment. This cardinal principle has not been followed by the High Court in the instant case."
x) LIC v. Sanjeev Builders (P) Ltd., ((2022) 16 SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 24
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
1) "25. The principles applicable to the amendments of the plaint are equally applicable to the
amendments of the written statements. The courts are more generous in allowing the amendment of
the written statement as question of prejudice is less likely to operate in that event. The defendant
has a right to take alternative plea in defence which, however, is subject to an exception that by the
proposed amendment other side should not be subjected to injustice and that any admission made
in favour of the appellant is not withdrawn. All amendments of the pleadings should be allowed
which are necessary for determination of the real controversies in the suit provided the proposed
amendment does not alter or substitute a new cause of action on the basis of which the original lis
was raised or defence taken. Inconsistent and contradictory allegations in negation to the admitted
position of facts or mutually destructive allegations of facts should not be allowed to be incorporated
by means of amendment to the pleadings. The proposed amendment should not cause such
prejudice to the other side which cannot be compensated by costs. No amendment should be
allowed which amounts to or relates in defeating a legal right accruing to the opposite party on
account of lapse of time. The delay in filing the application for amendment of the pleadings should
be properly compensated by costs and error or mistake which, if not fraudulent, should not be made
a ground for rejecting the application for amendment of plaint or written statement. (See South
Konkan Distilleries v. Prabhakar Gajanan Naik [South Konkan Distilleries v. Prabhakar Gajanan
Naik, (2008) 14 SCC 632] .)
26. But undoubtedly, every case and every application for amendment has to be tested in the
applicable facts and circumstances of the case. As the proposed amendment of the pleadings
amounts to only a different or an additional approach to the same facts, this Court has repeatedly
laid down the principle that such an amendment would be allowed even after the expiry of statutory
period of limitation.
27. In this behalf, in A.K. Gupta & Sons Ltd. Vs. Damodar Valley Corporation, AIR 1967 SC 96 :
(1966) 1 SCR 796, this Court held thus:
"7. .....a new case or a new cause of action particularly when a suit on the new case or
cause of action is barred: Weldon v. Neale [19 QBD 394]. But it is also well recognised
that where the amendment does not constitute the addition of a new cause of action
or raise a different case, but amounts to no more than a different or additional
approach to the same facts, the amendment will be allowed even after the expiry of
the statutory period of limitation:....."
28. In entitled, G. Nagamma & Anr. Vs. Siromanamma & Anr., (1996) 2 SCC 25, this Court
considered the proposed amendment of the plaint and noticing that neither the cause of action
would change nor the relief would be materially affected, allowed the same. This Court in this case
noticed that in the appellant's suit for specific performance, the appellant was entitled to plead even
inconsistent pleas and that in the present case, the appellants were seeking only the alternative
reliefs. It appears that the appellants had filed a suit for specific performance of an agreement of
re-conveyance. By the application under Order VI Rule 17 of the CPC for amendment of the plaint,
the appellants were pleading that the transactions of execution of the sale deed and obtaining a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 25
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
document for re- conveyance were single transactions viz. mortgage by conditional sale. They also
wanted to incorporate an alternative relief to redeem the mortgage. At the end of the prayer, the
appellant sought alternatively to grant of a decree for redemption of the mortgage. This amendment
was permitted by this Court.
29. In Pankaja & Anr. Vs. Yellappa (dead) by lrs. & Ors., (2004) 6 SCC 415, this Court held that it
was in the discretion of the court to allow an application under Order VI Rule 17 of the CPC seeking
amendment of the plaint even where the relief sought to be added by amendment was allegedly
barred by limitation. The Court noticed that there was no absolute rule that the amendment in such
a case should not be allowed. It was pointed out that the court's discretion in this regard depends on
the facts and circumstances of the case and has to be exercised on a judicial evaluation thereof. It
would be apposite to notice the observations of this Court in this pronouncement in extenso. The
principles were laid down by this Court thus:
"12. So far as the court's jurisdiction to allow an amendment of pleadings is
concerned, there can be no two opinions that the same is wide enough to permit
amendments even in cases where there has been substantial delay in filing such
amendment applications. This Court in numerous cases has held that the dominant
purpose of allowing the amendment is to minimise the litigation, therefore, if the
facts of the case so permit, it is always open to the court to allow applications in spite
of the delay and laches in moving such amendment application.
13. But the question for our consideration is whether in cases where the delay has
extinguished the right of the party by virtue of expiry of the period of limitation
prescribed in law, can the court in the exercise of its discretion take away the right
accrued to another party by allowing such belated amendments.
14. The law in this regard is also quite clear and consistent that there is no absolute
rule that in every case where a relief is barred because of limitation an amendment
should not be allowed. Discretion in such cases depends on the facts and
circumstances of the case. The jurisdiction to allow or not allow an amendment being
discretionary, the same will have to be exercised on a judicious evaluation of the facts
and circumstances in which the amendment is sought. If the granting of an
amendment really subserves the ultimate cause of justice and avoids further litigation
the same should be allowed.
30.There can be no straitjacket formula for allowing or disallowing an amendment of pleadings.
Each case depends on the factual background of that case.
xxx xxx xxx
16. This view of this Court has, since, been followed by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in the case
of T.N. Alloy Foundry Co. Ltd. Vs. T.N. Electricity Board. [(2004) 3 SCC 392]. Therefore, an
application for amendment of the pleading should not be disallowed merely because it is opposed on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 26
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
the ground that the same is barred by limitation, on the contrary, application will have to be
considered bearing in mind the discretion that is vested with the court in allowing or disallowing
such amendment in the interest of justice.
xxx xxx xxx
18. We think that the course adopted by this Court in Ragu Thilak D. John case [(2001) 2 SCC 472]
applies appropriately to the facts of this case. The courts below have proceeded on an assumption
that the amendment sought for by the appellants is ipso facto barred by the law of limitation and
amounts to introduction of different relief than what the appellant had asked for in the original
plaint. We do not agree with the courts below that the amendment sought for by the appellant
introduces a different relief so as to bar the grant of prayer for amendment, necessary factual basis
has already been laid down in the plaint in regard to the title which, of course, was denied by the
respondent in his written statement which will be an issue to be decided in a trial. Therefore, in the
facts of this case, it will be incorrect to come to the conclusion that by the amendment the appellant
will be introducing a different relief."
31. From the above, therefore, one of the cardinal principles of law in allowing or rejecting an
application for amendment of the pleading is that the courts generally, as a rule, decline to allow
amendments, if a fresh suit on the amended claim would be barred by limitation on the date of filing
of the application. But that would be a factor to be taken into account in the exercise of the
discretion as to whether the amendment should be ordered, and does not affect the power of the
court to order it, if that is required in the interest of justice.
71. Our final conclusions may be summed up thus:
70. Our final conclusions may be summed up thus:
(i) Order II Rule 2 CPC operates as a bar against a subsequent suit if the requisite
conditions for application thereof are satisfied and the field of amendment of
pleadings falls far beyond its purview.
The plea of amendment being barred under Order II Rule 2 CPC is, thus, misconceived and hence
negatived.
(ii) All amendments are to be allowed which are necessary for determining the real question in
controversy provided it does not cause injustice or prejudice to the other side. This is mandatory, as
is apparent from the use of the word "shall", in the latter part of Order VI Rule 17 of the CPC..
(iii) The prayer for amendment is to be allowed
(i) if the amendment is required for effective and proper adjudication of the controversy between the
parties, and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 27
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
(ii) to avoid multiplicity of proceedings, provided
(a) the amendment does not result in injustice to the other side,
(b) by the amendment, the parties seeking amendment does not seek to withdraw any clear
admission made by the party which confers a right on the other side and
(c) the amendment does not raise a time barred claim, resulting in divesting of the other side of a
valuable accrued right (in certain situations).
(iv) A prayer for amendment is generally required to be allowed unless
(i) by the amendment, a time barred claim is sought to be introduced, in which case the fact that the
claim would be time barred becomes a relevant factor for consideration,
(ii) the amendment changes the nature of the suit,
(iii) the prayer for amendment is malafide, or
(iv) by the amendment, the other side loses a valid defence.
(v) In dealing with a prayer for amendment of pleadings, the court should avoid a hypertechnical
approach, and is ordinarily required to be liberal especially where the opposite party can be
compensated by costs.
(vi) Where the amendment would enable the court to pin-pointedly consider the dispute and would
aid in rendering a more satisfactory decision, the prayer for amendment should be allowed.
(vii) Where the amendment merely sought to introduce an additional or a new approach without
introducing a time barred cause of action, the amendment is liable to be allowed even after expiry of
limitation.
(viii) Amendment may be justifiably allowed where it is intended to rectify the absence of material
particulars in the plaint.
(ix) Delay in applying for amendment alone is not a ground to disallow the prayer. Where the aspect
of delay is arguable, the prayer for amendment could be allowed and the issue of limitation framed
separately for decision.
(x) Where the amendment changes the nature of the suit or the cause of action, so as to set up an
entirely new case, foreign to the case set up in the plaint, the amendment must be disallowed.
Where, however, the amendment sought is only with respect to the relief in the plaint, and is
predicated on facts which are already pleaded in the plaint, ordinarily the amendment is required to
be allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 28
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
(xi) Where the amendment is sought before commencement of trial, the court is required to be
liberal in its approach. The court is required to bear in mind the fact that the opposite party would
have a chance to meet the case set up in amendment. As such, where the amendment does not result
in irreparable prejudice to the opposite party, or divest the opposite party of an advantage which it
had secured as a result of an admission by the party seeking amendment, the amendment is
required to be allowed. Equally, where the amendment is necessary for the court to effectively
adjudicate on the main issues in controversy between the parties, the amendment should be
allowed. (See Vijay Gupta v. Gagninder Kr. Gandhi & Ors., 2022 SCC OnLine Del 1897)"
25. For all these grounds urged, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant / plaintiff
prays to allow the appeal and thereby to set aside the judgment and decree dated
07.02.2020 passed by the Trial Court in O.S.No.2653/2006 on the file of the Senior
Civil Judge & JMFC, Anekal, Bengaluru Rural District.
26. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents / defendants contend that the
suit filed by the appellant / plaintiff is baseless, time-barred, and intended to harass
the purchasers. They assert that late Y. Subbarao, father of the appellant and
defendant No.1, bequeathed the suit property in Survey No. 50/4, measuring 6 acres
16 guntas, to both daughters through a Will dated February 15, 1973. Following his
demise, the appellant and defendant No.1 became absolute owners, with each
inheriting 3 acres. The respondents emphasize that the appellant voluntarily
executed a registered General Power of Attorney (GPA) in favour of Smt. S.
Nagarathnamma (defendant No.5) on January 20, 1995, authorizing her to sell the
appellant's 3-acre share.
27. Learned counsel for Respondents contend that, additionally, the appellant
executed a notarized General Power of Attorney in favour of defendant No.6 / Nazeer
Ahmed, on September 13, 1995, granting him authority over her undivided share in
the property. The same day, defendant No.1 also executed a GPA in favour of Nazeer
Ahmed. The respondents contend that these power of attorney documents were
executed willingly and were not fraudulent, as alleged by the appellant. The appellant
and defendant No.1 also executed separate agreements to sell their respective
shares--the appellant / plaintiff agreed to sell her share to R.K. Govindaraj for
Rs.39,00,000/- and defendant No.1 agreed to sell her share to R. Ashok Kumar for
the same amount. The buyers paid advance amounts, and additional consideration
was received over time.
28. The Learned counsel for respondents further contend that the agreement holders
nominated N.R. Ramesh to purchase the land on their behalf through a Deed of
Nomination dated September 15, 1996.
Subsequently, on September 21, 2002, defendant No.6, acting as the power of
attorney holder, executed sale deeds--one for 2 acres in favour of defendant No.8 and
another for 2 acres in favour of deceased defendant No.7.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 29
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
The transactions were duly recorded, and the buyers took possession of the property.
29. The learned counsel for respondents argue that the appellant's claim regarding
the fraudulent nature of the GPA executed in favour of defendant No.6, is baseless.
They emphasize that the GPA was notarized, properly stamped, and falls under the
presumption of validity under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act. It is contended
that the appellant failed to provide any substantial evidence to rebut this
presumption, and her argument about differences in the notary seal and treasury
stamp does not hold merit.
In support of his contention, the Learned counsel for Respondents have relied on a
judgment in the case of Jugraj Singh v. Jaswant Singh, ((1970) 2 SCC 386)), the
relevant portion of the judgment is extracted thus:
"8. The short question in this case is whether Mr Chawla possessed such a power of
attorney for executing the document and for presentation of it for registration. Now,
if we were to take into account the first power of attorney which was executed in his
favour on May 30, 1963, we would be forced to say that it did not comply with the
requirements of the law and was ineffective to clothe Mr. Chawla with the authority
to execute the sale deed or to present it for registration. That power of attorney was
not authenticated as required by Section 33 of the Indian Registration Act which in
the case of an Indian residing abroad, requires that the document should be
authenticated by a Notary Public. The document only bore the signature of a witness
without anything to show that he was a Notary Public. In any event there was no
authentication by the Notary Public (if he was one) in the manner which the law
would consider adequate. The second power of attorney however does show that it
was executed before a proper Notary Public who complied with the laws of California
and authenticated the document as required by that law. We are satisfied that that
power of attorney is also duly authenticated in accordance with our laws. The only
complaint is that the Notary Public did not say in his endorsement that Mr Chawla
had been identified to his satisfaction. But that flows from the fact that he endorsed
on the document that it had been subscribed and sworn before him. There is a
presumption of regularity of official acts and we are satisfied that he must have
satisfied himself in the discharge of his duties that the person who was executing it
was the proper person. This makes the second power of attorney valid and effective
both under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act and Section 33 of the Indian
Registration Act.
This extract is taken from National and Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. World Science News,
1976 SCC OnLine Del 8 : ILR (1976) 1 Del 559 : PLR (1976) 78 Del 71 : (1976) 12 DLT
69 : AIR 1976 Del 263 at page 561
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 30
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
8. At the time of hearing, Mr. Mahinder Narain, learned counsel for the appellant,
produced before me the original Power of Attorney. This document shows that it is a
power of attorney in favour of John Herbert Keeble executed on behalf of the
appellant-
Bank. It also bears the seal of the appellant-Bank as well as necessary authentication of due
execution by the aforesaid Notary Public. It also bears the seal of the Notary Public. The
authentication by the aforesaid Notary Public reads as under:--
"I JOHNMARTYN DIMOND, of the City of London Notary Public duly admitted and sworn
practising in the said City Do hereby Certify and Attest that I was this day present at the registered
Office of NATIONAL AND GRINDLAYS BANK LIMITED situate at No. 26 Bishopsgate in the said
City with the Right Honourable EDWARD FRANCIS BARON TWINING, G.C.M.G.M.B.E., a
Director and HENRY DOUGLAS CAYLEY The Deputy General Manager of the said Bank and did
see the seal of the said Bank affixed to or impressed on the foregoing Power of Attorney and that the
Seal so affixed is the genuine Seal of the said Bank.
And that the signatures "Twining" and "H.D. Cayley"
severally and respectively subscribed at food of the foregoing power of Attorney are of
the respective proper handwriting of the said the High Honourable EDWARD
FRANCIS BARON TWINING G.C.M.G.M.B.E. and HENRY DOUGLAS CAYLEY In
witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my Seal of Office in London
this seventh day of November. One thousand nine hundred and sixty-two.
(Seal) Sd/-
JOHN MARTYN DIMOND, Notary Public."
10. The document in the present case is a power of attorney and again on the face of it shows to have
been executed before, and authenticated by, a notary public. In view of Section 85 of the Evidence
Act, the Court has to presume that it was so executed and authenticated. Once the original
document is produced purporting to be a power of attorney so executed and attested, as stated in S.
85 of the Evidence Act, the Court has to presume that it was so executed and authenticated. The
provision is mandatory, and it is open to the Court to presume that all the necessary requirements
for the proper execution of the power of attorney have been duly fulfilled. There is no doubt that the
section is not exhaustive and there are different legal modes of executing a power of attorney, but,
once the power of attorney on its face shows to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a
notary public, the Court has to so presume that it was so executed and authenticated. The
authentication by a Notary Public of a document, purporting to be a power of attorney and to have
been executed before him is to be treated as the equivalent of an affidavit of identity. The object of
the section is to avoid the necessity of such affidavit of identity. Under Section 57 sub- section (6) of
the Evidence Act, the Courts have to taken judicial notice of the seals of Notaries Public and when
the seal is there, of which judicial notice is taken, there is no reason why judicial notice should not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 31
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
be taken of the signatures as well. What is argued by Shri Rameshwar Dial, learned counsel for
defendants 1 to 3, is that the Notary Public in Section 85 or Section 57 of the Evidence Act merely
means notaries appointed under the Notaries Act 1952. The argument is that where a document
purports to be a power of attorney, before the Court can presume it to be so executed and
authenticated as is contemplated by S. 85, it should have been authenticated by Indian Consul or
Vice-Consul or the representative of the Central Government and not by a notary public of a foreign
country. For one thing Notaries Act 1952 was not there when Evidence Act which was the first Act of
1872 was enacted. Secondly, the purpose of Sections 57 and 85 is to cut down recording of evidence.
For such matters, like the due execution of a power of attorney in the present day of international
commerce, there is no reason to limit the word "Notary Public" in S. 85 or Section 57 to Notaries
appointed in India. The fact that notaries public of foreign countries have been recognised as proper
authorities for due execution and authentication for purpose of section 85 of the Evidence Act is
illustrated by the Supreme Court in case Jugraj Singh v. Jaswant Singh, (1971) 1 SCR 38 (1). In this
case the Supreme Court held that a power of attorney executed and authenticated before a notary
public of California satisfied the test of S. 85 of the Evidence Act and S. 33 of the Indian Registration
Act. If the interpretation of notary public is limited to notaries public appointed in this country only,
it will become impossible to carry on commerce with foreign countries. Surely, S. 57 of the Indian
Evidence Act which enjoins upon the Courts to take judicial notice of seals of Notary Public, such
judicial notice cannot be limited to Notaries appointed in India only. It seems clear if the entire
sub-section is read. Once, this conclusion is reached, there is no reason to limit the meaning of the
expression "Notaries Public" in S. 85 of the Indian Evidence Act to Notaries appointed in India only.
11. In this view of the matter, it must be presumed that the power of attorney in favour of John
Herbert Keeble was duly executed and authenticated. This presumption, like other presumptions is
rebuttable, but, once, the original power of attorney bearing the signature and seal of the notary
public is produced, which expressly confers the power on the attorney to institute suits, the burden
immediately shifts to the defendants, who dispute the execution of such a power of attorney.
Therefore, instead of calling upon the defendants to give better particulars of their objections as to
the proper, institution of the suit, I think, it is fit and proper, if issue No. 1 is divided and the burden
regarding the proper institution of the suit by a duly authorised person, is placed on the defendants.
Issue No. 1 is accordingly divided as under:--
1. Whether the plaint has been signed and verified by a duly authorised person?
O.P.P. 1A. Whether the suit has not been instituted by a duly authorised person?
O.P.D."
30. The learned counsel for Respondents has further relied on a judgment in the case
of Northland Traders v.
Bank of Baroda, (1994 SCC OnLine All 186), the relevant portion of the extract is given below, "9.
There is another aspect of the matter, Section 85 of the Evidence Act lays down as follows:--
"85. Presumption as to powers of attorney. The court shall presume that every
document purporting to be a power of attorney and to have been executed before,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 32
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
and authenticated by a notary public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul
or Vice Consul or representative of the Central Government was so executed and
authenticated."
10. Under the aforesaid provisions, it would also be presumed that the person executing the power
of attorney on behalf of a corporate body was competent to do so. In the present case Sri M.K. Bose
had executed the power of attorney in favour of K.N. Pandey which was duly authenticated by a
notary public as mentioned in Section 85. The Court is, therefore, bound to presume that the power
of attorney was duly executed and authenticated. This presumption, however, is a rebuttable
presumption and it was open to the defendants to challenge the authority of the attorney or to prove
that the power of attorney was invalid or that the person acting on the basis of such power of
attorney was not duly authorised. No such evidence has come from the side of the defendants. On
the contrary PW. 1 K.N. Pandey had deposed that (sic) the Senior Branch Manager and was
authorised to sign and verify the plaint and to file the suit. There being no evidence in rebuttal the
court below was, therefore, justified in holding that K.N. Pandey was authorised to sign and verify
the plaint.
11. In the case of City Bank, N.K. New Delhi v. J.K. Jute Mills Company Ltd., Kanpur reported in
AIR 1982 Delhi 487, where the facts were somewhat similar to the case at hand a power of attorney
was executed by two officers of the Bank in favour of one Mr. Williams who executed a power of
attorney in favour of one N.K. Bahl who was the Assistant Branch Manager of the Bank. On the basis
of the powers conferred on him by the power of attorney which was duly authenticated by a notary
public, the said Mr. Bahi had filed the suit. An argument was raised that no presumption could be
raised that the concerned officers were competent to execute the power of attorney on behalf of the
appellant Bank. Relying upon certain decisions of the Delhi High Court in the cases of National
Grindlays Bank v. Radio Electronics Corporation Pvt. Ltd. reported in 1978 Rajdhani LR 217 and the
case of Bank of India v. Ajayab Singh Pritam Singh, reported in AIR 1979 NOC 199. It was held that
authentication of the power of attorney by a notary public raised a legal presumption that the same
has been duly executed and the person or persons who had executed had the authority to do so. It
was further held that the presumption was rebuttable and the other party was entitled to disprove
such resumption. The Court had held that the consistent view was that under Section 85 of the
Evidence Act would also be presumed that a person executing powers of attorney on behalf of a
corporate body was competent to do so. In view of what has been stated above, the argument of the
learned counsel for the applicants that it has not been proved that Mihir Kumar Bose was competent
to execute the power of attorney in favour of K.N. Pandey cannot be legally sustained. The validity of
the same could be presumed under the provisions of Section 85 of the Evidence Act and it could
further be presumed that M.K. Bose was competent to execute the power of attorney. It was open to
the defendants to disprove the said presumption but no evidence has been led by the defendants to
this effect."
31. Regarding the cancellation of the GPA executed in favour of defendant No.5 (Nagarathnamma),
the respondents assert that the appellant did not comply with the legal requirements under Section
206 of the Indian Contract Act. The appellant issued a notice of cancellation on October 11, 2002,
but failed to serve it on defendant No.5, as no proof of acknowledgment or postal receipt was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 33
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
produced. Furthermore, the appellant did not issue any public notice regarding the cancellation,
making it ineffective against third parties. On October 17, 2002, the appellant executed a registered
cancellation deed, but it was registered under Book IV, which does not notify third parties during
encumbrance searches. Consequently, defendant No.5 and purchasers remained unaware of the
cancellation.
32. The learned counsel for respondents highlight that on December 28, 2005, defendant No.1 and
defendant No.5 acting as GPA holder for the appellant, executed consent deeds confirming the sales
executed on September 21, 2002, in favour of defendants No.7 and 8. The property's mutation
records were updated based on these transactions, establishing defendants No.7 and 8 as the lawful
owners. Defendant No.1 did not challenge these transactions, making the sale of her 2-acre share
legally valid and binding.
33. The learned counsel for respondents argue that the appellant filed the suit in the year 2006, four
years after the execution of sale deeds, making it barred under the Limitation Act. The appellant's
claim of fraud lacks supporting evidence, and the Trial Court rightfully dismissed her suit. They also
emphasize that the appellant had already entered into agreements to sell her share of the land to
third parties and had received substantial consideration, demonstrating that her suit is filed with
ulterior motives. It is the further contention of the learned counsel for respondents that the
appellant's claim that Home Land Developers and Urban Space were behind the alleged fraudulent
power of attorney, stating that she failed to provide any pleadings or evidence to substantiate this
claim, is baseless.
34. The learned counsel for respondents further contend that defendants No.9 to 12, who entered
into agreements with the appellant in 2007, cannot claim any rights over the suit property. Since
they are agreement holders and not registered owners, their claims have no legal standing. Hence it
is contented that the Trial court has rightly held that their agreements do not affect the validity of
the previous transactions.
35. In support of their contentions, Learned counsel for Respondents have relied on a judgment in
the case of Satish Kumar Gupta v. State of Haryana, ((2017) 4 SCC 760), the relevant portion of the
extract is given below, "19. The other part of the impugned order permitting additional evidence and
remanding the case for fresh decision is uncalled for. No case was made out for permitting
additional evidence on settled principles under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC. The provision is reproduced
below:
"27. Production of additional evidence in appellate court.--(1) The parties to an
appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or
documentary, in the appellate court. But if--
(a) the court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence
which ought to have been admitted, or (aa) the party seeking to produce additional
evidence, establishes that notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, such
evidence was not within his knowledge or could not, after the exercise of due
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 34
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
diligence, be produced by him at the time when the decree appealed against was
passed, or
(b) the appellate court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be
examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause, The
appellate court may allow such evidence or document to be produced, or witness to
be examined.
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an appellate court, the
court shall record the reason for its admission."
20. It is clear that neither the trial court has refused to receive the evidence nor it could be said that
the evidence sought to be adduced was not available despite the exercise of due diligence nor it
could be held to be necessary to pronounce the judgment. Additional evidence cannot be permitted
to fill in the lacunae or to patch up the weak points in the case [N. Kamalam v. Ayyasamy, (2001) 7
SCC 503, pp. 514-16, para 19] . There was no ground for remand in these circumstances."
36. The Learned counsel for Respondents has also relied on a judgment in the case of Kathoom Bivi
Ammal v. Arulappa Nadar, (1968 SCC OnLine Mad 164), the relevant portion of the extract of which
is given below:
2. The trial Court held that the first defendant had cancelled the power-of-attorney
executed by her in favour of the fourth defendant on 2nd September, 1958, and that,
therefore, the mortgage executed by the fourth defendant in favour of the appellant
was not valid. But it gave a decree against the fourth defendant for the sum due on
the mortgage. The lower appellate Court also held that the power-of-
attorney was validly cancelled though there seems to be some confusion in its mind with regard to
this point as seen from its discussion in paragraphs 9 and 10 of its judgment. However, on the
ground that under Section 208 of the Indian Contract Act, the termination of the authority of an
agent does not take effect, so far as regards third persons, before it becomes known to them. The
cancellation would not bind them and consequently the mortgage deed executed by the fourth
defendant in favour of the appellant was valid. But it gave only a charge decree for the mortgage
amount. The appellant has, therefore, filed a memorandum of cross-objections and wants a decree
for possession of the mortgaged property to be granted in his favour. As both the Courts below have
held that the power-of-attorney executed by the first defendant in favour of the fourth defendant has
been validly cancelled by her even before the fourth defendant executed the mortgage in favour of
the appellant, the only question that arises is whether under Section 208 of the Indian Contract Act,
such cancellation will have the effect of making the mortgage executed by the fourth defendant void
as against the first defendant. Section 208 of the Indian Contract Act is as follows:
"208. The termination of the authority of an agent does not, so far as regards the
agent, take effect before it becomes known to him, or so far as regards third persons,
before it becomes known to them".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 35
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
4. This illustration is apposite to the facts of this case. In Mulla on Indian Contract Act, Students'
Edition, Eighth Edition, page 226, the case of Trueman v. Loder, (1840) 11 Ad & El 589, is referred
to. That was a case where A traded as B's agent with B's authority. All parties with whom A made
contracts in that business were held to have a right to hold B liable to them until B gives notice to
the world that A's authority is revoked; and it makes no difference if in a particular case the agent
intended to keep the contract on his own account. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that it is
very unreasonable to expect that the first defendant should inform the whole world that she had
cancelled the power-of-attorney given to the fourth defendant, and that she cannot be expected to
approach every body with whom the fourth defendant was likely to enter into contract and inform
them of the cancellation. I do not think that such considerations have any relevance in the face of
the clear words of the section. The policy of the law, apparently in the interests of trade and
commerce, is that the agent's action should bind the principal, even though the principal might have
cancelled the agent's authority unless the third persons with whom the agent enters into contracts
knew of the termination of the agency. On this point, therefore, the conclusion of the lower appellate
Court is correct, and it should be held that the mortgage executed by the fourth defendant in favour
of the appellant is valid and binding on the first defendant.
37. Learned counsel for respondents assert that the appellant's suit is a deliberate attempt to
blackmail the genuine purchasers, as she had initially entered into sale agreements, received
consideration, and later attempted to backtrack by filing this suit. They argue that the sale deeds and
consent deeds executed in favour of defendants No.7 and 8 were legally valid and binding. The trial
court correctly ruled that the appellant failed to establish her case and that defendants No.7 and 8
had legally acquired the suit property. The learned counsel for respondents, therefore, urge this
Court to dismiss the present appeal in R.F.A. No. 1759/2020 with costs, as the appellant's claims are
meritless, time-barred, and legally unsustainable.
38. In the context of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the respective parties and on a
deliberation of the facts stated above, the issues that now arise for consideration in the present
appeal are:
1. Whether the General Power of Attorney (GPA) executed by the Appellant / Plaintiff
in favour of Respondent No.6 (Nazeer Ahmed) and Respondent No.5 (Smt.
Nagarathnamma) was validly executed, duly authenticated as per law, and conferred
legal authority to transfer the Appellant's share in the property?
2. Whether the termination of the General Power of Attorney (GPA) by the Appellant
(Plaintiff) was valid and legally effective under Section 208 of the Indian Contract
Act, 1872, and whether proper notice of termination was given to the concerned
parties, thereby affecting the validity of subsequent transactions executed under the
revoked GPA?
39. It is to be noticed that the documents marked as Ex.D.7 and Ex.D.8, which are General Powers
of Attorney, were presumed to be validly executed and authenticated under Section 85 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872. As per the statutory mandate, every document purporting to be a power of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 36
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
attorney, if executed before and authenticated by a Notary Public or other competent authority, is
required to be presumed by the Court as duly executed and authenticated. In the present case, both
Ex.D.7 and Ex.D.8 bear notarization and thus attract the statutory presumption of validity. If at all
the Notary had authenticated the GPA in the absence of the plaintiff, she ought to have informed the
same to the Principal District Judge, Bengaluru having immediate control over the Notary. Further,
she could have given a complaint to the jurisdictional police for the act of fraud committed by the
Notary along with Defendant No.6. However, no conclusive rebuttal of this presumption was
furnished by the appellant.
As held in the case of Prem Singh v. Birbal (2006) 5 SCC 353 and reiterated in the case of Jamila
Begum v.
Shami Mohd. (2019) 2 SCC 727, a registered document carries a presumption of valid execution, and
the burden lies on the person challenging it to establish otherwise. The appellant's assertions were
found to be unsubstantiated by cogent or compelling evidence, and hence, the presumption stood
unrebutted.
40. These findings were in line with the trial court's conclusion, where it was held that the plaintiff
had neither produced the notary for examination nor initiated action for alleged misconduct, nor did
she provide any expert evidence to support her claim of forgery. The Trial Court rightly upheld the
presumption of regularity under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act and observed that the
plaintiff's vague and general denial lacked specificity and was not supported by pleadings of fraud or
fabrication.
41. Under Section 101 of the Indian Evidence Act, the burden of proof initially rested with the
plaintiff who alleged that Ex.D.7 was not executed by her and was a product of fraud. Since the legal
right claimed by the appellant was based on the non-execution or fraudulent nature of the GPA, the
burden was required to be discharged by her through tangible evidence. No expert evidence,
handwriting comparison, or other probative material was produced to establish her claim. In the
case of Rattan Singh v. Nirmal Gill, (2020 SCC OnLine SC 936), it was held that in the absence of
credible proof of forgery or fraud, and in light of supporting evidence adduced by the defendants,
the balance tilts in favour of the defendants. Likewise, in the present case, the failure of the
appellant to discharge her burden under Section 101 of the Indian Evidence Act rendered the
challenge to the GPA, unsustainable.
42. The Trial Court also found that the plaintiff had herself executed a separate registered GPA
(Ex.P.19) in favour of Respondent No.5 and had entered into a sale agreement (Ex.D.2) for
consideration--facts that were deliberately suppressed in the plaint. This act of suppression, the
court observed, was sufficient to discredit the appellant's claim and demonstrated her intent to sell
the property, thereby undermining her denial of execution of the GPA.
43. Additionally, under Section 106 of the Evidence Act, the burden to prove facts within the special
knowledge of a person rests on that person. Since Defendant No.6 was the power of attorney holder
and derived his authority under Ex.D.7, the obligation to establish its proper execution was cast
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 37
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
upon him. However, the initial benefit of presumption under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act
enabled the document to stand on its own unless dislodged by counter-evidence. The plaintiff's
inability to produce even prima facie proof of non-execution meant that the statutory burden on
defendants did not intensify. The testimony of attesting witnesses and other circumstantial proof
further corroborated the validity of the impugned documents. The trial court took note that no
credible evidence was led to discredit these witnesses or the transaction, and held that the
defendants' version stood established.
44. While cross-examining the witnesses DW-1 and DW-3, for the first time, the plaintiff had posed
questions to the said witnesses in respect of two firms by name Home Land Developers and Urban
Space. According to the plaintiff, these two firms were behind the back in creating Exhibit D7.
However, there is no whisper in the plaint in respect of the above two firms. Even in the evidence,
the plaintiff had not stated anything in respect of the above two firms having created the GPA as per
Exhibit D7 to knock of the suit schedule property. It is also to be noticed that Exhibit P7, the GPA,
has not been authenticated by the Sub-Registrar as per Section 33 of the Registration Act.
45. In respect of Ex.D.8, which was allegedly executed by Defendant No.1, it was found that she had
neither denied its execution in her written statement nor stepped into the witness box to dispute it.
Consequently, under Section 114(g) of the Indian Evidence Act, an adverse inference was justifiably
drawn against her. The principle laid down in the case of Sidhartha Vashist @ Manu Sharma v. State
(NCT of Delhi) ((2010) SCC Online SC
480)) was applicable, wherein it was held that if a party fails to rebut an allegation within their
knowledge, the court is entitled to presume the correctness of the opposite party's version. In the
present case, by failing to dispute Ex.D.8, Defendant No.1 allowed the document to acquire
evidentiary strength. The Trial court observed that Ex.D.8 and Ex.D.7 were executed on the same
day, before the same notary, and the non-denial of one GPA by Defendant No.1 significantly
weakened the appellant's challenge to the other.
46. Exhibits P7 and P8 are the sale deeds dated 21.09.2002 executed by Defendant No.6 as an agent
of the plaintiff and defendant No.1 in favour of Defendant Nos.7 and 8. Defendant No.6 being the
agent of the plaintiff, had signed the documents and presented them before the Sub-
Registrar. Such a power of attorney can be authenticated by the Notary. The plaintiff has failed to
give any explanation as to why she executed GPA as per Exhibit P19 in favour of Defendant No.5
though she executed an agreement of sale as per Exhibit D2. The plaintiff has not denied the
execution of Exhibit D2 though she had the knowledge as on the date of filing the suit, as the
existence of agreement of sale had been clearly mentioned in the sale deeds marked as Exhibits P7
and P8 produced by the plaintiff herself at the time of filing the suit. However, plaintiff had
authorised Defendant No.5 to sell the suit schedule property to any person inclusive of the
agreement holder. The said circumstance clearly gives room for doubt that the plaintiff had
suppressed some material facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 38
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
Further, the plaintiff has not at all narrated the circumstances as to why she chose Defendant No.6,
a totally stranger to her to act as her GPA.
47. Exhibit P20 is the certified copy of the cancellation of GPA. As per the document on 17.10.2002,
the plaintiff has cancelled the GPA executed by her in favour of Defendant No.5. It is the case of the
plaintiff that she gave notice to Defendant No.5 in respect of cancellation of the GPA as per Exhibit
P19. However, plaintiff had not produced any document before Court that she made known to public
in respect of cancellation of the GPA as per Exhibit P20. However, Exhibit P6 is the copy of the
notice dated 11.10.2002 issued by the plaintiff to Defendant No.5 to give information in respect of
cancellation of GPA. However, the address of Defendant No.5 mentioned in the said notice and the
causetitle of the plaint, are different. Hence, the cancellation of the GPA by the appellant / plaintiff,
was found to be ineffective by the Trial Court, under Section 208 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872,
which stipulates that termination of agency does not take effect against third parties unless such
termination is made known to them.
The evidence demonstrated that neither Respondent No.5 (Smt. Nagarathnamma) nor the
purchasers had been served with valid notice of cancellation. The registered deed of cancellation,
recorded under Book IV, did not provide constructive notice during encumbrance searches. Hence,
the sale deeds and consent deeds executed subsequently were shielded from invalidation.
Furthermore, under Section 206 of the Indian Contract Act, it is mandatory that reasonable notice
of revocation be given to the agent. Since no evidence of service or public notice of cancellation was
produced, the termination was not rendered effective either in law or in fact. These observations
were affirmed by the trial court, which found that the GPA cancellation was neither communicated
nor notified, thereby making it ineffective against third parties.
48. The Trial court also took note that the sale deeds executed by Defendant No.6 in favour of
Respondents No.7 and 8 (Ex.P.7 and Ex.P.8) were supported by prior agreements, substantial
consideration, and were registered.
No reliable evidence was presented by the plaintiff to show that these transactions were fraudulent.
The court found that the purchasers were bona fide and had valid title and possession, as also
reflected in the updated mutation records.
49. In view of the above discussion made considering the oral and documentary evidence found
place in the record, it is opined that the General Power of Attorney (GPA) executed by the Appellant
(Plaintiff) in favour of Respondent No.6 (Nazeer Ahmed) and Respondent No.5 (Smt.
Nagarathnamma) was validly executed, duly authenticated as per law, and conferred legal authority
to transfer the Appellant's share in the property. The Appellant voluntarily executed the GPA in
favour of Respondent No.5 on 20th January 1995, granting her full authority, including the power to
sell the property. Subsequently, on 13th September 1995, the Appellant executed another notarized
GPA in favour of Respondent No.6. The Trial court rightly presumed the validity of these documents
under Section 85 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which provides a legal presumption in favour of
notarized and duly executed GPAs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 39
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
The plaintiff / Appellant failed to produce substantial evidence to rebut this presumption.
Furthermore, both the Appellant and Respondent No.1 (her sister) entered into valid agreements to
sell their respective shares to third parties, confirming their intent to transfer ownership. Over the
years, they accepted significant portions of the sale consideration, reinforcing the legal standing of
the transactions. The sale deeds executed based on the GPAs were, therefore, legally valid and
binding. As a result, Issue No.1 which has been raised by this Court, is answered in the Affirmative.
50. Further, in view of the discussion above it is opined that the termination of the General Power of
Attorney (GPA) by the Appellant (Plaintiff) was not legally effective under Section 208 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872, as she failed to provide proper notice of termination to the concerned parties,
thereby making the subsequent transactions executed under the revoked GPA, valid. The Appellant's
alleged cancellation of the GPA on 11th October 2002, was not properly communicated to
Respondent No.5, and there is no proof that she received the notice. Further, the registered
cancellation deed executed on 17th October 2002, was recorded under Book IV of the Registration
Act, 1908, which does not provide constructive notice to third parties conducting due diligence
before purchasing the property. Consequently, when Respondent No.5 executed consent deeds and
sale transactions on December 28, 2005, in favour of Respondents No.7 and No.8, these
transactions remained legally valid as per Section 208 of the Indian Contract Act, which states that
an agent's termination is ineffective against third parties who have no knowledge of it. The mutation
records were lawfully updated, confirming the legal ownership of the purchasers.
Hence, we are of the opinion that the Trial court has rightly held that the Appellant's claim of
invalidation of the transactions due to GPA cancellation, is unsustainable.
Accordingly, Issue No.2 which has been raised by this Court, is answered in the Negative.
51. In view of the above findings and reasons, we are of the opinion that the Trial court has rightly
dismissed the suit, having thoroughly evaluated the evidence, applied settled legal principles, and
drawn appropriate inferences.
The GPAs were validly executed and acted upon; the cancellation was legally ineffective; and the
purchasers acquired valid title. Accordingly, the present appeal preferred by the appellant / plaintiff
requires to be dismissed, as the Appellant's contentions lack merit, and the transactions executed
under the GPA remain legally binding. No grounds for interference are made out.
Accordingly, we proceed to pass the following:
ORDER
i) The appeal in R.F.A. No. 1759/2020 preferred by the appellant / plaintiff stands
dismissed.
ii) The judgment and decree dated 07.02.2020 passed by the Court of the Senior Civil
Judge and JMFC, Anekal, Bangalore Rural District in O.S.No.2653/2006, stands
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 40
Smt.S.Savithramma vs Smt.S.Padmavathamma on 26 March, 2025
confirmed.
iii) All pending I.A.s stand disposed of as a consequence.
Before parting with this judgment, this Court places on record its deep appreciation for the able
research and assistance rendered by its Research Assistants, namely Mr.Pranav.K.B , Ms.
Sushmithaa Roshini R and Mr. Mohammed Sulaiman.
SD/-
(K.SOMASHEKAR) JUDGE SD/-
(VENKATESH NAIK T) JUDGE KS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127883450/ 41
