Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru.
Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
Author: Jaspreet Singh
Bench: Jaspreet Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:24454
Reserved
Court No. - 8
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 2699 of 2025
Petitioner :- Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, Thru. Secy. Syed Mohammmad Athar Nabi And Another
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. Finance Lko. And 13 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vikas Singh,Lalta Prasad Misra,Mahendra Bahadur Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Abhishek Singh,Puneet Chandra,Zia Ul Qayuim
Hon'ble Jaspreet Singh,J.
1. Heard Dr. L.P. Mishra and Sri M.B Singh learned counsel for the petitioners, Sri Puneet Chandra
learned counsel for the respondent no.4, Sri Abhishek Tomar learned counsel for the respondent
no.5, Sri Abhishek Singh learned counsel for the respondent no.14, Sri Altaf Mansoor learned
counsel for the respondent no.15 as well as Sri K.K. Sharma learned counsel for the respondent
no.16.
2. All the aforesaid private respondents have collectively raised preliminary objections regarding the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 1
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
maintainability of the instant petition. It is urged that the petition has been filed by the Society
through its Secretary who has been impleaded as petitioner no.2.
3. It is stated that the Society is governed by its bye-laws, a copy of which has been brought on
record, however, Clause 10(4) of the bye-laws of the Society categorically states that any proceedings
conducted by or against the Society shall be done by the Secretary after taking prior approval from
the Committee of Management/Society. It was urged that at the time of filing of the writ petition
there was no Resolution brought on record by which it could be ascertained that the Committee of
Management/Society had authorized the Secretary to institute the instant petition. Hence, in
absence of the Resolution the petition was not maintainable. In addition, Sri Altaf Mansoor has
raised another objection to the effect that the writ petition was signed on 17.03.2025 whereas the
affidavit is sworn on 17.02.2025. It is thus sought to be urged that on the date when the affidavit was
signed and sworn, the writ petition was not in existence and it has come to be filed at a later stage,
for this reason as well the petition is not maintainable.
4. In response learned counsel for the petitioners have urged that the Society is governed by its
bye-laws and in the bye-laws, it is categorically stated that the proceedings by or or against the
Society shall be conducted under the authority of the Secretary. It is urged that once in the bye-laws
itself it has been provided that it would be Secretary who is authorized to conduct or defend the
proceedings and the petitioner no.2 who is the Secretary has signed the petition, hence, it cannot be
said that the petitioner no.1 which is the Society and is represented through its Secretary which is in
consonance with Clause 10 of the by laws of the Society and is also in sync with Section 6 of the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 and for the said reason it cannot be held that the petition is not
maintainable.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the decision of the Apex Court in P. Nazeer v
Salafi Trust and another; (2022) SCC OnLine SC 382 and it was emphasized that in the said case the
Apex Court had taken note of Section 6 of the Societies Registration Act and it was held that every
society registered under the Act may sue or be sued in the name of the President, Chairman or
Principal Secretary or Trustees as shall be determined by the Rules and Regulations and only in
default of such determination the name of such person as shall be appointed by the governing body
can represent the Society. Since in terms of the by laws the Secretary is already nominated thus the
petition filed by the Secretary cannot be said to be without authority and moreover, Section 6 itself
authorizes the Secretary, inter alia, which is corroborated by Clause 10(4) of the bye-laws hence, the
petition cannot be thrown out on the ground of lack of Resolution.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioners has also relied upon the decision of this Court in Committee of
Management A.K College, Shikohabad District Firozabad and Ors vs State of U.P; (2000) 1 UPLBEC
777 to contend that the term of the Committee of Management continues from the date it takes over
charge till the time the new Committee is constituted. It is urged that in the instant case, the
Committee of Management is continuing as the new elections have yet not been held, consequently,
it cannot be said that the petition has been filed by a person not authorized or not acknowledged as
per bye-laws, hence, preliminary objections deserves to be overruled.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 2
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
7. The Court had heard learned counsel for the parties and on 27.03.2025 had passed an order and
the relevant portion thereof reads as under:-
"8. This Court had also heard the learned counsel for the parties on the preliminary objections
which primarily relates to the fact that since the petition has been filed by the Society, accordingly
its alter ego i.e. the Secretary who under the by-laws is authorized to file a petition on behalf of the
Society and is also entitled to defend any proceedings but the contention is that the Committee of
Management of the Society must execute resolution in favour of the Secretary. Reference has been
made to clause 10(4) of the by-laws and it is urged that in absence of any such prior authorization
the petition itself is bad and cannot be entertained.
9. Dr. L. P. Misra, learned counsel for the petitioners while responding to the said submission has
pointed out that Section 6 of the Societies Registration Act is quite clear and if the same is read with
clause 10 (4) of the by-laws, it would clearly indicate that the Secretary is authorized to file the
petition in terms of the by-laws as well as in terms of Section 6, hence there is no requirement to file
any separate authorization.
10. Learned counsel for the parties have filed certain decisions of this Court and the Apex Court in
support of their respective submissions.
11. Having considered the preliminary objections raised by the counsel for the private respondents
and the response of the learned counsel for the petitioners, this Court before dealing with the same
is of the view that an opportunity must be made available to the petitioners that in case if they do
feel appropriate, they may file any authorization if they so wish before the next date fixed. "
8. In furtherance of the aforesaid order, counsel for the petitioners filed a
supplementary affidavit bringing on record the notice, the agenda as well as the
Resolution which was passed authorizing the Secretary to file and prosecute the
instant petition.
9. In this context, Sri Abhishek Singh learned counsel appearing for the respondent
no.5 has further objected to the supplementary affidavit and submitted that the mere
fact that the Resolution which has been brought on record by the petitioners along
with supplementary affidavit is dated 08.04.2025 in itself is indicative of the fact that
the petitioners duly acknowledge that authorization in favour of the Secretary was
necessary prior to the filing of the petition or atleast by the time the petition came to
be filed and since on the date of filing of the petition the Resolution was not there
which came to be passed only on 08.04.2025 hence, the Secretary, did not have the
authority to institute the writ petition, hence, the petition apparently is defective and
deserves to be dismissed at this threshold.
10. Sri Abhishek Singh learned counsel in support of his submissions for sustaining
the preliminary objections has relied upon a decision of a coordinate Bench of this
Court in Baba Bariyar Shah Memorial Association v State of U.P. and Ors in Misc
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 3
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
Single no.1316 of 2016 decided on 15.03.2019. It is urged by Sri Abhishek Singh that
the facts of the instant case are quite similar to the case in Baba Bariyar Shah (supra)
wherein preliminary objection regarding the authority of the Secretary in absence of
a Resolution was held to be fatal and the writ petition was held to be non
maintainable and on the same parity the instant petition also deserves to be
dismissed while upholding the preliminary objections.
11. The Court has considered the rival submissions and also perused the material
available on record.
12. At the outset, it may be noticed that the Society i.e. petitioner no.1 as per its
bye-laws can sue and be sued through its Secretary. It is also relevant to notice that
the last Committee of Management/Society which was in control of the affairs of the
Society was represented by Sri Syed Mohammad Athar Nabi who is styled as the
Secretary and through him the Society has been impleaded as petitioner no.1 while
Sri Syed Mohammad Athar Nabi is impleaded as the petitioner no.2.
13. In the instant petition, challenge is laid to the order passed by the Deputy
Registrar, Firms Societies and Chits Lucknow dated 19.12.2024 whereby it has
decided an issue regarding membership. In this background, apparently, the Society
as per its bye-laws is permitted to sue or be sued in the name of the Secretary as per
Clause 10(4) of the bye-laws.
14. However, the contention has been raised by the private respondents that it only
permits the Society to sue or be sued through its Secretary but in order to sue or be
sued the Society must first pass a Resolution and in the instant case since the
Resolution was not present on the date of filing of the petition, hence, the petition in
itself is incompetent. It has also been contended that by filing Resolution dated
08.04.2025, it indicates that on the date of filing of the petition the authority was not
there and this defect cannot be cured at a subsequent stage by bringing Resolution
dated 08.04.2025 on record, while it is also against the pleading of the petitioner
made in para 47 of the petition.
15. Learned counsel for the petitioners while refuting the submissions of the private
respondents has also raised an issue that the manner in which Clause 10(4) has been
incorporated in the bye-laws it indicates that the prior approval of the Committee of
Management is required only in a case where the Society is required to contest the
proceedings but no such prior approval is required in a case where the Society has to
institute proceedings, in as much as, the bye-laws itself authorize the Secretary.
16. As far as the aforesaid interpretation is concerned that may not detain this Court,
at this stage. However, the fact remains that the Society is to be sued or be sued
through its Secretary. It is not disputed that the Secretary has instituted the petition
on behalf of the Society but it is equally true that as per the bye- laws the Society
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 4
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
must authorize the Secretary to institute the proceedings. The reliance placed on
Section 6 of the Societies Registration Act does not in any manner suggests that the
Secretary on its own may file any proceedings on behalf of the Society merely because
in terms of Section 6, he is treated as one of the Principal officers of the Society. All
what Section 6 indicates is the fact that the Society or a trust is to be sued through its
Principal Officers who may be the Chairman, President, Secretary or other persons
called by any other designation unless there is any contrary indication in the bye-
laws of the Society. In absence of any clear reference in the bye- laws indicating or
conferring power on any officer to represent the Society or in absence of the
availability or the willingness of the President, Chairman or Secretary of such a
Society only then such other person can institute the proceedings who is duly
authorized by the Committee of Management/Society.
17. In the instant case, the bye-laws of the Society clearly confers power on the
Secretary to represent the Society in legal matters, if that be so and the instant
petition has been filed through the Secretary it cannot be held, at this stage, that the
petition has been instituted by an incompetent person who is not authorized.
18. However, whether prior approval is required that is a question of fact that needs
to be considered. In the instant case, this Court finds that a Resolution has been
brought on record dated 08.04.2025 which authorizes the Secretary to continue with
the petition. Upon perusal of the said resolution, it appears to be more in the nature
of a ratification approving the act of institution of the writ petition by the Secretary.
19. It may be true that the said Resolution dated 08.04.2025, it can give rise to an
explicit inference that on the date of filing of the writ petition the Resolution was not
there. However, it is equally true that even if an act has been done by a person who
prima facie is authorized under bye-laws to represent the Society then without
bringing on record any contrary material that the said Secretary was not authorized,
an inference holding that the petition was not competent cannot be arrived at.
20. It is for the said reason that this Court after noticing para-47 of the writ petition
wherein it was averred that in terms of the bye-laws of the Society, the Secretary is
permanently authorized to file the cases on behalf of the Society and the Secretary
was authorized by the members through its Resolution to contest the cases in the
interest of Society that the Court in its order dated 27.03.2025 had granted time to
the petitioners to bring on record any Resolution if available. It is in furtherance
thereof that the Resolution dated 08.04.2025 was brought on record which as
already observed hereinabove is more in the nature of ratification of the act of the
Secretary rather than to authorize the Secretary for a first time to institute the
petition.
21. This issue can also be seen from another angle and that is once the Society which
is represented through its Committee of Management/Society may have instituted a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 5
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
petition without there being a formal authorization, however, upon being questioned
in this regard if the Society files a Resolution may be of a subsequent date then the
issue that requires consideration is whether a post facto approval can be given to
such an act by Committee of Management/Society or not.
22. From a bare perusal of the Resolution which has been brought on record by the
petitioners, it reflects that the issue regarding the life membership which was decided
by the Deputy Registrar of Societies has been challenged before the High Court in a
petition and even though as per bye-laws the Secretary is fully authorized to
represent the Society and it is reiterated that the members/Society, by majority,
authorizes the Secretary to continue with the said petition.
23. This reflects the will of the members/Society to support the action of the Society
represented through its Secretary to contest the proceedings. Even though this
Resolution is dated 08.04.2025, much after filing of the writ petition ie on
17.03.2025 but the fact remains that the person before this Court is the Secretary who
is representing the Society and as per the bye-laws, Secretary is the competent
authority to institute the proceedings, to that extent the institution of the petition
cannot be faulted.
24. Whether the Resolution was necessarily to be passed before institution of the
petition or a subsequent Resolution could cure the initial defect can be considered as
ratification by the Committee of Management/Society of an action taken on behalf of
the Society which may be irregular.
25. The word 'ratification' in itself implies that an initial defect is cured and to that
extent in proceedings such as a writ petition a hyper technical view may not be
desirable to defeat the rights of a juristic person who is represented by its alter ego.
26. Once the Committee has ratified the act of institution of the petition any
irregularity in filing the petition, if any, stands cured. This Court is fortified in its
view in light of the decision of the Apex Court in Maharashtra State Mining
Corporation Vs. Sunil S/o Pundikarao Pathak; (2006) 5 SCC 96 held as under:
"7. The High Court was right when it held that an act by a legally incompetent
authority is invalid. But it was entirely wrong in holding that such an invalid act
cannot be subsequently 'rectified' by ratification of the competent authority.
Ratification by definition means the making valid of an act already done. The
principle is derived from the Latin maxim 'Ratihabitio priori mandato aequiparatur'
namely ' a subsequent ratification of an act is equivalent to a prior authority to
perform such act'. Therefore ratification assumes an invalid act which is
retrospectively validated. [See P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Advanced Law Lexicon, (2005)
Vol. 4, p. 3939 et seq.]
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 6
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
8. In Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta [(1973) 2 SCC 543] the services of the General
Manager of a company had been terminated by the Chairman of the Board of
Directors pursuant to a resolution taken by the Board at a meeting. It was not
disputed that that meeting had been improperly held and consequently the resolution
passed terminating the services of the General Manager was invalid. However, a
subsequent meeting had been held by the Board of Directors affirming the earlier
resolution. The subsequent meeting had been properly convened. The Court held:
(SCC pp.546-47, para 14) "Even if it be assumed that the telegram and the letter
terminating the services of the appellant by the Chairman was in pursuance to the
invalid resolution of the Board of Directors passed on December 16, 1953 to
terminate his services, it would not follow that the action of the Chairman could not
be ratified in a regularly convened meeting of the Board of Directors. The point is
that even assuming that the Chairman was not legally authorized to terminate the
services of the appellant, he was acting on behalf of the Company in doing so,
because, he purported to act in pursuance of the invalid resolution. Therefore, it was
open to a regularly constituted meeting of the Board of Directors to ratify that action
which, though unauthorized, was done on behalf of the Company. Ratification would
always relate back to the date of the act ratified and so it must be held that the
services of the appellant were validly terminated on December 17, 1953".
The view expressed has been recently approved in the case of High Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan V. P.P. Singh [(2003) 4 SCC 239 : 2003 SCC (L & S) 424], [See also Claude-Lila Parulekar
v. Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. (2005) 11 SCC 73.]"
27. In National Institute of Technology and another v. Panna Lal Chaudhary and
another; (2015) 11 SCC 669 noticing the earlier decision of Parmeshwari Prasad
Gupta v. Union of India; (1973) 2 SCC 543 and High Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan v. P.P. Singh; (2003) 4 SCC 239 (supra), the Apex Court in Paragraphs 29
to 33 of Panna Lal Chaudhary (supra) has held as under:-
"29. The expression "ratification" means "the making valid of an act already done".
This principle is derived from the Latin maxim "ratihabitio mandato aequiparatur"
meaning thereby "a subsequent ratification of an act is equivalent to a prior authority
to perform such act". It is for this reason, the ratification assumes an invalid act
which is retrospectively validated.
30. The expression "ratification" was succinctly defined by the English Court in one
old case, Hartman v. Hornsby [Hartman v. Hornsby, 142 Mo 368 : 44 SW 242 at p.
244 (1897)] as under:
"Ratification' is the approval by act, word, or conduct, of that which was attempted
(of accomplishment), but which was improperly or unauthorisedly performed in the
first instance."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 7
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
31. The law of ratification was applied by this Court in Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta v. Union of India
[Parmeshwari Prasad Gupta v. Union of India, (1973) 2 SCC 543]. In that case, the Chairman of the
Board of Directors had terminated the services of the General Manager of a Company pursuant to a
resolution taken by the Board at a meeting. It was not in dispute that the meeting had been
improperly held and consequently the resolution passed in the said meeting terminating the services
of the General Manager was invalid. However, the Board of Directors then convened subsequent
meeting and in this meeting affirmed the earlier resolution, which had been passed in improper
meeting. On these facts, the Court held : (SCC pp. 546-47, para 14) "14. ... Even if it be assumed that
the telegram and the letter terminating the services of the appellant by the Chairman was in
pursuance of the invalid resolution of the Board of Directors passed on 16-12-1953 to terminate his
services, it would not follow that the action of the Chairman could not be ratified in a regularly
convened meeting of the Board of Directors. The point is that even assuming that the Chairman was
not legally authorised to terminate the services of the appellant, he was acting on behalf of the
Company in doing so, because, he purported to act in pursuance of the invalid resolution. Therefore,
it was open to a regularly constituted meeting of the Board of Directors to ratify that action which,
though unauthorised, was done on behalf of the Company. Ratification would always relate back to
the date of the act ratified and so it must be held that the services of the appellant were validly
terminated on 17-12-1953."
This view was approved by this Court in High Court of Judicature of Rajasthan v. P.P. Singh [High
Court of Judicature of Rajasthan v. P.P. Singh, (2003) 4 SCC 239 : 2003 SCC (L&S) 424].
32. The aforesaid principle of law of ratification was again applied by this Court in Maharashtra
State Mining Corpn. v. Sunil [Maharashtra State Mining Corpn. v. Sunil, (2006) 5 SCC 96 : 2006
SCC (L&S) 926]. In this case, the respondent was an employee of the appellant Corporation.
Consequent to a departmental enquiry, he was dismissed by the Managing Director of the appellant.
The respondent then filed a writ petition before the High Court. During the pendency of the writ
petition, the Board of Directors of the appellant Corporation passed a resolution ratifying the
impugned action of the Managing Director and also empowering him to take decision in respect of
the officers and staff in the grade of pay the maximum of which did not exceed Rs. 4700 p.m.
Earlier, the Managing Director had powers only in respect of those posts where the maximum pay
did not exceed Rs. 1900 p.m. The respondent at the relevant time was drawing more than Rs. 1800
p.m. Therefore, at the relevant time, the Managing Director was incompetent to dismiss the
respondent. Accordingly, the High Court held [Sunil v. Maharashtra State Mining Corpn., 2005 SCC
OnLine Bom 758 : (2006) 1 Mah LJ 495] the order of dismissal to be invalid. The High Court further
held that the said defect could not be rectified subsequently by the resolution of the Board of
Directors. The High Court set aside the dismissal order and granted consequential relief. The
appellant then filed the appeal in this Court by special leave. Ruma Pal, J. speaking for the
three-Judge Bench, while allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court held as
under: (Sunil case [Maharashtra State Mining Corpn. v. Sunil, (2006) 5 SCC 96 : 2006 SCC (L&S)
926], SCC pp. 96g-h & 97a-b) "The High Court rightly held that an act by a legally incompetent
authority is invalid. But it was entirely wrong in holding that such an invalid act could not be
subsequently 'rectified' by ratification of the competent authority. Ratification by definition means
the making valid of an act already done. The principle is derived from the Latin maxim ratihabitio
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 8
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
mandato aequiparatur, namely, 'a subsequent ratification of an act is equivalent to a prior authority
to perform such act'. Therefore, ratification assumes an invalid act which is retrospectively
validated.
*** In the present case, the Managing Director's order dismissing the respondent from the service
was admittedly ratified by the Board of Directors unquestionably had the power to terminate the
services of the respondent. Since the order of the Managing Director had been ratified by the Board
of Directors such ratification related back to the date of the order and validated it."
33. Applying the aforementioned law of ratification to the facts at hand, even if we assume for the
sake of argument that the order of dismissal dated 16-8-1996 was passed by the Principal and
Secretary who had neither any authority to pass such order under the Rules nor was there any
authorisation given by the BoG in his favour to pass such order yet in our considered view when the
BoG in their meeting held on 22-8-1996 approved the previous actions of the Principal and
Secretary in passing the respondent's dismissal order dated 16-8-1996, all the irregularities
complained of by the respondent in the proceedings including the authority exercised by the
Principal and Secretary to dismiss him stood ratified by the competent authority (Board of
Governors) themselves with retrospective effect from 16-8-1996 thereby making an invalid act a
lawful one in conformity with the procedure prescribed in the Rules."
28. In so far as the reliance placed by Sri Abhishek Singh on a decision of a coordinate Bench of this
Court in Baba Bariyar Shah (supra) is concerned, suffice to state that this Court finds that the said
decision has been rendered on the basis of its own facts and there was never any issue regarding
ratification of the act of the office bearers/Committee of Management nor this aspect was
considered in the said decision hence the proposition therein may not come to the rescue of the
private respondents.
29. In this regard it will be relevant to notice that ratio of a judgment is binding. However, when
there is difference in the facts of two cases it may making great difference in the precedent value of
such a decision.
30. Similarly, the decision cited by the learned counsel for the private respondent in Baba Hulasi
Das Shiksha Sansthan Thru Its Manager & Another v Deputy Registrar, Firms, Societies & Chits
Lucknow Region & Anr in Misc. Single No.2694 of 2013 decided on 02.05.2013 and in Saraswati
Vidya Mandir v State of Uttar Pradesh; 2003 3 AWC 1917 are not applicable to the extent as their
facts differ from the facts of this case.
31. In this regard this Court is fortified in its view in terms of the decision of the Apex Court in
Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd and others, (2003) 2 SCC 111 held as under:
"59.A decision, as is well known, is an authority for which it is decided and not what
can logically be deduced therefrom. It is also well settled that a little difference in
facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a
decision. [See Ram Rakhi v Union of India [AIR 2002 Del 458 (FB)] ,Delhi Admn.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 9
Society Anjuman Islahul Muslimeen, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 28 April, 2025
(NCT of Delhi)v. Manohar Lal [(2002) 7 SCC 222 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 1670 : AIR 2002
SC 3088] ,Haryana Financial Corpn. v.Jagdamba Oil Mills[(2002) 3 SCC 496 : JT
(2002) 1 SC 482] and Nalini Mahajan (Dr)v Director of Income Tax (Investigation)
[(2002) 257 ITR 123 (Del)] .]"
32. In light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the clear view that the petition cannot be said to be bad
for want of Resolution, specially, when it has been filed by the Secretary and any defect of prior
approval by the Society stands rectified by the Resolution dated 08.04.2025. The preliminary
objection raised by the private respondent stands overruled.
33. Having held that, this Court hastens to add that any observation made herein may not be treated
as an expression of opinion on merits and are only prima facie observation to adjudge the issue of
maintainability. All plea on merits are left open at this stage.
34. The matter shall be listed on 5th May, 2025 as fresh and in the meantime, it will be open for the
private respondents to file their response on merits of the petition.
Order Date :- 28.04.2025 Harshita
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46871473/ 10
