Sohan vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
Sohan vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29773
Court No. - 66
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 17894 of 2024
Applicant :- Sohan
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Diksha Verma,Swati Agrawal Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Jamil Ahamad Azmi
Hon'ble Sameer Jain,J.
1. Heard Ms. Swati Agrawal Srivastava, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Vijay Kumar, learned
A.G.A. for the State-respondent and Sri Jamil Ahamad Azmi, learned counsel for the informant.
2. The instant bail application has been filed seeking release of the applicant on bail in Case Crime
No.38 of 2024, under Sections 302, 201, 506 I.P.C., Police Station- Gaurabadshahpur, District-
Jaunpur, during pendency of the trial in the court below.
3. FIR of the present case was lodged on 21.02.2024 at 18:15 hrs. and according to the FIR, daughter
of the informant aged about 28 years developed relationship with the applicant and thereafter she
often wandered alongwith him and one day informant received information that applicant has taken
his daughter to Delhi and she was last seen alongwith applicant by his brother-in-law Vijay Bahadur.
It is further mentioned in the FIR that on 21.11.2023 last time informant had a conversation with his
daughter and thereafter his mobile phone was switched off and in the meantime applicant informed
his son that daughter of the informant is not alongwith him and she had gone somewhere and on
11.12.2023 his dead-body was recovered from a well. It is further mentioned in the FIR that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114955519/ 1
Sohan vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
applicant after committing her murder, concealed her dead-body in the well.
4. Learned counsel for the applicant submits on the basis of false allegation, applicant has been
made accused in the present matter and it is a case of circumstantial evidence and except suspicion,
it appears, there is no cogent evidence against the applicant on record.
5. She further submits that however, as per the prosecution, deceased was last seen alongwith
applicant by witness Vijay Bahadur but the statement of witness Vijay Bahadur does not appear to
be convincing.
6. She further submits that however, as per the informant on 11.12.2023 the decomposed dead-body
of his daughter was recovered from a well but there is no cogent evidence on record, which could
even suggest that actually alleged recovered dead-body was of the daughter of the informant.
7. She further submits that as dead-body was in a very bad condition, therefore, it reflects, it was not
possible to identify it.
8. She further submits that for identification of the dead-body, the blood samples of the informant
and his wife were tried to match with the tissues of the dead-body but from the DNA Report, which
has been filed by the State alongwith compliance affidavit dated 04.10.2024, it reflects, the blood
samples of informant and his wife could not be matched with the tissues of the highly decomposed
recovered dead-body and therefore, it cannot be said that the alleged recovered dead-body was
actually of the daughter of the informant.
9. She further submits that however, as per allegation when the applicant was arrested then he
confessed his guilt and on his pointing out the mobile phone of the deceased was recovered but
neither applicant ever confessed his guilt before anyone including police nor on his pointing out any
mobile phone of the deceased was recovered.
10. She further submits that even merely on the basis of recovery of the mobile phone of the
deceased on the pointing out of the applicant, it cannot be said that applicant committed the murder
of the daughter of the informant.
11. She further submits that applicant is having no criminal history and he is in jail in the present
matter since 18.02.2024 i.e. for last more than one year.
12. Per contra, learned A.G.A. as well as learned counsel for the informant opposed the prayer for
bail and submit that there is cogent evidence that applicant was having friendship with the deceased
and brother-in-law of the informant Vijay Bahadur witnessed the applicant alongwith the deceased
but they fairly conceded from the statement of the witness Vijay Bahadur, it could not be reflected
when he witnessed the applicant alongwith the deceased.
13. They further could not dispute the fact that the alleged recovered dead-body was in highly
decomposed state and from the DNA Report, it could not be reflected that the alleged recovered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114955519/ 2
Sohan vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
dead-body was of the daughter of the informant however, they vehemently submits that on the
pointing out of the applicant mobile phone of the deceased was recovered, therefore, it cannot be
said that he is innocent.
14. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
15. It is a case of circumstantial evidence and it reflects as applicant was having friendship with the
daughter of the informant, therefore, he has been made accused in the present matter by the
informant. Further, however, it appears, witness Vijay Bahadur, the brother-in-law of the informant
tried to give evidence of last seen against the applicant but from his statement recorded during
investigation, which was produced by learned A.G.A. during the course of argument, it reflects, the
evidence of last seen given by him appears to be vague as not date and time has been mentioned by
him when he witnessed the applicant alongwith the deceased.
16. Further, as per the prosecution, except above evidence of last seen, there is also evidence that
when applicant was arrested then he confessed his guilt and on his pointing out mobile phone of the
deceased was recovered but this Court finds merit in the argument advanced by learned counsel for
the applicant that merely on the basis of such recovery, at this stage, it is hard to believe that
applicant involved in commission of the present crime.
17. Further, record also suggests that the alleged recovered dead-body was in highly decomposed
state and it was not possible to identify the same and however for identification of the dead-body,
blood samples of the informant and his wife were tried to match with the tissues of the alleged
recovered dead-body but from the DNA Report, which has been filed by the State through
compliance affidavit, it reflects their blood samples could not be matched with the tissues of the
dead-body, therefore, till date precisely it cannot be said that the alleged recovered dead-body was of
the daughter of the informant.
18. Further, applicant is having no criminal history and he is in jail in the present matter since
18.02.2024 i.e. for last more than one year.
19. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in my view,
applicant is entitled to be released on bail.
20. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
21. Let the applicant- Sohan be released on bail in the aforesaid case on furnishing a personal bond
and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the following
conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless his
personal presence is exempted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114955519/ 3
Sohan vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or promise
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activity.
22. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty to move an
application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
23. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in by the parties
pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Zafar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114955519/ 4
