Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
CRM(M) No. 586/2022
CrlM Nos. 2240 & 1209/2022
Reserved on: 31.01.2023
Pronounced on:03.02.2023
Sohan Lal Sharma .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. M.A. Bhat, Advocate
v/s
UT of J & K & Anr. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Adarsh Bhagat, GA
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MA.CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
03.02.2023
1. This petition has been filed under Section 482 CrPC seeking quashment of the FIR No. 72/2022
dated 26.06.2022 registered at Police Station Thathri Doda, at the behest of respondent No.2,
wherein the petitioner-accused person was found involved in the commission of offence punishable
under Section 366/376 IPC.
2. Petitioner/accused pleaded following facts:-
a) That the petitioner is a defence personnel serving in Army in a unit of Rashtriya
Rifles as a sepoy and is presently posted at Anantnag. He is the only earning hand in
the family comprising of old aged mother and himself. His father has died when the
petitioner was of a tender age.
b) That the daughter of the complainant who is doing her MA and is major girl
residing in nearby village, managed Whatsapp number of the petitioner and started
messaging him from her Mobile No. 9149699762 and expressed her desire to marry
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 1
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
with the petitioner. At the time when the daughter of the complainant started
sending messages to the petitioner, the petitioner was on his active duty in Kashmir
Valley. The petitioner has never indulged in any such activity with the daughter of the
complainant which could be termed as indecent or offensive.
Thereafter the complainant and her daughter have been time and again approaching the mother of
the petitioner for marriage of the petitioner with the daughter of the respondent no.2 but the
petitioner has all along refused the proposal. The daughter of the complainant has been time and
again and at regular intervals pressurizing and trying to persuade the petitioner to marry with her
but the petitioner always has categorically been telling her that he is not willing to marry her. She
has been constantly text messaging the petitioner and using all her means to force the petitioner to
marry her but the petitioner has never agreed to her demand and she has even been threatening the
petitioner in her text messages that she will get her marriage solemnized with the petitioner even
forcibly. She says in her text message: ''Mai apse Zabardasti bhi Shadi Krvayu gi. Par Abhi nhi. Tum
ana par. Bht hua apka drama". This is chat of April 2022 at 10:40 p.m, there are other messages also
which clearly show that it is the daughter of the respondent no.2 who has been constantly trying to
force the petitioner to marry with her but the petitioner has always been showing no interest in
marriage with the daughter of the respondent no.2.
c) That the missing of the daughter of the respondent no.2 on 19.06.2022 and a report with the
police on 20-06-2022 where the petitioner is nowhere figuring in the whole story of the complainant
that her daughter had gone to Jammu, lived one night at Jammu and then went to Srinagar with
some unknown lady lived with her in a hotel at Srinagar and then she was recovered by the Thathri
Police from Outskirts of Srinagar. The petitioner has no concern with this whole episode but the
complainant has tried to use this episode to falsely implicate the petitioner in a serious criminal case
of abduction and rape only to blackmail the petitioner for contracting marriage with her daughter.
The allegations of the complainant that the petitioner had called her daughter on phone during
night at 10:00 p.m. and told her that he will marry with her and under this garb committed rape
upon the daughter of the complainant, is a story which ex-facie appears to be fabrication and a plot
to falsely involve the petitioner.
d) That the falsity of the allegations is clear from the fact that once the complainant had lodged a
missing report of her daughter with the respondent No.l and he, in pursuance to this report,
recovered the girl (daughter of the complainant) from Srinagar, then the girl must have told the
whole story to the respondent no.l and had there been any such thing happened with the girl, she
would have told the Police and Police would have registered the case but that did not happen
because after the police recovered the girl, based on her statement, the girl was handed over to the
parents and missing report ostensibly closed as settled. The report filed by the complainant on
26.06.2022 is completely an after-thought, a tailored and cosmetic story leveling totally baseless
and frolicsome allegations against the petitioner and the respondent no.l without considering the
consequences of the allegations upon the petitioner rushed to register a case under heinous offences
of abduction and rape u/s 366/376 IPC against the petitioner being case FIR No.72/2022 dated
26-06-2022 of Police Station Thathri Doda.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 2
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
3. Respondent in his counter has stated that the petitioner is involved in the serious crime, the crime
committed by the accused/petitioner is not only against the women is also against society as well. It
is further contended that the present petition under section 482 Cr.PC is not maintainable as the
petition is based on concocted story and involves factual disputes which can be adjudicated after
full-fledged trial by leading evidence before the competent court of law. The investigation in the case
is at very initial stage and scope of interference by the court in the matter of investigation is very
bleak, thus present petition deserves to be dismissed.
4. Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the matter. I have also perused the material
available on record.
5. According to learned counsel for petitioner, allegations leveled are totally baseless, malicious and
do not disclose any offence. It is averred that allegations made in the FIR, even if are taken on their
face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a
case against the petitioner and despite the fact that petitioner is being harassed by respondent No.2
by pressurizing the petitioner to marry with her and this is a beaten law of the land that where a
criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide or maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused, the same deserve to be quashed.
6. Before dealing with the contentions raised by the petitioner, it would be apt to understand the
scope of power of the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. The same has been discussed by
the Supreme Court in the case titled, State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Golconds Linga Swamy, 2004 (6)
SCC
522. Paras 5, 7 and 8 of the judgment are relevant to the context and the same are reproduced as
under:-
"5. Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquid alique concedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 3
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto.
................................................
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal
evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When
exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not
ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That
is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an
instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances
into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the
same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit
a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under
Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may
exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by
this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC 335) A note of
caution was, however, added that the power should be exercised sparingly and that
too in rarest of rare cases. The illustrative categories indicated by this Court are as
follows:
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 4
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the F.I.R. or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-
cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a Police Officer without an order of a Magistrate
as contemplated under S. 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
8. As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are very
wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be careful
to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power
should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court of a
State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts are
incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the
Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their
true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in
regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the
proceeding at any stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S. Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC
892), Dr. Raghubir Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would not be proper for
the High Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to
determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on such premises, arrive at a conclusion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 5
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous to assess the material before it and
conclude that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. In proceeding instituted on complaint,
exercise of the inherent powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the
complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken by the
Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the inherent powers under
Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that there should be meticulous analysis of the
case before the trial to find out whether the case would end in conviction or acquittal. The
complaint/F.I.R. has to be read as a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in
the light of the statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show that the
complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there would be no justification for
interference by the High Court. When an information is lodged at the police station and an offence is
registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material
collected during the investigation and evidence led in Court which decides the fate of the accused
person. The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot by
itself be the basis for quashing the proceeding."
7. On the same subject, recently the Supreme Court in the case of M/S Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt.
Ltd. vs. State of Maharastra & Ors, (Criminal Appeal No. 330 of 2021 decided on 13.04.2021, has
laid down the following principles:-
i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure contained in Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a
cognizable offence;
ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the cognizable offences;
iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence of any kind is disclosed
in the first information report that the Court will not permit an investigation to go on;
iv) The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly with circumspection, as it
has been observed, in the „rarest of rare cases(cid:129) (not to be confused with the
formation in the context of death penalty).
v) While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is sought, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry as to there liability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint;
vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the initial stage;
vii) Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an exception rather than an ordinary
rule;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 6
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping the jurisdiction of the police,
since the two organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one
ought not to tread over the other sphere;
ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary, not over lapping;
x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference would result in miscarriage of
justice, the Court and the judicial process should not interfere at the stage of
investigation of offences;
xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer an arbitrary
jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice;
xii) The first information report is not an encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts
and details relating to the offence reported. Therefore, when the investigation by the
police is in progress, the court should not go into the merits of the allegations in the
FIR. Police must be permitted to complete the investigation. It would be premature
to pronounce the conclusion based on hazy facts that the complaint/FIR does not
deserve to be investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law.
After investigation, if the investigating officer finds that there is no substance in the application
made by the complainant, the investigating officer may file an appropriate report/summary before
the learned Magistrate which may be considered by the learned Magistrate in accordance with the
known procedure;
xiii) The power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is very wide, but conferment of wide power requires the
court to be more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty on the court;
xiv) However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit, regard being had to the parameters of
quashing and the self-restraint imposed by law, more particularly the parameters laid down by this
Court in the cases of R.P. Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra), has the jurisdiction to quash the
FIR/complaint;
xv) When a prayer for quashing the FIR is made by the alleged accused and the court when it
exercises the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., only has to consider whether the allegations in the
FIR disclose commission of a cognizable offence or not. The court is not required to consider on
merits whether or not the merits of the allegations make out a cognizable offence and the court has
to permit the investigating agency/police to investigate the allegations in the FIR;
xvi) The aforesaid parameters would be applicable and/or the aforesaid aspects are required to be
considered by the High Court while passing an interim order in a quashing petition in exercise of
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. However,
an interim order of stay of investigation during the pendency of the quashing petition can be passed
with circumspection. Such an interim order should not require to be passed routinely, casually
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 7
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
and/or mechanically. Normally, when the investigation is in progress and the facts are hazy and the
entire evidence/material is not before the High Court, the High Court should restrain itself from
passing the interim order of not to arrest or "no coercive steps to be adopted" and the accused
should be relegated to apply for anticipatory bail under Section 438 Cr.P.C. before the competent
court. The High Court shall not and as such is not justified in passing the order of not to arrest
and/or "no coercive steps" either during the investigation or till the investigation is completed
and/or till the final report/ chargesheet is filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C., while
dismissing/disposing of the quashing petition under Section 482Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India.
xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie of the opinion that an exceptional case is
made out for grant of interim stay of further investigation, after considering the broad parameters
while exercising the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India referred to hereinabove, the High Court has to give brief reasons why such an interim order
is warranted and/or is required to be passed so that it can demonstrate the application of mind by
the Court and the higher forum can consider what was weighed with the High Court while passing
such an interim order.
xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High Court of "no coercive steps to be adopted"
within the aforesaid parameters, the High Court must clarify what does it mean by "no coercive
steps to be adopted" as the term "no coercive steps to be adopted" can be said to be too vague and/or
broad which can be misunderstood and/or misapplied.
8. From the forgoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear that the power under Section 482
Cr.P.C to quash criminal proceedings has to be exercised sparingly only in deserving cases in the
circumstances illustrated in the aforesaid judgments.
9. FIR sought to be quashed had been registered at Police Station Thathri of District Doda on
26.06.2022 on a report lodged by one Nirjella Devi W/O Bushan Kumar R/O Bag Barshalla, Thathri
District Doda alleging therein that on 20.06.2022 her daughter a student of Government Degree
College, Thathri did not return till 5 O'clock and that she had laid a missing report on 21.06.2022 in
this regard at the Police Station and SHO had brought back her daughter after being recovered from
Srinagar area to Police Station Thathri on 23.06.2022 and handed over her to them. On enquiry
from her daughter she disclosed that one Sohan Lal (petitioner herein) used to call her
telephonically frequently and a few days back at about 10 pm she was asked by him to come out and
he would marry her and that in the promise of marriage, she was sexually ravished; that on
20.06.2022 she had gone to college he met her on her way, gave her Rs.2000/- and told her to
board a vehicle to reach Jammu wherefrom his man shall meet her and keep her there; that in
Jammu, nobody met her and she kept roaming and next morning she went to Bus Stand where she
was weeping and suddenly a woman met her to whom she narrated the story and that woman who
was going to Srinagar took her along, she stayed in a hotel along with that woman and next day
police had recovered her from Srinagar and brought back to Police Station Thathri. On this report, a
case was registered vide impugned FIR for commission of offences punishable under sections
376/366 IPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 8
Sohan Lal Sharma vs Ut Of J & K & Anr on 3 February, 2023
10. During investigation of the case, the statement of the prosecutrix got recorded in terms of
Section 164 Cr.PC on 04.07.2022 wherein she stated that she had affair with the petitioner who
proposed her for marriage. On 24.05.2022 while she came back from the house of her sister at
9.30/10 pm accused intercepted her near shops and took her on the roof of a shop where she was
subjected to rape and thereafter she was threatened of dire consequences. He also assured her of
contracting marriage. On 26.05.2022 she was again called by him, however, on her refusal to meet
him, she was black-mailed of expose and when she did not meet him he started defaming her in
public and his friends. He used to tease her while going to and fro college. She had been given an
amount of Rs. 2000/- by the petitioner on 20.06.2022 to leave for Jammu and in case his man does
not meet her in Jammu she was advised to go to Anantnag, where he will contract court marriage
with her as they cannot solemnize the marriage at Thathri in view of their different castes. She spent
her night in a cabin of watchman of a show-room in Rehari area of Jammu and next day she
accompanied a lady to Srinagar. She had switched off her phone in Jammu as advised by the
petitioner and on reaching Srinagar she switched on, her phone at 5/6 pm and on tracing her
location, she was apprehended by the police and taken back to Thathri. On returning home, she had
narrated the story to her mother, her parents took up the matter with the family of the petitioner for
marriage and when they did not agree, FIR was lodged against the petitioner.
11. Coming to the facts of the instant case, the contents of the impugned FIR clearly disclose
commission of cognizable offences by the petitioner. The veracity of these allegations cannot be gone
into by this Court in the present proceedings. It is the investigating agency only, which is equipped
to test the veracity of these allegations. This Court cannot arrogate to itself the powers of the
investigating agency so as to determine the merits of the contention of the petitioner that the
allegations made in the FIR are false.
Even the allegations of mala fides against the informant by itself is not a ground for quashing the
criminal proceedings. The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No.2 has
lodged the impugned FIR only to wreck vengeance upon him can also be gone into by the
investigating agency during investigation of the case.
12. In view of the foregoing discussion, it is clear that this is not a case where contents of the FIR do
not disclose commission of any offence against the petitioner but it is a case where the contents of
the impugned FIR certainly disclose the commission of cognizable offences. Therefore, the exercise
of jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C to quash the impugned FIR in the instant case, would
amount to stifling a legitimate prosecution which is not permissible under law.
13. For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition and the same is dismissed
accordingly.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 03.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67709740/ 9
