Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12
June, 2023
Author: H.B. Prabhakara Sastry
Bench: H.B. Prabhakara Sastry
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 12TH DAY OF JUNE, 2023
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE H.B. PRABHAKARA SASTRY
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE C.M. JOSHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.100251/2019
C/W.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.100423/2019
IN CRL.A. NO.100251/2019
BETWEEN
SOMALINGAPPA YALIVAL,
S/O. NINGAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 56 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONNALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI L.S. SULLAD, ADVOCATE)
AND
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA,
CIRCLE INSPECTOR,
KALAGATAGI POLICE,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 1
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
REP. BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
2
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA,
DHARWAD.
2. BASAVARAJ YALIVAL,
S/O. SHIVAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 36 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
3. SANGAPPA YALIWAL,
S/O. SHIVAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
4. PRABHU YALIVAL,
S/O SHIVAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
5. MANJUNATH,
S/O. GURUSIDDAPPA DODAMANI,
AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
6. KUMAR OLEKAR @ VAJRAKUMAR,
S/O. KALLAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 35 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
3
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 2
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
7. MANJAPPA YALIVAL @ GANGADHAR,
S/O BASAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 28 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
8. MATTU CHKALABBI @ MRUTUNJAYA,
S/O. BASAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 21 YEARS,
OCC: AGRI.,
R/R HIREHONALLI,
TQ. KALAGATAGI,
DHARWAD.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI V.S. KALSURMATH, HCGP FOR R1;
SRI K.L. PATIL, ADVOCATE FOR R2 TO R8)
THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL IS FILED U/S 372 OF CR.P.C.,
SEEKING TO SET ASIDE THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT IN S.C.
NO.5/2016 DATED 18.04.2019, PASSED BY IV ADDL.
DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT, DHARWAD AND CONVICT
RESPONDENT NO. 2 TO 8 FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE U/S
143, 147, 148, 341, 302 R/W 149 IPC AND CALL FOR THE LCR
IN SESSIONS CASE NO.5/2016 IN THE FILE OF IV ADDL.
DISTRICT AND SESSIONS COURT, DHARWAD.
IN CRL.A. NO.100423/2019
BETWEEN:
STATE OF KARNATAKA,
REPRESENTED BY THE
CIRCLE POLICE INSPECTOR,
4
DHARWAD RURAL CIRCLE,
(KALAGHATAGI PS),
DHARWAD DISTRICT,
THROUGH THE ADDL.
STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
ADVOCATE GENERAL OFFICE,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA,
DHARWAD BENCH.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI V.S. KALSURMATH, HCGP)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 3
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
AND
1. BASAVARAJ,
S/O. SHIVAPPA YALIWAL,
AGED ABOUT 36 YEARS,
OCC: AGRICULTURE.
2. SANGAPPA,
S/O. SHIVAPPA YALIWAL,
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS,
OCC: AGRICULTURE.
3. PRABHU,
S/O. SHIVAPPA YALIWAL,
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS,
OCC: AGRICULTURE.
4. MANJUNATH,
S/O. GURUSHIDDAPPA DODAMANI,
AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS,
OCC: AGRICULTURE.
5. KUMAR @ VAJRAKUMAR,
S/O. KALLAPPA WALIKAR,
AGED ABOUT 35 YEARS,
5
OCC: AGRICULTURE
AND KIRANI SHOP.
6. MANJAPPA @ GANGADHAR,
S/O. BASAPPA YALIWAL,
AGED ABOUT 28 YEARS.
7. MUTTU @ MRUTUNJAYA,
S/O. BASAPPA CHAKALABBI,
AGED ABOUT 21 YEARS,
OCC: STUDENT.
ALL ARE R/O. HIREHONNALLI,
TQ. KALAGHATAGI,
DIST: DHARWAD,
PIN CODE: 580114.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI K.L. PATIL, ADVOCATE FOR R-1 TO R-7)
THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL IS FILED U/SEC.378(1) & (3)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 4
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
OF CR.P.C., SEEKING TO GRANT SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL
AGAINST THE JUDGMENT AND ORDER OF ACQUITTAL DATED
18.04.2019 PASSED BY THE IV ADDL. DISTRICT AND
SESSIONS JUDGE DHARWAD IN S.C. NO. 5/2016 AND SET
ASIDE THE JUDGEMENT AND ORDER OF ACUITTAL DATED
18.04.2019 PASSED BY THE IV ADDL. DISTRICT AND
SESSIONS JUDGE, DHARWAD IN S.C. NO. 5/2016 AND
CONVICT AND SENTENCE THE RESPONDENTS/ACCUSED FOR
THE OFFENCES PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 143, 147, 148,
341, 302 R/W. SECTION 149 OF IPC.
THESE CRIMINAL APPEALS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED ON 15.02.2023, COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT THROUGH VIDEO
CONFERENCING AT BENGALURU, THIS DAY, C. M. JOSHI, J.,
DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
6
JUDGMENT
These appeals arise out of the judgment of acquittal in SC No.5/2016 passed by the learned IV
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Dharwad, dated 18-4-2019.
2. The complainant-Somalingappa S/o Ningappa Yaliwal as well as the State have approached this
Court in these appeals.
3. The parties are referred to as per their ranks before the Sessions Court for the sake of
convenience.
4. The brief facts of the case are as below:
Based on the complaint filed by the
complainant Somalingappa Yaliwal (PW12)
Kalghatagi PS registered Crime No.280/2015 on 20-09-2015, wherein it was alleged that the
complainant was the resident of Hirehonnalli village of Kalghatagi Taluka, and his son Ningappa
was serving in Military for the last six years prior to the filing of the complaint and had come to the
village on 16-9-2015 on leave for 20 days. It was stated that there was a dispute in respect of
backyard of property bearing No.95 between him and accused persons for about two months. It was
stated in the complaint that one Bharamappa Yeliwal and Parvatevva Hurakadli, had allegedly
executed a relinquishment deed in favour of accused No.1 and the accused were contending that the
said property bearing No.98 was part and parcel of the property No.95 belonging to PW12.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 5
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
It was stated in the complaint that on
20-09-2015 at about 3.30 p.m. when the
complainant, his wife and children were in his
house, the friend of the deceased Ningappa i.e. PW22 - Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatigar had came
to his house and asked the deceased Ningappa to accompany him to his groundnut field.
Accordingly, they went on a motor cycle. Thereafter, at about 4.45 p.m. when the complainant was
standing at Hireagasi, Basalingappa Shivalingappa Yaliwal i.e. PW19 came and informed that
PW22- Mallikarjun Hatagar had informed him over phone that the accused had assaulted deceased
Ningappa near the crusher of Yaliwal on Dhulikoppa road, Hirehonnalli, in respect of the dispute
regarding the open site, with Machhu. Thereafter, Prabhuling Yaliwal i.e. PW13 and Manjunath
Yaliwal PW17 brought Ningappa on a motor cycle and the injured Ningappa was taken in a car
belonging to PW7- Rudrappa Yaliwal to KIMS hospital, Hubballi. It was stated that, complainant
-PW12, his wife Yallavva and PW13- Prabhuling M. Yaliwal and PW14- Mehaboob sab accompanied
the injured Ningappa in the said car to the hospital. It was also stated in the complaint that while on
the way to the hospital, the deceased Ningappa was enquired by the complainant and he informed
that the accused Nos. 1 to 7 had assaulted him while he was returning on the motor cycle near the
Yaliwal crusher with the weapons and had injured him. It was stated that the deceased Ningappa
had sustained injuries on his head, hands, neck etc., and while they were entering the compound of
the KIMS hospital at about 5.30 p.m., Ningappa died. Therefore, he sought for action against the
accused.
5. The said complaint was registered by the Investigating Officer for the offences punishable under
Sections 143, 147, 148, 341, 302 read with Section 149 of IPC.
6. The accused Nos. 1 to 7 were arrested by the Investigating Officer and they were produced before
the Court and later they were enlarged on bail. After investigation, the chargesheet was laid by the
Investigating Officer for aforesaid offences and on the committal of the case to the Sessions Court,
the Sessions Court secured the accused and framed the charges for the aforesaid offences, for which
accused Nos. 1 to 7 pleaded not guilty.
7. In order to prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution examined 23 witnesses as PWs- 1 to 23,
Exhibits P1 to P47 and MO 1 to 19 were marked in evidence.
8. The defence has got marked Ex.D1 to D17 in the cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses.
After recording the statements of the accused Nos. 1 to 7 under Section 313 of Cr.PC., the arguments
by learned SPP for the State and learned counsel for the accused were heard.
9. Accused had contended in their statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that they had not given any
voluntary statement before the Investigating Officer and had not produced any incriminating
articles, clothes etc. They contended that there was a dispute regarding property No.95 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 6
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Hirehonnalli village, but it was the deceased Ningappa, who used to pick up quarrel with various
people whenever he comes to the village saying that he is a Military man. They contended that
deceased Ningappa has grabbed the property of one Dyavanagouda Govind Patil by threatening him
and there was also an assault on one Basayya Chikkamath about 3 years prior to the incident and
also there was wrongful confinement of one Nagappa Sheelavantar by the deceased under the
pretext of illicit intimacy with one Laxmi and therefore, he had many people who were in enimical
terms with him and therefore, they have committed the murder, but not the accused persons.
10. After hearing the arguments, the Sessions Court, by the impugned judgment has recorded the
finding of acquittal.
11. The Sessions Court raised the following points for consideration which were answered in the
negative while coming to such conclusion:
"1. Whether the prosecution proves all reasonable doubt that, on 20/09/2015 at
about 4.30 p.m at Yaliwal crusher on Hirehonnalli- Dhulikoppa road, all the accused
1 to 7 being the members of an unlawful assembly came with a common object by
holding deadly weapons like longs and sticks, as there was dispute in respect of the
property bearing No. 95 of Hirehonnalli with the complainant and with an intention
to commit the murder, they have indulged in rioting and wrongfully restrained the
deceased Ningappa who was coming with C.W.16 Mallikarjun Hatagar on a motor
cycle and thereby all the accused have committed an offence punishable under
section 143, 147, 148 and 341 R/w Sec 149 of I.P.C. ?
2. Whether the prosecution proves beyond all reasonable doubt that on the above
said date, time and place, all the accused 1 to 7 being the members of an unlawful
assembly came with common object by holding deadly weapons as stated supra and
the accused 1, 4, 6 and 7 assaulted the deceased Ningappa with longs and the accused
2, 3 and 5 assaulted Ningappa with sticks and who succumbed to the injuries on the
way to K.I.M.S hospital Hubballi at 5.30 p.m. and thereby all the accused have
committed an offence punishable under Section 302 R/w. Sec. 149 of I.P.C. ?
3. What order ?"
12. Aggrieved by the said judgment, the complainant-Somalingappa S/o Ningappa Yaliwal, who was
PW12 before the Sessions Court, has approached this Court in appeal in Crl.A.No.100251/2019 and
the State has also approached this Court in appeal in Crl.A.No.100423/2019.
13. The appellants contend that the Sessions Court has seriously erred in appreciating the evidence
produced by the prosecution and failed to consider strong material evidence available. It is
contended that the evidence on record shows that the accused have participated actively in the
commission of the crime and the Sessions Court failed to understand the case of the prosecution in
accepting the strong material evidence and that the corroborative evidence put forth by the
prosecution has not been considered. It is contended that PWs 12, 13 and 22 and other witnesses
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 7
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
have spoken about the motive, the commission of the offence and the oral dying declaration by the
deceased Ningappa.
14. It is contended that PW12-Somalingappa Yaliwal, who is none else than the father of the
deceased has stated clearly in his evidence about the deceased Ningappa having disclosed the names
of the assailants. So also the evidence of the other witness i.e. PW 13 is also believable and the sole
eye witness to the incident PW22- Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatigar, has stated about seeing the
assault by the accused. It is contended that the Sessions Court failed to appreciate that PW7-
Rudrappa, the relative of the accused, has obviously turned hostile. It is contended that the Sessions
Court unnecessarily placed reliance on the evidence of PW7 and PW14 who had not spoken about
the alleged dying declaration made by deceased Ningappa. Therefore, the revelations by the
deceased about the assailants corroborate the evidence of PW22, which clearly falsifies the say of
PW7 Rudrappa and PW14- Mehboobsab. This aspect has not been properly appreciated by the
Sessions court in coming to the conclusion and therefore, they contend that the impugned judgment
is perverse, arbitrary and is based on the wrong inferences being drawn from the evidence available
on records.
15. The appeals were admitted by this Court and on issuance of notice, accused Nos. 1 to 7 have
appeared before this Court through their counsel and trial Court records have been secured.
16. We have heard the arguments by learned counsel appearing for the appellant/complainant and
the learned High Court Government Pleader for State. We have also heard the arguments by the
learned counsel appearing for the respondents-accused and have perused the records.
17. The points that arise for our consideration in these appeals are:
(i) Whether the prosecution has proved that death of deceased Ningappa was
homicidal death?
(ii) Has the prosecution proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused 1 to 7 have
caused the death of deceased Ningappa Yalival?
(iii) Whether the alleged act of the accused in causing death of deceased Ningappa by
assaulting him with machetes and sticks is culpable homicide amounting to murder
or not amounting to murder?
(iv) What order?
18. Before proceeding to consider the evidence, we are aware that the Appellate Court has to be
cautious while considering an appeal against acquittal. The law relating to an appeal in acquittal is
settled. The latest decision of the Apex Court in the case of Ravi Sharma vs. State (Government of
NCT of Delhi) and Another1 chronicles the consistent stand taken by the Apex Court over a long
period of time concerning the appeal against acquittals. It is relevant to note that the decision in the
case of Chandrappa vs. State of Karnataka2 in para No.42 lays down the following principles.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 8
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
"42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general
principles regarding powers of appellate Court while dealing with an appeal against
an order of acquittal emerge;
(1) An appellate Court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded;
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate Court on (2022) 8 SCC 536 (2007) 4 SCC
415 the evidence before it may reach its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and
of law;
(3) Various expressions, such as, 'substantial and compelling reasons', 'good and
sufficient grounds', 'very strong circumstances', 'distorted conclusions', 'glaring
mistakes', etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate Court in an
appeal against acquittal.
Such phraseologies are more in the nature of 'flourishes of language' to emphasize the reluctance of
an appellate Court to interfere with acquittal than to curtail the power of the Court to review the
evidence and to come to its own conclusion.
(4) An appellate Court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is double
presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence available to him under
the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be
innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly, the accused having
secured his acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and
strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate
court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."
19. Thereafter, the Apex Court in the case of Jafrudheen vs. State of Kerala3 in para 25 held as
below:
"25. While dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking Section 378 of the
Cr.PC, the Appellate Court has to consider whether the Trial Court's view can be
termed as a possible one, particularly when evidence on record has been analysed.
The reason is that an order of acquittal adds up to the presumption of innocence in
favour of the accused. Thus, the Appellate Court has to be relatively slow in reversing
the order of the Trial Court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the presumption in favour
of the accused does not get weakened but only strengthened. Such a double
presumption that enures in favour of the accused has to be disturbed only by
thorough scrutiny on the accepted legal parameters."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 9
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
20. All the above decisions along with many other precedents have been considered elaborately by
the Apex Court in Ravi Sharma's case and it has reiterated those principles and therefore, it is
evident that the Appellate Court should be cautious while reversing a judgment of acquittal. The
reason behind the principle is that the (2022) 8 SCC 440 accused has the benefit of innocence as a
basic principle of a criminal jurisprudence. Secondly, the accused has the benefit of acquittal by the
Trial Court which had the occasion to peruse and observe the demeanor of the witnesses and the
manner in which they had spoken before the Court. The confidence of the Trial Court arises on the
basis of the deposition of the witnesses who physically appeared before it. That advantage is not
before the Appellate Court and therefore, keeping in view these principles, the case on hand needs to
be appreciated by this Court. Therefore only if the approach of the trial Court is perverse and such
perversity go to the root of the case, the appellate court can intervene. PROSECUTION CASE:
21. The case of the prosecution as it unfolds from the chargesheet papers is that, there was a dispute
between the accused No.1 and PW12 regarding the property bearing panchayat Nos.95 and 98. The
accused were trying to construct a building in the property of PW12. The deceased Ningappa was
serving in Military and he had informed his higher officers regarding the dispute and as such, they
had written a letter as per Ex.P24 on 3-8-2015 to the Tahasildar, Superintendent of Police and other
officials of the Government stating that there was forcible, illegal occupation of the property of the
deceased Ningappa by one Basavaraj Sangappa Yaliwal and Shivappa Yaliwal. It was also stated in
the said letter that all efforts made by the deceased Ningappa went in vain and the family was under
the threat of dire consequences from the miscreants. When the request by the higher officers of the
deceased Ningappa was not fruitful, Ningappa had come to the village to resolve the matter. The
dispute was that the accused were trying to construct the house in property bearing panchayat No.
95 though they are claiming right in the property bearing panchayat No.98. After the deceased came
to the village on 20 days leave on 16.9.2015, the deceased as well as the PW12 had been to the office
of the panchayat and had met the President and complained about the claim by the accused. They
were informed that there will be a meeting of the panchayat on 21.9.2015 and they have to come to
the meeting and explain their case. But in the meanwhile, Ningappa was murdered on 20-9-2023.
Therefore, the prosecution contends that there was a motive for commission of the offence.
22. It is the further case of the prosecution that on 20-09-2015, when the deceased Ningappa was in
his house, his childhood friend, PW22- Mallikarjuna Mahadevappa Hatgar came to his house and
deceased Ningappa accompanied PW22 Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatgar to his groundnut field.
While they were returning back there was an assault as contended in the complaint supra.
Therefore, accused had a motive in respect of property dispute and the prosecution alleges that the
accused mounted assault on the deceased with weapons and killed him.
23. Soon after the receipt of the complaint by PW12, PW18 - Maralusiddappa Doddabasappanavar,
registered the case in Crime No.280/2015 and launched the investigation. The case was registered at
9.45 p.m. and the FIR was received by the Court at 2.20 AM.
24. On 21-09-2015, the inquest of the body of the deceased was conducted as per Ex.P23 in presence
of PW14. The body was subjected to autopsy by PW6-Dr. A.A. Nadaf. Thereafter, PW18 visited the
spot and conducted the spot mahazar as shown by PW22- Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatagar and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 10
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
the said spot mahazar is at Ex.P8. A machete was also seized from spot (MO5), along with the blood
stained mud, normal mud, blood stained twigs. On the same day, he records the statements of the
witnesses and then arrested the accused Nos. 1 and 6 and recorded their voluntary statement. At the
instance of accused No.1, the Investigating Officer seized the Long (a machete with long blade)
which was used by accused No.1 (MO No.7) and mahazar was conducted as per Ex.P16. Thereafter,
their blood stained clothes were seized by the Investigating Officer. The prosecution contends that
the accused Nos. 2 to 4 and 7 were arrested on 23-9-2015 and they also gave voluntary statement
and on the basis of which, the weapons like machetes and sticks and the vehicle used by them were
also seized at their instance under the mahazar.
25. On 29-9-2015, the Investigating Officer received the report of the Post Mortem of the deceased
conducted by PW6. Then the investigation was handed over by him to PW23-Motilal Ramaswami
Pawar. Thereafter, PW23 recorded the statements of the Police Constables who were involved in the
investigation i.e., carrier of the FIR, carrier of the MOs to the FSL etc., and after securing the
relevant documents, ultimately, filed the chargesheet. PW22 gave a statement under Section 164(5)
of Cr.P.C. before the Magistrate, Dharwad.
26. According to the prosecution, PW22-Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatagar, while fleeing away
from the spot informed PW19-Basalingappa Yaliwal, over phone to inform the incident to the family
members of Ningappa. However, PW13 and PW17 having got the information of assault on deceased
Ningappa, went to the spot over the motor cycle and then brought the deceased Ningappa on the
motor cycle by triple riding to Hireagasi (a place at Hirehonnalli village). Then PW12-Somalingappa
Yaliwal, his wife-Yellavva and PW7-Rudrappa Yaliwal and PW14- Mehboobsab Makandar along
with PW13-Prabhuling Yaliwal took the deceased in the car of the PW7 to the KIMS hospital,
Hubballi. The prosecution contends that, on the way to the hospital, deceased Ningappa had given a
dying declaration informing the names of the assailants. However, before the deceased reached the
hospital, when they entered the compound of the KIMS hospital, Hubballi, Ningappa breathed his
last. Therefore, the prosecution heavily relies on the evidence of PWs 7,12,13,14, 17 and PW22 in this
regard and also the evidence of PW6-Dr.A.A.Nadaf, who conducted the autopsy of the body of the
deceased. It also relies on the evidence of expert of FSL i.e. PW20-Dr. Mahadeshwaraswami Y.H., to
establish that the blood stains on the clothes worn by the accused also belong to the blood-group
which is found on the clothes of deceased Ningappa. Therefore, the prosecution contends that there
is evidence to show that the accused had made preparation and in view of the panchayat meeting
fixed on 21-9-2019, they were looking for an opportunity to kill the deceased Ningappa. There was
also an incident which had taken place in front of the panchayat office, where the accused had
threatened the deceased that they will kill someone of the family of the PW12.
27. It is in the light of the above contentions of the prosecution that the evidence on record and
contentions by defence need to be considered.
EVIDENCE
28. PW1-S.M.Hallad, happens to be the Police Constable, who took the body of the deceased
Ningappa to the Post mortem.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 11
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
PW2-Hema, happens to be the Women Head Constable who collected the PM report and submitted
the same to the Investigating Officer.
PW3-Sahadev Siddappa Dharwad, is a Head Constable who carried the articles 1 to 18 to the FSL on
the instructions of the Investigating Officer.
PW4-D.R. Kumbar happens to be the AEE of PWD who prepared sketch of the spot as per ExP2.
PW5-P.H. Takkalaki happens to be the Police Constable who submitted the FIR to the concerned
Magistrate as per instructions of the Investigating Officer. He states that he received the FIR at 9.45
p.m. and he submitted the same to the Magistrate who was sitting at Dharwad at 2.00 a.m.
PW6-Dr.A.A.Nadaf, happens to be the Medical Officer, who conducted the autopsy of the body of
the deceased and submitted the P.M. report as per ExP5 and the notes of the post mortem are also
marked at Ex.D3. The requisition submitted by the Investigating Officer to the PW6 in Form No.146
(ii) is at Ex.D1.
PW7-Rudrappa C. Yaliwal, happens to be the relative of both the parties and car owner, who took
the deceased in his car to KIMS Hospital, Hubballi. He has turned hostile to the prosecution case.
PW8-B.B. Belliwale, happens to be the pancha of the spot mahazar which is at Ex.P8, Recovery
mahazars at Exs.P10 and 11.
PW9-C.K Bommigatti, PW10-P.Y.Kichadi, PW11-I.C. Kamadhenu, PW15-V.M. Mugad, happen to be
the panchas who were present at the time of recoveries made by the Investigating Officer at the
instance of the accused.
PW12-Somalingappa Ningappa Yaliwal, happens to be the complainant and father of the deceased
Ningappa. He speaks about the motive, dying declaration, filing of the complaint to the police.
PW13-Prabhuling M. Yaliwal, happens to be the relative of the deceased Ningappa. He accompanied
the deceased from the spot to Hireagasi on motor cycle, along with PW17. Then he accompanied
PW12 and deceased to KIMS, Hubballi.
PW14-M.M.Makandar has accompanied the complainant and others in the car while going to
hospital and he was also a signatory to inquest panchanama.
PW16-D.M.Dhanigonda, happens to be the pancha who was present at the time of seizure of the
clothes of the deceased.
PW17-Manjunath.S.Yaliwal, happens to be the brother of the deceased. He and PW-13 had brought
the deceased from the spot of the incident to Hireagasi on a motor cycle.
PW19-B.S.Yaliwal, happens to be the person who has received the call from PW22 and had informed
PW-12 about the incident. He has turned hostile and denied that he had received call from PW22.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 12
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
PW20-Dr.Mahadeshwaraswami Y.H., happens to be the expert from FSL who speaks about the
blood stains and the groups. He also speaks about the blood stains found on two of the weapons.
PW21-Vinayak Chandrakant Annigeri, happens to be the scribe who wrote the complaint as per
Ex.P4 at the instance of the PW12 at KIMS hospital, Hubballi.
PW22-Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatagar, happens to be the friend of the deceased and an eye
witnesses to the incident.
PW18-M.R. Doddabasappanavar, CPI, who conducted major part of the investigation and PW23-
Motilal Ramaswami Pawar, CPI, is the Investigating Officer, who completed the investigation and
filed the chargesheet in this case.
THE ARGUMENTS:
29. Learned counsel Sri L.S. Sullad, appearing for the appellant/complainant contended that though
the prosecution has proved its case, the Trial Court has placed reliance on the hostile witnesses and
inconsistent discrepancies in the evidence to base its finding. The points he contended in his
submissions are as below:
(a) He submitted that PW12-Somalingappa Ningappa Yaliwal, PW13-Prabhuling M.
Yaliwal, PW17-
Manjunath Yaliwal and PW22- Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatagar are important witnesses for the
prosecution. He submitted that the evidence of PW12 and the documents at Exs.P24 to P27 show
that there was a motive for commission of the offence by the accused. The elaborate
cross-examination of PW12 regarding the dispute in respect of the open space of the panchayat Nos
95 and 98 and the fact that the higher officers of the deceased had written letter to the SP,
Tahasildar and etc., clearly disclose that there was a motive for the accused for the commission of
the offence and the said fact has been proved by the prosecution. He submits that the deceased had
only come for resolving dispute on a leave for 20 days and the meeting of the panchayat was fixed
for hearing the pleas of the parties on 21-9-2015. It is submitted that the accused had the criminal
background and therefore, the motive for commission of the offence has been sufficiently
established by the prosecution.
(b) He submitted that the accused coming to the spot with preparation by holding the weapons
clearly indicate that they were looking for an apt opportunity to finish the deceased Ningappa. The
deceased Ningappa and PW22 were found to be going to the land of PW22 and while they were
returning on the motor cycle, they were assaulted by the accused. The evidence of the
PW22-Mallikarjun Hatagar, being an eye witness clearly establish this aspect. Therefore, he
submitted that there was preparation for commission of the offence. Four Longs (machetes with
longer blade) and three sticks have been seized by the Investigating Officer at the instance of the
accused as well as from the spot. He submitted that the recoveries are proved by the evidence of the
panch witnesses.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 13
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
(c) He submitted that none of the injuries found on the body of the deceased show that he was
incapable of speaking. Though there is a small injury which had occurred on the mandible, it cannot
in any way show that the deceased was incapable of speaking. Therefore, the ability of the deceased
to speak before dying, while entering the compound of the KIMS hospital at Hubballi cannot be
doubted. He submits that the minute details about the status of the deceased Ningappa while he was
being taken to the hospital, as spoken by PW12, clearly establish that his evidence is believable. He
submitted that dying declaration before PW12 and PW13 is clear and there is no reason to discard
the same. He also submits that the deceased was fit as suggested by the defence to PW12 and he had
undergone the training in the defence. Therefore, he submitted that it cannot be believed that the
deceased was not capable of speaking while he was being taken to the hospital. Moreover, from the
spot, he was brought on the motor cycle and then he was shifted to the car of the PW7. He argued
that this also shows that the deceased was alive when he was taken into the car of PW7-Rudrappa C.
Yaliwal. He points out that the say of PW12 that the deceased Ningappa had requested for water
while he was being taken to the hospital has not been denied and therefore, the ability of the
deceased to speak and inform the names of the assailants cannot be doubted.
(d) He submitted that the evidence of the eye witness PW22 is believable unless the contradictions
are substantial. It is submitted that he was under threat and fear by the accused who were having
the criminal antecedents. He submitted that he was in the fear of the backslash of taking the
deceased to his groundnut field and while returning back the incident had happened. Therefore, the
pressure and the fear on PW22 who was the friend of the deceased Ningappa has to be understood
in the circumstances of the case. Later, PW22 gave a statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. before
the Magistrate and there also, he has stated about the names of the assailants. He submitted that
some discrepancies in the evidence of PW22 as to whether PW12 and himself had been to the
Kalagatagi Police Station in the evening on the date of the incident is minor and it cannot be a factor
which would discredit the testimony and that the fact remains that FIR has been registered by the
police after receiving the complaint from PW12-Somalingappa Ningappa Yaliwal at KIMS hospital,
Hubballi, which was written by PW21-Vinayak Chandrakant Annigeri.
(e) He submitted that the blood stains on the clothes of the deceased and two of the weapons seized
clearly show that they belonged to 'AB' group and the clothes of the deceased also have the stains of
'AB' group blood. Therefore, it is submitted that the blood stains of 'AB' blood group on the clothes
of the accused should have been explained by them in their statement under Section 313 of Cr.P.C.
(f) He submitted that the evidence of the PW18, Investigating Officer shows the investigation done
by him though there are some lacunae in such investigation. He submitted that such lacunae will not
go to the root of the case and it cannot be a circumstance which would favour the defence. It is
submitted that the investigation done by PW18 and PW23 do not show anything which is fatal to the
case of the prosecution.
(g) He submitted that the Trial Court suspected the presence of PW12-Somalingappa Ningappa
Yaliwal, in the car on the basis of the evidence of PW7. More importantly, PW13, PW14 and PW17
support the case of the prosecution that the PW12 traveled in the said car and therefore, the say of
PW12 cannot be brushed aside. He submitted that the Trial Court erred in coming to the conclusion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 14
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
that the deceased was not capable of speaking or giving any dying declaration. The injuries
sustained by the deceased were not properly assessed by the Trial Court in coming to such
conclusion. He submitted that the evidence of the PW6-Dr.A.A.Nadaf, clearly establishes that there
was nothing to believe that the deceased could not have spoken about the names of the assailants. In
fact, the evidence of PW6 throws light on the nature of the injuries sustained by the deceased and it
clearly establish that the death of the deceased Ningappa was a homicidal death. He further
submitted that the Trial Court disbelieved the evidence of PW22 due to inconsistency in the
evidence and his statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. He submitted that the statement under
Section 164 of Cr.P.C. was made by the PW22 under distress during the investigation and it is the
testimony before the Trial Court which gains importance. He points out that the discrepancy is not
in respect of the contradictions in material evidence, but it is only as to whether subsequent to the
incident PW12 and PW22 had been to the police station at Kalagatagi or not.
(h) Lastly, he submits that the Trial Court erred in holding that the clothes of the father, brother and
mother of the deceased were not seized by the Investigating Officer to establish that they bore the
blood stains of the deceased while he was being taken to the KIMS hospital. He submitted that this
observation by the Trial Court is unnecessary when PW12, PW13, PW7 and PW14 also say that PW12
was also present in the car, it was not at all necessary that their clothes be seized.
30. In support of his contentions, he relies on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Kushal
Rao Vs. State of Bombay4 the Apex Court in para 16 has laid down the following principles:
AIR 1958 SC 22 "(i) that it cannot be laid own as an absolute rule of law that a dying
declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated,
(ii) that each case must be determined on its own facts keeping in view the
circumstances in which the dying declaration was made,
(iii) that it cannot be laid down as a general proposition that a dying declaration is a
weaker kind of evidence than other pieces of evidence,
(iv) that a dying declaration stands on the same footing as another piece of evidence
has to be judged in the light of surrounding circumstances and with reference to the
principles governing the weighing of evidence,
(v) that a dying declaration which has been recorded by a competent magistrate in
the proper manner that is to say, in the form of questions and answers, and, as far as
practicable, in the words of the maker of the declaration, stands on a much higher
footing than a dying declaration which depends upon the oral testimony which may
suffer from all the infirmities of human memory and human character, and
(vi) that in order to test the reliability of a dying declaration the court has to keep in
view the circumstances like the opportunity of the dying man for observation, for
example, whether there was sufficient light if the crime was committed at night,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 15
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
whether the capacity of the man to remember the facts stated had not been impaired
at the time he was making the statement has been consistent throughout if he had
several opportunities of making a dying declaration apart from the official record of
it, and that the statement had been made at the earliest opportunity and was not the
result of tutoring by interested parties."
31. Regarding the proof of the oral dying declaration, the learned counsel for the appellant has relied
on the decision in the case of Atbir vs. Government of NCT of Delhi5 wherein, in para 22 it is
observed as below:
"(i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis of conviction if it inspires the full
confidence of the court.
(ii) The court should be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind at the
time of making the statement and that it was not the result of tutoring, prompting or
imagination.
(iii) Where the court is satisfied that the declaration is true and voluntary, it can base
its conviction without any further corroboration.
(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that the dying declaration
cannot be the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated. The rule requiring
corroboration is merely a rule of prudence.
(v) Where the dying declaration is suspicious, it should not be acted upon without
corroborative evidence.
2010 (9) SCC 1
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity such as the deceased was unconscious and
could never make any statement cannot form the basis of conviction.
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain all the details as to the occurrence, it is not
to be rejected.
(viii)Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to be discarded.
(ix) When the eyewitness affirms that the deceased was not in a fit and conscious state to make the
dying declaration, medical opinion cannot prevail.
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is satisfied that it is true and free from any effort to induce the
deceased to make a false statement and if it is coherent and consistent, there shall be no legal
impediment to make it the basis of conviction, even if there is no corroboration."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 16
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
32. He also relied on the decision in the case of Parbin Ali and another Vs. State of Assam6 to
contend that the statements made by the deceased can very much be believed if found credible.
33. Learned High Court Government Pleader appearing for the State has adopted the arguments by
(2013) 2 SCC 81 the learned counsel appearing for the complainant PW12. He submitted that the
evidence of the PW5-P.H.Takkalaki P.C., sufficiently explains the delay in reaching the FIR to the
concerned Magistrate and therefore, the judgment of acquittal by the Trial Court is not sustainable
under law.
34. Thus, both the counsel appearing for the appellants have sought for setting aside the acquittal
judgment and seek for conviction of the accused.
35. The learned counsel Sri K.L.Patil, appearing for the accused has argued on the following lines:
(a) He submits that the motive for the commission of the offence has not been proved
by the prosecution by producing sufficient evidence. He submits that if at all there
was a dispute, the matter is of civil in nature. It is submitted that the meeting fixed by
the panchayat on 21-9-2019 is not established and it was only the say of PW12 but not
the matter of the investigation. He submits that whenever the deceased used to come
on leave, he used to have rubbings with the localites. This is stated by the accused in
their statement under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. as well as suggested to PW12, though he
has denied.
(b) He submits that the alleged FIR at Ex.P4 is not the real first information report. It
is contended that PW12 allegedly gave statement to the SP at KIMS hospital at 6.20
p.m. and it was the real first information report. The said statement has not been
produced by the prosecution before the Court and as such, the one which was written
at about 9.00 p.m. cannot be termed to be a First Information Report. He submitted
that Ex.P4 was written by PW21. But the identity of PW21 is not proved and it is
doubtful as may be seen from the evidence of PW21. He was not from the same
village as that of PW12 and therefore, why he wrote the complaint even though there
were other police constables and officers present at KIMS hospital, is not explained
properly. It is submitted that though the alleged incident had taken place at about
4.00 p.m. and by 5.30 p.m. the body of the deceased was at KIMS hospital, the first
information report was received at 9.00 p.m. This delay is not explained properly and
therefore, the false implication of the accused cannot be ruled out. He submits that
PW22-Mallikarjuna Hatagar, in his statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. states that
he along with PW12 went to the Police station at Kalagatagi in the night and gave the
complaint. This is contrary to the evidence of the PW12 and as such, there is material
discrepancy which goes to the root of the case.
(c) He relies on the evidence of PW7 and PW14 who have not supported the prosecution. He points
out that PW7 denied that PW12 was present in the car while the deceased Ningappa was taken to
KIMS hospital. Therefore, the very presence of PW12 is doubtful and therefore, the dying
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 17
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
declaration of the deceased as stated by PW12 becomes unreliable. He also points out that the
PW14-Mehboobsab Makandar, also do not say anything about the dying declaration of the deceased
Ningappa. Therefore, the prosecution heavily relies on the close relatives of the deceased and PW12;
and as such, the evidence is unreliable. He submits the alleged dying declaration cannot be believed
as it is difficult to accept that the deceased was capable of making a statement. In this regard, he
relies on the decision in the case of Uttam vs. State of Maharashtra.7 In this decision, the Apex
Court after considering decisions concerning dying declaration came to the conclusion that when
there are two contradictory dying declarations, the accused is entitled for the benefit of doubt.
Obviously, in the present case, there are no such multiple dying declarations and therefore, this
decision cannot be useful for the accused.
(2022)8 SCC 576
(d) He points out that OPD chit at Ex.D2 clearly establishes that the deceased was brought dead. He
points out that OPD chit also mention that the deceased was brought by Mahaboobsab Makandar
i.e. PW14, but not the PW12-Somalingappa Yaliwal, the complainant. If the complainant, PW12 was
present, his name would have been found in the OPD chit as he was none else than the father of the
deceased Ningappa.
(e) The learned counsel for the accused also contends that there are many discrepancies in the
evidence of the prosecution witnesses. He submits that the Trial Court has considered these
discrepancies in detail while discussing the evidence on record. He submits that PW-13 says that he
does not know whose motor cycle was used to bring the deceased Ningappa from the spot to the
Hireagasi. It is pointed out that there are contradictions and improvements in the evidence of
PW-12 and the Investigating Officer had never secured any documents in respect of the civil dispute
between the accused and the PW-12. It is submitted that PW-12 is trying to falsely implicate the
accused in the matter and his evidence in seeking to produce certain documents before the Trial
Court which were not secured by the Investigating Officer clearly establish this aspect. He also
points out the improvements and the contradictions in the evidence of PW-22 regarding the place
where the incident took place, the conduct of the PW-22 after the incident etc. It is pointed out that
there are vague replies in the evidence of the PW-22 and as such his evidence is not reliable.
(f) The learned counsel for the accused also submitted that the descriptions of the weapons are not
properly established. He points out that whether it was a 'machu' or a 'long' is in dispute. Initially
PW-22 says that it was a 'machu' or 'chopper'. Later, he makes a U-turn and say that it was a 'long'.
His evidence before the Court as well as the statement made under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. are totally
contradictory in this regard. The discrepancy regarding the wooden handle or metallic handle is also
pivotal in this regard and therefore, the use of such weapon is not established by the prosecution.
(g) He submits that the recovery of the weapons made by the Investigation Officer at the instance of
the accused do not fall within the scope of provisions of Section 27 of Evidence Act. He contends
that, allegedly the Investigating Officer knew about the voluntary statement, the place of
concealment of weapon and thereafter, he had secured the panchas and then went to the alleged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 18
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
spot. When the Investigating Officer had the knowledge of the spot where the alleged weapons were
kept, such recoveries do not fall within the scope of the provision of Section 27 of the Evidence Act.
In this regard he relies on the decision in the case of Thimma Reddy Vs State of Karnataka8 where
the law relating to recovery made under Section 27 of the Evidence Act is dealt with.
(h) The learned counsel for the accused submits that manner in which the accused came to know
about the movement of the deceased is not forthcoming in the prosecution evidence. When the
deceased had come to the village on leave, the accused coming to know about such movement of the
deceased and he going to the land of PW-22 is totally by chance and therefore, it cannot be said that
the accused knew about the fact that deceased Ningappa had been to the land of PW-22. This aspect
has not been brought out by the prosecution and therefore, it is totally improbable that the accused
had committed the said offence.
(i) Lastly, he contends that the Post Mortem report clearly establishes that there was fracture of
mandible 2018(2) AKR 577 and therefore, the deceased could not have spoken and disclosed the
name of the assailants to either PW-12 or anybody else. Therefore, he contends that dying
declaration is not feasible and the evidence of PW-22 is not reliable and as such, the conclusion
reached by the Trial Court that there is insufficient evidence against the accused is correct. Hence,
he prayed for dismissal of the appeals.
36. In the light of the above submissions by the rival parties, let us examine the points raised by this
Court supra.
WHETHER HOMICIDAL?
37. The first aspect to be considered by this Court is, whether the death of the deceased Ningappa is
homicidal?
The evidence of PW6- Dr.A.A. Nadaf, throws light in respect of the injuries sustained by the
deceased. The autopsy report, coupled with the inquest mahazar of the body of the deceased which
is at Ex.P23 show the nature of the injuries sustained by the deceased. The PW14- Mehaboobsab
Makandar and one Gangappa were the panchas of the said inquest mahazar-Ex.P23. The other
relevant evidence in respect of the nature of the death of the deceased Ningappa is that of the eye
witness PW22.
38. The perusal of the evidence of PW6 and P.M. report produced at Ex.P5 show the following
injuries on the body of the deceased Ningappa, which are as below:
"1. Vertically placed abraded laceration measuring 4cmsx 1cms x bone deep present
over right side of forehead above right eyebrow.
2. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 7cms x 1.5cmsx bone deep present
over left side of forehead situated 5cms above left eyebrow, underlying bone is cut.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 19
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
3. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 5cms x 1cms x bone deep present over
front region situated 1 cms above external injury No.2, underlying bone is cut.
4. Chop wound measuring 7.5cms x 1.5cms x bone deep present over left side of head
situated 5cms above 1cms behind left ear, underlying bone is cut.
5. Chop wound measuring 5cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over left side of head
situated 1cms inner to external injury No.4, underlying bone is cut.
6. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 6cms x 0.5 cms x bone deep present
over top of back of head situated 12cms above left ear, underlying bone is cut.
7. Vertically placed chop wound measuring 6cms x 0.5cms x bone deep situated 1 cms
right of external No.6, underlying bone is cut.
8. Vertically placed laceration measuring 3cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over top
of head situated 3cms right of external injury No.7.
9. Horizontally placed laceration 3cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over back of
head situated 8cms behind right ear.
10. Vertically placed chop wound 5cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over back of
head situated 12cms behind right ear, underlying bone is cut.
11. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 7cms x 3cms x muscle deep present
over right side back (nape) of neck situated 5cms behind right side angle of lower jaw.
12. Obliquely placed incised wound measuring 5cms x 0.5cms x skin deep present
over back of nape of neck 1cms left of external injury No.11.
13. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 6cms x 0.5 cms x muscle deep present
over back of left side nape of neck situated 6cms back of left side angle of lower jaw.
14. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 12cms x 2cms x vertebra deep present
over back of right side of neck situated 2cms below external injury No.11 underlying
C5, C6 vertebrae are fractured.
15. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 4cms x 1cms x muscle deep present
over back of right side lower part of neck situated 2.5cms below external injury
No.14.
16. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 2cms x 1cms x bone deep present over
top of right shoulder 8cms inner to tip of right shoulder, underlying bone is cut.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 20
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
17. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 3cms x 1cms x muscle deep present
over back of right shoulder situated 3cms below external injury No.16. Its inner end
shows tailing (Superficial incised wound) up to 11cms.
18. Horizontally placed incised wound measuring 11cms x 2cms x muscle deep
present over back of right shoulder situated 1cms below external injury No.17. Its
inner end shows tailing up to 4cms.
19. Two superficial linear incised wound each measuring 12.5cms present over back
of right shoulder separated 0.5cms apart situated 3cms inner to tip of right shoulder.
20. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 8cms x 1cms x muscle deep present over
back of upper part of right arm situated 1cms above and right of right armpit.
21. Horizontally placed superficial linear incised wound measuring 11cms present
over back of right shoulder situated 6cms below external injury No.18.
22. Vertically placed chop wound measuring 6cms x 2.5cms x cavity deep present
over right side back of chest 6cms below external injury No.21 and 13cms from right
of midline, underlying bone is cut.
23. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 2cms x 1cms x bone deep present over right side
back of chest situated 9cms below external injury No.22 and 14cms right of midline underlying bone
is cut.
24. Horizontally placed superficial incised wound measuring 2cms x 0.5cms x skin deep present
over top of left shoulder situated 4cms inner to tip of left shoulder.
25. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 3cms x 1cms x bone deep present over back of left
shoulder situated 11cms down of top of left shoulder and 10cms left of midline.
26. Obliquely placed three linear contusions measuring 22cms, 9cms, 12cms present over right side
back of chest.
27. Obliquely placed three linear superficial incised wound measuring 21cms, 5cms, 13cms present
over back of lower part of chest and upper part of abdomen.
28. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 15cms x 4cms x bone deep present over outer side of
lower part of left arm and left elbow, underlying bone is cut.
29. Abrasion measuring 3cms x 1cms present over front of lower part of left arm situated 3cms
above left elbow.
30. Abraded contusion measuring 11cms x 10cms present over outer side of right shoulder.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 21
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
31. Abraded contusion 8cms x 6cms present over outer side of middle of right arm.
32. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 9cms x 2.5cms bone deep present over back of middle
one third of right forearm, situated 15cms below right elbow, underlying bone is cut.
33. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 5cms x 2cms x bone deep present over back of right
wrist, underlying bone is cut.
34. Obliquely placed chop wound measuring 1cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over tip of little
finger, underlying nail is avulsed.
35. Vertically placed chop wound 1cms x 1cms present over right side of neck 3cms below right side
angle of mandible, underlying lower jaw bone is cut.
36. Horizontally placed chop wound measuring 2cms x 0.5cms x bone deep present over right side
of face 1cms in front of right ear lobule, underlying bone is cut."
39. According to PW6, the external injury Nos. 28,29,32,33 and 34 are possibly the defence injuries.
It is the case of the prosecution that the deceased was assaulted by the accused with long and sticks.
Obviously, he being a defence personnel (a PT instructor in army -as stated by PW17), had resisted
and brought his hands across his head in order to avoid the assault. As a result, assault was received
on his hands and the above mentioned injury Nos. 28,29,32,33 and 34 were inflicted on the arms
and elbow. Therefore, it is evident that he offered resistance. These injuries cannot be termed to be
accidental injuries at any stretch of imagination. So also, the inquest mahazar produced at Ex.P23
also discloses that there were several injuries which can only be inflicted by way of assault. These
two documents which are at Ex.P23-Inquest mahazar and Ex.P5-PM report disclose the nature of
the injuries that could be inflicted only by way of an assault by a third party. The cause of death is
stated to be hemorrhage and shock as a result of injuries sustained.
40. A perusal of the evidence of PW14-Mahaboob sab Makandar, shows that he was present at the
time of the inquest mahazar on the next date of the incident and the it was conducted in his
presence.
41. It is relevant to note that the defence does not dispute the fact that deceased died due to the
above said injuries. The defence contends that the accused were not involved in the commission of
the offences, but it was somebody else who had inimical terms with the deceased Ningappa might
have committed said assault which has resulted in his death. Therefore, there being no resistance by
the defence about the nature of the death that it was a homicidal in nature, it can easily be
concluded that the nature of the death of the deceased Ningappa was homicidal in nature. Hence, we
answer Point No.1 in affirmative.
WHETHER THE ACCUSED CAUSED THE DEATH?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 22
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
42. Once we conclude that the nature of death of the deceased Ningappa is homicidal in nature in
view of the injuries sustained by him as above, the next question that arises is, whether the accused 1
to 7 committed the culpable homicide?.
In this regard, the evidence of PW7-Rudrappa C. Yaliwal, PW13-Prabhulig M. Yaliwal, PW17-M.S.
Yaliwal and PW22-Mallikarjun Mahadevappa Hatagar, coupled with the evidence of
PW6-Dr.A.A.Nadaf and PW20- Dr.Mahadeshwaraswami Y.H., gain much importance. The motive
to commit the offence, the evidence of eye witness, the oral dying declaration of the deceased and
the recoveries are the factors to be considered by the court.
THE MOTIVE:
43. The first aspect to be considered by this Court is, whether there was motive for the commission
of the offence. Of course, we are aware that the motive is of greater importance when the
prosecution relies on the circumstantial evidence. In the case on hand, the prosecution relies heavily
on the alleged dying declaration by the deceased Ningappa and the eye witness account of PW22.
Therefore, though motive is not of greater importance in the matter, it is necessary to ascertain that
the accused had the reason to have grudge against the deceased Ningappa and PW12.
44. PW12-Somalingappa Yaliwal, has stated in his testimony before the Trial Court that, he has
backyard bearing panchayat property No.95 and it is a open space and his relative Bharmappa
Basappa Yaliwal and Parvatevva Huragadali were owning property bearing panchayat No.98. He
states that the said property No.98 was relinquished in the name of accused No.1 and that the said
Bharmappa Basappa Yaliwal died in the year 2011. Parvatevva is still alive. The alleged
relinquishment was in the year 2014 and as such it was fake. Thereafter, the accused started
asserting that the said property bearing panchayat No.98 comes within the property bearing
panchayat No.95 belonging to PW12 and therefore, there was a dispute. He states that the accused
No.1 and his family members i.e. accused Nos. 2,3,6 and 7 had forcibly tried to construct a house in
the property belonging to PW12. The said dispute was informed to the deceased Ningappa and the
deceased Ningappa had apprised his higher officers, who had written a letter to the Superintendent
of Police, Dharwad and the Deputy Commissioner, Dharwad etc. The said letter is produced at
Ex.P24. Even then the concerned authorities had not taken any action and therefore, deceased
Ningappa came to the village on 16-9-2015, on 20 days leave. On 19-9-2015, PW12 and said
Ningappa had been to the office of the President of the Panchayat and appraised their contention
regarding the property. The President of the panchayat had informed that on 21- 9-2015 there will
be a meeting of panchayat and PW12 should come and appraise the members of the panchayat.
These facts which are mentioned by PW12 gets support from the document at Ex.P24. It is relevant
to note that the fact that there was a dispute in respect of the property bearing panchayat No. 98 and
95 is not much in dispute. However, it is the contention of the accused that the deceased Ningappa
had other people who are in enimical terms with him in the village and they might have committed
the offence.
45. The evidence of PW12 coupled with Ex.P24 and also the evidence of PW7 and other witnesses
show that there was a dispute regarding the open space in respect of property bearing panchayat No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 23
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
95 and 98. Under these circumstances, it is evident that there was a motive for the accused to
commit an offence is fairly established by the prosecution.
46. Apart from that, it is the case of the complainant, PW12 that while he and Ningappa were
coming out of the Panchayat Office on 19-9-2015, the accused had also threatened that one of the
members of his family would be killed or injured. It is relevant note that the said alleged incident on
19-9-2015, obviously, was not mentioned in the complaint. It is evident that the complaint need not
be an encyclopedia and it was written by PW12 while he was in grief of the death of his son
Ningappa. Under these circumstances, even though the accused denied that there was any such
incident infront of the office of the Panchayat, Ex.P24 indicates that there were threats by the
accused and therefore, the higher authorities of the deceased had written letter to the Deputy
Commissioner and others. Obviously, Ex.P24 mentions that the deceased had complained of the
forcible illegal occupation of his immoveable property adjoining his parental house by one Basavaraj
Shivappa Yelival and Sangappa son of Shivappa Yelival of the same village. It was also stated in
Ex.P24 that all efforts to persuade the miscreants to vacate the land has been futile, rather the
family is under the threat of dire consequences from miscreants. It was also stated that the police of
Kalaghatagi Police station were complained about the said acts of the accused, but they had not
registered the FIR. Under these circumstances, the Ex.P24 dated 3-8-2015 is clear indication to
show that there was the motive for the accused to commit the offence.
47. The next aspect to be considered is, whether the accused are involved in commission of the
offence? THE SOLE EYE WITNESS:
48. According to the prosecution, PW22-Mallikarjuna Hatagar is an eye witness to the incident.
PW22- in his testimony before the Trial Court states that he knew accused Nos. 1 to 7. He also states
that deceased Ningappa was his childhood friend. He states that on 16-9-2015 deceased had come to
the village on leave for 20 days. He states that on 20-9-2015 at 2.30 p.m. he had been to the house of
the deceased Ningappa and called the deceased to go to the groundnut field where they are
harvesting the ground nut. Accordingly, both of them went to their field on their bike and by parking
the bike at some distance they walked to their land. They spent some time in the field, ate
groundnut, got pan from father of PW22 and at about 3.30 pm they wanted to come back. The
deceased was riding the motor cycle and PW22 was the pillion rider and near the crusher of one
Yeliwala, the accused Nos. 1 to 7 came suddenly from behind the fencing bushes and pulled their (of
PW22 and deceased) shirts and therefore, both of them fell down. He states that when accused
assaulted the deceased, he shouted and the accused shouted that PW22 should also be killed and
therefore, being frightened he fled away into the fields. He states that accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were
holding the sticks and the other accused were holding the machete, called as long. While running
away, he informed PW19-Basalingappa Yaliwal over phone that the accused had attacked the
deceased Ningappa and PW19 had retorted him as to why they had gone there. Then he went to his
house. Further PW22 has also identified the accused Nos. 1 to 7 before the Trial Court.
49. PW22 further states that on the same day after about 10 p.m. PW12 came to his house and
informed that Ningappa had died and thereafter, they went to the Police station and PW12
confirmed as to whether the FIR was registered. He also states about the motive for the said assault
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 24
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
and states that the accused were shouting as to whether the deceased want to take the backyard.
PW22 states that on the next day police had came to the spot and he showed the spot and they
conducted the spot mahazar and the 'long' used by accused No.6 was lying there and he showed the
same and mahazar was prepared as per Ex.P8. The other articles seized i.e., normal mud, blood
stained mud, blood stained twigs etc., are identified by him and MOs 6, 10, 13 and 14 are marked.
50. It is also elicited in his evidence by the prosecution that on 4-11-2015, the police had brought
him to the Court at Dharwad and he had given a statement before the Court. The said statement
made by him before the learned Magistrate is at Exs. P46 and 47. In the said statement, he had
stated that while they were returning back by walk from their field, about five persons came towards
them from behind the fence and among them, he identified Basavaraj, Prabhu, Muthu and Kumar
and they were holding the sticks and machu. Fearing the assault, he ran away from the spot and he
also saw that Manjunath and Manjappa (accused No.4 and 6) were also going towards the field
holding sticks. He also saw that the accused were assaulting the deceased. Then he informed the
same over the phone to Basalingappa Yaliwal -PW19 and thereafter, he mentioned the names of the
accused.
In the cross-examination of PW22, much is elicited as to how he has come to the Court or whether
the summons was served or not. Obviously, PW22 had stated that he was under threat which he had
mentioned on 18-7-2017 at the time of the trial. The defence had sought for time for his
cross-examination and by observing that the witness was secured on proclamation, with necessary
directions for the safety of PW22 the Trial Court had granted the time. Therefore, it is evident that
PW22 being the star witness, had been subjected to detailed cross-examination. In the
cross-examination, nothing is elicited which discredits his testimony.
Para 25 of the cross-examination of PW22 shows that he did not inform the incident to PW12 but
returned to his house. It is evident that PW22 expected the backlash of the assault on the deceased
and therefore, he had informed PW19 and did not speak to PW12 who was standing near Agasi. It is
further elicited that when he visited the police station during night on the same day along with
PW12 police had not enquired him. It is also elicited that somebody had pelted stone on his house
during night. It was suggested to PW22 that on that night, the brothers of deceased Ningappa had
caused galata by visiting the house of PW22, suspecting his involvement in the incident, which is
denied by him. Thus, it is evident that PW22 had feared the backlash as the incident had occurred
when he had taken the deceased to his field and while returning back, the assault had occurred.
Obviously, it is for this reason that he did not orally inform the PW12 who was standing near the
Agasi. This conduct of the PW22 is noteworthy.
It is further elicited that he felt that he should rescue the deceased, but he says that the accused had
threatened him also. Para 29 and 30 of his cross- examination is relevant in this regard. It shows a
natural conduct. It is elicited that he had seen the deceased Ningappa having fallen down on account
of the assault. This elicitation in cross-examination of PW22 gains much importance about the
nature of the injuries. Certain minor omissions, which he had not stated before the Magistrate under
Section 164 of Cr.P.C. are suggested to him. Also he contradicted his say in 164 Cr.P.C. statement
that he and PW 12 and some others had gone to Police station and lodged complaint (Ex D13). It is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 25
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
pertinent to note that the substantial evidence of PW22 is that he had identified the accused before
the Court and he had identified the accused at the time of the incident and he had mentioned the
names of the accused to the police clearly. He was an eye witness to the incident and when the
accused started assaulting the deceased, he shouted and when he was also threatened, fled away
from the spot. It is also elicited in the cross-examination of PW22 that while he gave a statement
before the Magistrate, he was under fear. This mental state of PW22 needs to be appreciated by the
Court in the light of the fact that there was a backlash on account of the death of the deceased that
he may be the reason for the incident. If PW22 had not called the deceased to his groundnut field,
the incident might not have occurred. This aspect was in the mind of PW22 when he gave statement
before the police. However, PW22 has categorically stated that they were returning on the motor
cycle and accused had pulled the shirts and therefore, they fell down. He pleads ignorance as to
whether they were riding motor cycle while returning from the land was stated before the learned
Magistrate while recording the statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. These are the minor
discrepancies and cannot discredit his testimony.
In the cross-examination dated 21-7-2017, PW22 clarifies, as to whether they were walking back or
they were on the motor cycle. He says that they walked for some distance and then they were on the
motor cycle. It is also elicited as to whether it is a Machu or long. When he has identified the
weapons, the question as to whether it is called 'machu' or 'long' is of no relevance. The evidence of
PW22 shows a natural conduct during and after the incident. He feared to face PW12 and inform the
incident and therefore, went back to his house via backyard. The cross-examination in no way
discredits his testimony.
51. The next evidence which is of relevance is of PW19-Basalingappa Yaliwal, who was the second
person to know about the assault by the accused. PW19 states that, he only knows about the death of
the deceased Ningappa, but he denies that PW22-Mallikarjun Hatagara had informed him over
phone that the accused had assaulted the deceased. Therefore, he was treated as hostile and the
cross-examination by prosecution has not yielded any results. Therefore, the phone call made by
PW22 to PW19 does not get support from the evidence of PW19.
THE DYING DECLARATION:
52. The next important witness in the matter is none else than PW12-Somalingappa Ningappa
Yaliwal, who happens to be the father of the deceased Ningappa.
PW12 states that on 20-9-2015, PW22 had called on the deceased Ningappa while PW12 and his
family members were in their house. PW22 took deceased Ningappa to his ground nut field on a
motor cycle. Thereafter, at 4.00 p.m. PW-12 came to his another house at Hireagasi at their village.
While he was there, PW19- Basavalingappa Yaliwal, came there and informed that PW-22
Mallikarjuna Mahadevappa Hatagar, had called him over phone and informed that Ningappa was
assaulted with long and sticks by accused Nos. 1 to 7 on Dhulikoppa road near the crusher of one
Yaliwal. After getting the information from PW19, PW13-Prabhulinga and PW17-Manjunatha,
together went on a motor cycle and brought the deceased Ningappa on a motor cycle near the place
where PW12 was standing. He states that many people gathered at the spot and the PW14-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 26
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Mahaboobsab also came there. Thereafter, PW7 who was in his house nearby also came there.
Deceased Ningappa was helped to alight from the motor cycle of PW13 and PW17 and then PW7
brought his car and with the help of PW14 and PW7, the deceased Ningappa was taken into the car.
He states that PW12, PW13 and the wife of PW12 Yellavva, sat in the rear seat of the car and
deceased Ningappa was made to sleep on their thighs in supine position. While PW7 drove the car
towards the hospital, PW14 was on the left front seat of the car. It is stated that while they were
coming to KIMS Hospital, Hubballi, he enquired Ningappa as to what had happened. Then he states
that, Ningappa had informed that when PW22 and Ningappa were returning on the bike along
Dhulikoppa road and when they were to join Dhulikoppa road, Basya, Sangya, Prabhya, Doddamani
Manjya, Valikar Kumya, Sotta Manjya, Mutthu (the names as they are called in local slang) i.e.,
accused Nos. 1 to 7 had come with long and sticks and had assaulted him on the neck, head,
forehead, back of the head, arms etc. When PW-12 enquired the reason for such assault, Ningappa
informed that it was regarding the dispute of the backyard. He also stated that when the deceased
moaned, he was provided with water.
53. It is further stated by PW-12 that Ningappa informed to make him to sleep face down i.e., in
prone position and therefore, he was made to sleep facing down with his legs protruding out of the
window of the car. Ningappa stated that he be saved and then they came to KIMS hospital where the
deceased was taken into the hospital on a stretcher and after 30 minutes of examining the deceased,
the Doctors of the KIMS hospital informed that he was dead. Later, he says in his testimony before
the Trial Court that deceased had informed that accused Nos. 1, 4 6 and 7 were holding longs and
the accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5 were holding sticks.
In the cross-examination of PW-12, only denials are elicited by the defence. The suggestion to
PW-12 that the deceased was not in a condition to speak was denied. He also denied the suggestion
that PW-12 was not in the said car. Much of the cross-examination is in respect of dispute in respect
of back yard and the manner in which the accused were asserting their rights on the said property. It
is relevant to note that, much of the cross- examination of the PW-12 is about the denials. The
examination-in-chief of PW-12 is put to PW-12 verbatim, word to word to be false. All such
suggestions are denied by PW-12 meticulously. It is significant to note that the say of PW-12 that the
deceased moaned for water and then PW-12 had provided water to the deceased Ningappa was not
denied by the defence.
54. A perusal of the evidence of PW-13-Prabhuling Yaliwal, discloses that on 20-09-2015 he and
PW-17- Manjunath Yaliwal, were going on their motor cycle to their land at about 4.00 p.m. via
Hireagasi. The people were coming saying that Ningappa had been assaulted near the crusher on
Dhulikoppa road. Therefore, they went there. When they reached the spot, deceased Ningappa had
sustained injuries and the blood was oozing out and Ningappa pleaded them to take him to the
hospital and be rescued. Immediately, PW-13 and PW-17 took the deceased Ningappa on their
motor cycle and made him to sit in between them and brought him near Hireagasi. At Hireagasi
PW-7 saw that the deceased had bleeding injuries and therefore, he brought his car and in the said
car PW-12, his wife (of PW-12) Yellavva and PW- 14 took the deceased Ningappa to the hospital. He
states that PW-7 drove the car and PW-14 was sitting in the front and deceased Ningappa was made
to sleep on the thighs of PWs 12, 13 and Yellavva. He states that, when the deceased was enquired,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 27
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
he stated that while Ningappa and PW-22 Mallikarjun Hatagar were returning from their land and
while they were about to reach Dhulikoppa road, the accused Nos. 1 to 7 were standing by the side of
the bushes holding weapons in their hands and suddenly, they came and assaulted the deceased. He
also states that the deceased Ningappa had informed that the assault was regarding the dispute in
respect of the backyard. He also states that the deceased had requested to make him to sleep in
prone position. When the deceased demanded water, he was provided with the water and by that
time, they reached KIMS hospital compound and after entering the hospital compound, the
deceased had stopped speaking and his eyes were looking up. He was taken inside the hospital and
Doctors informed that Ningappa was dead. He also states that PW-22 has also informed about the
incident on the next day that the accused Nos. 1 to 7 had assaulted the deceased with long and sticks.
He states that PW-22 had informed that accused Nos. 1,2 and 6 assaulted deceased Ningappa with
long and accused Nos. 4 and 7 were also holding similar weapon and when they started assaulting
the deceased Ningappa, accused Nos. 2,3 and 5 assaulted with sticks and longs and seeing the same,
PW-22 had run away from the spot.
In the cross-examination it is elicited that there is dispute in respect of the land. It is elicited that
there are hospitals at Hirehonnalli and Kalagatagi. He states that they reached KIMS hospital at
5.30 p.m. and he returned to the village at about 10.30 p.m. He states that the police had come to
the hospital at about 6.30 p.m. It is elicited that after knowing about the assault near Hireagasi, he
did not try to inform either to PW-12 or others. However, when he returned with the deceased,
PW-12 and Yellavva were there. It is elicited that distance from the spot of the incident to the
Hireagasi is about 1.5 kilometers. He is unable to say about the name from whom, he came to know
about the assault on the deceased Ningappa. He states that he do not know about the motor cycle of
PW-22 which was used by him and the deceased on that day. He denies that the deceased was not in
a position to speak. He states that before they went to KIMS hospital, he had not met PW-22 or
PW-19. He states that he was not in a position to file the complaint to the police on that day. It is
elicited in the cross examination that it was PW-14-Mahaboob sab, who got the chit prepared in
KIMS hospital. Rest of the cross examination is about the denial of the statement in the examination
in chief. It is again, significant to note that his evidence that the deceased has moaned and had
asked for water was not denied in the cross examination. Para 32 of the cross-examination clearly
shows that deceased demanding water and PW-12 and PW-13 providing water to him was not
specifically denied by the defence.
55. The other important witness of the prosecution is, PW-17-Manjunath Yaliwal. It was PW-17 and
PW-13 who have brought the deceased Ningappa from the spot of the incident to Hireagasi. In his
examination- in- chief, he states that deceased was serving in the Military and he came to the village
on 3-9-2015 on 20 days leave. He reiterates what has been stated by PW-s- 12 and 13 in respect of
the dispute in respect of back yard of the house. He states that on 20-9-2015, between 2 to 3 p.m., he
and his family members along with the deceased were in the house and PW-22 came on his motor
cycle and called deceased Ningappa to go to their land. Then at about 4.00 p.m. he and PW-13 were
going to the land on the motor cycle via Hireagasi and came to know from the people that deceased
Ningappa was assaulted by accused No.1 and his companions. Therefore, they went near the crusher
of Yalivala on Dhulikoppa road and saw that the deceased Ningappa had fallen with injuries.
Deceased Ningappa pleaded to take him to the hospital and save him and blood was oozing from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 28
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
injuries. They brought him to the Hireagasi and thereafter, the deceased was taken to the hospital in
the car belonging to PW-7. He also states that PWs-12, 13 and mother of the deceased Yallavva had
gone to the hospital along with PW-7 and PW-14. Thereafter, PW-17 and his uncle Mahadevappa
went to KIMS hospital by bus and came to know that Ningappa died. He also states that he enquired
with PW- 13, who informed about the information divulged by the deceased while coming to the
hospital that accused Nos. 1 to 7 have assaulted the deceased Ningappa while PW- 22 and deceased
Ningappa were coming on the Dhulikoppa road. He reiterates what has been stated by PW-13 in his
evidence. He also states that PW-22 knew about the incident that the accused Nos. 1 to 7 have
assaulted the deceased.
In the cross- examination, it is elicited that before he reached KIMS hospital, police had arrived
there and he states that it was about 7 or 8 p.m. when he reached the hospital. He states that his
father had given complaint to the police and he had not given any information to the Kalagatagi
police. He states that when he and PW-13 reached the spot, there were none in the vicinity. It is
relevant to note at this juncture that PW-s- 13 and 17 had come to know about the incident from the
people who were near Hireagasi.
56. The cross-examination of PW-17 shows that there was no public near the crusher or near the
Dhulikoppa road where the deceased had fallen. Obviously, the distance between Hireagasi and the
spot is about 1.5 KMs. Therefore, at no stretch of imagination, the argument of defence that the
evidence of the PW-17 is contra to the evidence of PW-13, (who says that there are many people
from whom he came to know about the assault) can be accepted. In the cross- examination, it is
elicited that the police have not seized the blood stained clothes of PWs 13 and 17. The rest of the
cross examination is verbatim denial of the examination- in- chief.
57. The next important witness is, PW-14-Mahaoob Sab Makandar. He states in his
examination-in-chief that he knew accused Nos. 1 to 7 as well as PW-12- Somalingappa Yaliwal and
the deceased Ningappa. He states that deceased Ningappa had come to the village on leave on
16-9-2015 and there was a dispute between the accused No.1 and the deceased Ningappa. He states
that on 20-9-2015 at about 4 to 4.30 p.m. some people have gathered near Hireagasi and therefore,
he also joined them. He states that PWs- 13 and 17 also came on motor cycle with the deceased
Ningappa from Dhulikoppa road side and deceased Ningappa had bleeding injuries and the people
gathered were saying that they had to take Ningappa to the hospital. In the meanwhile, PW-7-
Rudrappa came there with his car and he and PW-7- Rudrappa along with the PW-12, wife of PW-12
-Yallavva and PW-13 took the deceased Ningappa in car to the KIMS hospital. When they entered
the KIMS hospital, the Doctors examined Ningappa and informed that he was no more. On
enquiring the PW-12, he (PW-14) came to know that the deceased Ningappa and Mallikarjuna had
been to the land and while returning, near the quarry of Ulavappa Yalivala, accused No. 1 to 7 have
assaulted Ningappa with sticks and longs. It is relevant to note that PW-14 had enquired the PW-12
and that PW-12 had informed that the deceased Ningappa had told him that the accused had
assaulted the deceased Ningappa. This say of PW-14 in para 3 of his examination-in-chief is relevant
to show that PW-12 had informed about the statement made by the deceased Ningappa to PW-12.
He further states that on the next day, police had called him for the inquest mahazar and he had
seen the injuries on the body of the deceased and the inquest mahazar was prepared between 8.00
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 29
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
am to 10 a.m. He identifies his signature on Ex.P23.
In the cross-examination, much is questioned as to how he received the Court summons and
warrants etc. We do not find that such cross- examination is of any relevance here.
58. It is pertinent that after issuance of summons and warrants, the presence of PW-14 was secured
by the Trial Court and he has deposed before the Trial Court. This elicitation in the
cross-examination about PW-14 that he not appearing before the Court immediately on receiving
the summons reflects that the witnesses who had deposed before the Court were under pressure by
someone. However, the evidence of PW-14 so far as it relates to the fact that PW-12 had also
accompanied the deceased Ningappa in the car to the KIMS Hospital is clear and is contrary to what
has been stated by PW-7 that PW-12 had not come in the car. In the cross- examination, it is further
elicited that there was dispute in respect of the Panchayat Property Nos. 95 and 98 between the
accused, PW-12 and the deceased Ningappa. It is elicited that there are various private hospitals
between Hirehonahalli and KIMS Hospital and he had prepared the chit at the KIMS Hospital.
Obviously, the perusal of the said chit marked at Ex D2 show that it was PW-14 who is said to have
accompanied the deceased to the Hospital. He states that they did not make any effort to take the
deceased to any private hospital in between. It is also elicited that the clothes of PW-13 and PW-17
were blood stained and there were also blood stains in the car. Further in para-11 of the
cross-examination, it was again elicited that the Police were writing as stated by PW-12 and he had
seen the same. Curiously, the time when the Police were writing the statement of PW-12 is not
elicited. The suggestion that he had not at all gone to the hospital and that PW-12 and his wife
Yellavva also had not gone to hospital has been denied by him.
59. The other witness who had accompanied the deceased Ningappa to the hospital as per the case
of the prosecution is, PW-7-Rudrappa Yeliwala. He states that usually he is residing at Dharwad and
occasionally he goes to Hirehonnalli village. He states that at about 4.00 p.m. he came to know that
near the bus stand, the deceased Ningappa, PW-13 and some others were there and Ningappa had
sustained injuries. He pleads ignorance as to how the injuries had happened and states that he took
the deceased Ningappa to KIMS hospital, Hubballi. The mother of deceased Ningappa i.e,. Yellavva
and PW- 13 as well as PW-14 Mehaboob Sab were in the car. He categorically says that PW-12 had
not accompanied him in the car. Therefore, he was treated as hostile and cross- examined by the
learned Public Prosecutor.
In the cross-examination, it was elicited that he knew that on 16.09.2015 Ningappa had come to the
village on leave. He denies about the knowledge of the dispute in respect of the backyard. Thus, his
evidence is only to the effect that he had taken the injured Ningappa along with his mother Yellavva
and Mehboob Sab to the hospital. He also does not say that PW-13 had accompanied the deceased
Ningappa to the hospital. In the cross-examination, it was elicited that he is cousin of the accused
No. 1 to 3. In the cross-examination by the defence, it was elicited that it will take about 30 minutes
to 45 minutes to reach KIMS hospital from Hirehonnalli. He states that the Police had visited the
hospital at about 6.30 to 7.00 p.m. It is elicited that since PW-14 informed that deceased Ningappa
had already died and therefore, they have to go to KIMS hospital and as such, the deceased was
taken to the KIMS hospital. He has denied the suggestion that he did not take the deceased
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 30
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Ningappa to the KIMS hospital. It is pertinent to note that he do not say as to why the dead body of
the deceased was taken to KIMS without informing to the police. Curiously, the defence has not
elicited at what time PW- 12 came to hospital and he gave statement to police.
60. The above evidence on record shows that PWs- 12 and 13 categorically say that the deceased
Ningappa had disclosed about the assault by the accused No. 1 to 7 on him near the crusher of one
Yalivala. The evidence regarding the dying declaration made by the deceased Ningappa is clear and
categorical. Obviously, they were sitting at the rear of the car and therefore, their proximity to the
deceased was more than PW-7 and PW-14. There is a possibility that PW-14 might not have heard
what the deceased Ningappa had informed to PWs-12 and 13. The evidence of PWs-12 and 13 show
that their testimony has not been impeached in anyway.
61. The evidence of PWs-12 and 13 show that there is nothing elicited in the cross-examination
which would render their testimony unbelievable which discredit their ability to say about the
incident. Their evidence appear to be natural and they were not impeached in any way by the cross-
examination. It is relevant to note that there may be certain minor contradictions or omissions
which do not render their testimony unbelievable. Obviously, PW-s- 12 and 13 were in grief when
the incident happened and their first response was to save the deceased Ningappa.
62. It was elicited in the cross-examination of PW- 12 that there were many hospitals on the way to
KIMS hospital, Hubballi. It was replied that, it was a Sunday and there are no hospitals where the
Doctors in the hospitals are available. It is evident that only hospital available for the public in and
around the village is the KIMS Hospital only. Of course, there may be certain private hospitals on
the way to Hubballi but the explanation given by PW-12 is sufficient enough to show that their
intention was to bring deceased Ningappa to KIMS hospital which had better facilities.
63. It is also pertinent to note that the evidence of PW-14 shows that he partially support the
prosecution case but the prosecution has not cross-examined him as to whether he had heard the
statement made by the deceased that the accused had assaulted him. He clearly states that the
deceased was injured and that there was a dispute between the deceased and accused in respect of
the backyard i.e. property Nos. 95 and 98. He states that he accompanied the deceased, PWs-12 and
13 and Yellavva to the hospital. He also states that PW-14 has driven the car to the hospital.
However, he does not say that the deceased Ningappa had stated before PWs- 12, 13 and Yellavva
that accused had assaulted him with long and sticks. This evidence of PW-14 that PW-12 was in the
car is of much importance as he is a witness not related to either the deceased or the accused. On the
contrary, PW-7-Rudrappa happens to be cousin of accused No. 1 to
3. When the evidence of PW-7 and PW-14 are contradictory to each other, the evidence of PW-14
gains credibility since he is not related either to the accused or to the deceased. Therefore, when the
evidence of PW-14 substantially support the say of PW-12, we do not find any reason to hold that the
testimony of PW-12 has to be discarded. Thus, the testimony of PW-12 holds ground and there is no
reason to disbelieve his version. The fact that PW-14 is also from the Hirehonnalli village and that
the accused are also from the Hirehonnalli village is an aspect which needs to be borne in mind.
Further, the cross-examination of PW-14 by learned counsel appearing for the defence shows that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 31
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
initially he was little reluctant to appear before the Court when the summons were issued by the
Trial Court. It was only on the coercive actions being employed by way of issuance of the warrants
that PW-14 had appeared before the Court. Under these circumstances, we find that the testimony of
PWs-12 and 13 having supported substantially by the PW-14, there is no reason as to why the say of
PW-12 and 13 is not to be accepted.
64. The next aspect which needs to be ascertained is, whether the deceased was capable of giving the
statement in the light of the injuries sustained by him.
It is pertinent to note that the deceased had sustained 36 injuries on his body. The injury Nos.35 and
36 were on the neck and mandibles of the deceased. It is evident that the injuries were on the neck
and on the jaws. Therefore, it is possible that the deceased Ningappa was capable of speaking and he
disclosed the name of the accused to PWs-12 and 13 while they were in the car. It has also come in
the evidence of PWs- 13 and 17 when they reached the spot where the deceased had fallen near the
crusher at the place of assault, he was pleading for saving his life and to take him to the hospital. The
evidence of PWs- 13 and 17 is clear in this regard. Therefore, the contention of the prosecution that
deceased was capable of speaking gains importance.
65. The evidence of PW-6 shows that there were no such injuries which affected the speech of the
deceased Ningappa. There were no injuries to the larynx and the throat. The injuries were on the
back of the neck. Therefore, when the evidence of PW-6 clearly show that larynx was not injured, it
is not possible to hold that the deceased was incapable to speak. More importantly, the PM report
shows that brain was intact though there were several injuries on head. This rules out that the
deceased died at the spot.
66. Significantly, either the prosecution or the defence has not elicited or cross-examined PW-6, on
the aspect as to whether the injuries had any effect on the speech of the deceased Ningappa.
Therefore, the injuries sustained by the deceased Ningappa do not show that he was incapable of
making any oral statement.
67. The Trial Court has come to the conclusion that considering 36 injuries suffered by deceased
Ningappa, it cannot be said that he is capable of giving any statement. It is relevant to note that
PWs-13 and 17 state that when they reached the spot where the deceased had fallen he was pleading
for the medical help and to save him. This say of the PW-s-13 and 17 coupled with the time gap
between the deceased being picked up by PW-s-13 and 17 from the spot and the statement given by
him on the way to the hospital plays a vital role. It is necessary to note that unless the injuries are
directly on the larynx and it damages the larynx, a person who suffers injuries would continue to
speak till he fades out. Under these circumstances, we find that the say of PWs-13 and 17 coupled
with the testimony of PW-12 establish that the deceased was capable of giving the statement and he
had made statement before PWs-12 and 13 that the accused 1 to 7 had assaulted the deceased with
longs and sticks. Further, there is no reason as to why the testimony of PWs- 12, 13 and 17 should be
discarded. When PW-7 and PW-14 have not fully supported the case of the prosecution, that portion
of the evidence which they have supported the case of the prosecution has to be accepted. When the
evidence of PW-14 supports the version of PWs- 12 and 13 that they have accompanied the deceased
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 32
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Ningappa in the car to the hospital and when PW-7 admits that he drove the deceased to the
hospital, such evidence has to be accepted and it supports the case of the prosecution. In no way, the
testimony of PWs- 12 and 13 was impeached by the defence.
THE RECOVERIES:
68. The evidence of PW-18- M.R. Doddabasappanavar, Investigating Officer, who
had initiated the investigation since inception shows that the accused Nos. 1 and 6
were arrested on 21-9-2015 and on questioning them, accused No.1 gave voluntary
statement as per Ex.P35 and informed that he would produce the weapon used for
the commission of the offence. As such, the Investigating Officer has summoned
PW-10-P.Y.Kichadi and CW7 and then accused No.1 led to the spot where he had
hidden the Long which he had used for commission of the offence. The said weapon
at MO 7 was seized under Ex.P16. Thereafter, on return to the police station accused
No.1 also produced the clothes and were seized under the mahazar in the presence of
PW-8-B.B.Belliwale and CW-4.
69. Thereafter, accused No.6 also gave a voluntary statement as at Ex.P36 and
produced the clothes worn by him and they were seized under mahazar as per Ex.P11
in the presence of PW-8-Belliwale and CW4. Thus, PW-8 and CW 4 were the panchas
in respect of the recovery of clothes of accused Nos. 1 and 6. The evidence of PW-10-
P.Y. Kichadi, who is the pancha for the recovery discloses that on 21-9-2015 the police had called
him and he and CW7 went to the police station. The police enquired the accused No.1 and he
informed that he had hidden the long by the side of the land of one Basamma and they went in
police jeep and accused No.1 led the police to the said spot and picked up the MO 7 from the bushes
and produced it. It was seized under the mahazar as per Ex.P16. This evidence of PW-10 shows that
the accused No.1 was questioned in the police station and accused No.1 led police and panchas to the
spot. It corroborates the evidence of PW-18 who states that soon after the accused gave the
voluntary statement, he had summoned the panchas and they went to the place where MO 7 was
hidden.
70. After return from the spot, the clothes worn by the accused Nos. 1 and 6 were seized by the
Investigating Officer and they were seized under the two mahazars i.e. Exs.P10 and 11.
PW-8-B.B.Belliwale, was the pancha for the said mahazars. The evidence of PW-8 discloses that
accused No.1 had produced his blood stained full shirt and jeans pant and it was seized under
mahazar Ex.P10. He has identified the same as MO 15 and 16. He states that after half an hour of the
said mahazar, the accused No.6 also produced his T shirt and the pant and they were seized under
the mahazar as per Ex.P11 and they were at MO 17 and 18.
In the cross- examination of PW-8, it is elicited that the signatures were taken by the police on 4 to 5
blank papers. However, the evidence of the investigating officer in this regard is clear. Sofar as
recovery is concerned, PW-8 states that he was present in the police station in the evening on
21-9-2015 and denies that the police had not recovered the clothes of accused Nos. 1 and 6. Even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 33
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
though, his testimony creates doubt in respect of the mahazar prepared at spot of incident (Ex.P8),
his testimony withstands the say of the police that the clothes of the accused Nos. 1 and 6 were
recovered in the police station.
71. Sofar as PW-10-P.Y. Kichadi, is concerned, his cross examination is clear and categorical in
saying that accused No.1 led the Investigating Officer to the spot where he had hidden the weapon.
He has denied the suggestion that no such weapon was seized and he has replied that the said spot
was about one kilometre from the village. He is also clear and categorical in saying that mahazar was
drawn between 3.50 to 4.20 p.m. Therefore, there is no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PW-10
regarding the said recovery.
72. The Investigating Officer- PW-18 states that accused Nos. 2 to 4 and 7 were arrested on
23-9-2015 and they also gave voluntary statements as per Exs.37, 38, 39 and 41. He states that when
the accused No.2 and 3 gave the voluntary statement, he summoned panchas PW-9 and CW-8 to the
police station and the accused led for the recovery of the sticks. The perusal of evidence of PW-9
discloses that the accused No.2 was enquired by the investigating officer and he informed that he
would produce the stick which was used by him. Accordingly, the police and the panchas went to the
spot where the stick was thrown and he produced the said stick and it was seized under the mahazar
as Ex.P12. He identifies the said stick at MO8.
73. Thereafter, accused No.3 was enquired, he also led the police and panchas to the spot where he
has hidden the stick and mahazar was drawn for the recovery of MO.9 as per Ex.P14. The cross
examination of the PW- 9 discloses that, it was suggested to him that his son was working as the
driver on the vehicle belonging to PW-12 Somalingappa. He has denied the said suggestion. The
cross- examination tries to elicit that he had political connections and he had stated that he had
contested for Panchayat, but had lost. It is elicited that he did not give the information to the police
to write the mahazar, but he has read the mahazar and thereafter, he signed it. An effort was made
in the cross examination to elicit that he is an interested witness. But there is no clear elicitation that
he is an interested witness as he is close to the family of PW-12. Thus, the evidence of PW-10 shows
that the accused Nos.2 and 3 had mentioned about the sticks and they had led the police for the
recovery of MOs 8 and
9.
74. In pursuance to the voluntary statements of accused Nos. 4 and 7, Investigating Officer states
that he has summoned PW-11 and CW10 and accused were enquired and they disclosed that they
would produce a stick and Long and they led the investigating officer and panchas to the respective
spots. The perusal of evidence of PW-11- Irappa Kamadhenu, shows that he and CW10 Manjunath
were called to the police station. On enquiry, accused No.4 had told that he would produce the long
which was used for commission of the offence. Accordingly, accused No.4 led the police and panchas
to the place on Hubballi Karwar road near bridge and produced the Long which was seized by the
police.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 34
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
After that, when PW-11 and CW10 were about to return to their house, police said that there is
another mahazar to be done and accused No.7 was in police station and on enquiry, accused No.1
told about the place where he had kept the long. Accordingly, they went to the place along with
accused No.7 and he produced the weapon. Thus, the evidence of PW-11 in this regard clearly
establish that recoveries were made as per the statement made by the accused Nos. 4 and 7 in his
presence. The police have conducted the mahazars as per Exs.P18 and P21 and he has identified his
signatures and the contents of the mahazars to be correct.
In the cross-examination, PW-11 states that he is from Begur village and he is a distant relative of
PW-12. He states that when he went to the police station PW-12 was not in the police station. In the
cross-examination, it is categorically elicited that when he was in the police station, accused 4 and 7
have not stated the place where they have kept the weapon but only say that they will produce the
weapons if they go to the said spot. This elicitation in the cross- examination of PW-11 discloses that
the Investigating Officer did not have prior information as to the place where the weapons were
kept.
75. PW-18, Investigating Officer states that accused No.5 gave voluntary statement as per Ex.P41
and said that he would produce the stick and Scorpio vehicle which was used to come to the spot of
the incident. Accordingly, PW-15-V.M.Mugad and CW13 were summoned to the Police station and
in their presence again accused was enquired and then he led the police and panchas to the spot.
The perusal of evidence of PW-15 shows that accused No.5 was enquired by the Investigating Officer
and he said that he would show the vehicle and the stick. Accordingly, they went in the police jeep
and the accused No.5 produced the vehicle bearing No.KA.41.P.6657. He also produced the stick
which was kept in the dickey of the said vehicle. They were seized under the mahazar as per Ex.P33.
PW-15 has identified his signature on the same.
In the cross- examination, PW-15 states that he knew the accused but he do not know the PW-12 or
his wife. Much of the cross-examination is in respect of the manner in which the summons by the
trial court was served upon him and how he came to the court to depose. He states that police had
not issued him notice to come to the police station for the purpose of the mahazar and police had
not recorded the voluntary statement in his presence. However, he categorically says that Ex.P33 is
the said mahazar. Rest of the cross-examination is denials.
76. Ex.P8 happens to be the spot mahazar under which one of the weapon i.e. MO 5 was seized. It is
none else than PW-8 who was present at the time of spot mahazar and he has stated that in a
channel near the spot, the MO 5- Long had fallen and it had blood stains.
77. PW-8 clearly says that he was also summoned to the spot of the incident and police had
conducted the mahazar. However, in the cross examination, he has stated that he has signed on
blank papers. He identified his signature on Ex.P8 and he did not say that mahazar was prepared in
his presence at the spot. He identifies the contents of the mahazar. The recovery of MO5 from the
spot is spoken by the Investigating Officer as well as by PW-22 also.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 35
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
78. It is the case of the prosecution that these weapons which were recovered and the clothes of the
accused as well as deceased were sent to FSL, which was examined by
PW-20-Dr.Mahadeshwaraswamy Y.H. There appears to be some discrepancy in respect of the
numbering of the material objects and the articles. It is to be noted that PW-8-B.B.Belliwale, was
shown MOs 15 to 18 to be the clothes of the accused Nos. 1 and 6 and he identified them. The
evidence of PW-18-M.R. Doddabasappanavar, also shows that the MOs 15 to 18 are the clothes of
the accused Nos. 1 and 6. However, the evidence of PW-20 is not clear as to which are these objects
in his report. Para 4 of the examination in chief of PW-20 describes the articles which he had
examined and co relates the same to the MO 5 to 18. This evidence of PW-20 does not co-relate to
the material objects and there appears to be certain discrepancy. However, it is relevant to note that
PW-20 is categorical in saying and describing the articles which he had examined. Obviously,
PW-20 did not have the information as to which articles were seized and from whom. It was for the
Investigating Officer to clarify this aspect and such co-relation between the articles examined by
PW-20 and the material objects which were marked are not available in the deposition of PW-20. It
appears to be a small lacunae in the investigation.
79. The evidence of PW-20 discloses that the clothes of the accused Nos. 1 and 6 which are MOs 15
to 18 had the blood stains. So also the two of the Longs which were allegedly seized from accused
Nos. 1 and 6 had blood stains and Ex.P43 issued by PW-20 clearly shows this aspect. Under these
circumstances, the blood stains on two of the weapons tallied with the blood stains which were
found on the clothes of the deceased. Obviously, the undergarments of the deceased Ningappa were
also blood stained and they were of 'AB' blood Group. Therefore, it is evident that the weapons as
well as the clothes of the accused and the deceased contained 'AB' group blood. The
cross-examination of PW-20 does not discredit his testimony. The evidence of the Investigating
Officer and the documents produced though have some lacunae, they would not discredit their
testimony.
80. The learned counsel for the accused submitted that the Investigation Officer had the prior
information of the place where the weapons were hidden by the accused and therefore, there is no
such discovery of the weapons as envisaged under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. We find
considerable force in this argument as the voluntary statements at Ex P 31 to 37 disclose the place
where they were hidden/thrown. The decision in the case of Thimma Reddy Vs Vs State of
Karnataka9, referred by learned counsel for the accused, wherein, the law relating to discovery of
the fact and recovery of the incriminating 2018(2) AKR 577 material was considered by the co-
ordinate Bench of this Court at length, which was authored by one of us. It was observed that
"procedures followed in the alleged recovery of the weapon was not proper and in fact, there was no
such recovery of the incriminating material". Therefore, we have restricted our discussion to the
blood stains found on the clothes worn by the accused 1,6 and the clothes of the deceased.
DEFENCES AND DELAY IN FILING FIR
81. One of the main defence of the accused is that there is delay in registering the FIR. According to
the PW- 12 and other witnesses, the incident had occurred around 4.00 p.m. and the deceased along
with PWs-12, 13 and others reached KIMS hospital, Hubballi, around 5.30 p.m. The First
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 36
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
Information report as per Ex.P4 was received by PW-18 at 9.00 p.m. It is contended that this delay
of 3 1/2 hours is fatal to the prosecution case.
82. It is pertinent to note that soon after the deceased brought to Hireagasi at around 4 to 4.30 p.m.,
without delay he was taken to KIMS Hospital, Hubballi. The PW-12 says that the deceased was taken
into the hospital on a stretcher and within 30 minutes the Doctors informed that he was brought
dead. Simultaneously, PW- 14 prepared the OPD chit as per Ex.D2, wherein it is mentioned that the
deceased Ningappa was brought dead. It was subsequent to this information received by PW-12 that
the filing of the First Information Report is relevant. In all probability, only after recovery from the
initial shock of the death of deceased Ningappa, PW-12 could have lodged the complaint.
83. In the evidence of PW-12, it is elicited that the Superintendent of Police and other officials had
come to the hospital at around 6.30 p.m. It is elicited that he gave a statement to the Superintendent
of Police and it was recorded by him. It is this statement of PW-12 in the cross- examination at para
80 and 81 which is heavily relied by the defence. The Trial Court in its judgment, holds that the said
statement made before the Superintendent of Police, Dharwad, is the first information under
Section 156 of Cr.P.C. and therefore, conclude that the Ex.P4 is doubtful.
84. It is pertinent to note that a mere enquiry by the Superintendent of Police, Dharwad, cannot be
termed to be the first information report. PW-18 reached the KIMS hospital, Hubballi, after getting
information and visiting the spot of the incident. As such, the receipt of the Ex.P4 by PW-18 at 9.00
p.m. cannot be termed to be an outcome of delay and that it was a product of consultation and
deliberation. There is nothing elicited in the cross- examination of PW-12 which establishes that
PW-12 has consulted anyone who were in the knowledge of the incident and there was room for
embellishments. The Ex.P4 was written by PW-21- Vinayak, who was a resident of Hebballi. Though
PW-21 says that he is a stranger to PW-12, PW-12 states that PW-21- Vinayak had come to see his
son. PW-21 has been elaborately cross examined and he says that he is a resident of Hebballi and
not a resident of Kalaghatagi. Though he admits that his signature on Ex.P4 and the summons
Ex.D12 differs, he categorically identifies his signature and handwriting on Ex.P4. Therefore, the
contention of the defence that the identity of PW-21 is doubtful cannot be accepted.
85. Evidently, PW-12 was in grief of the death of his son Ningappa and an oral enquiry by the police
who were present at the KIMS Hospital, Hubballi, may be Superintendent of Police, Dharwad,
cannot be termed to be a first information report. What he has stated was reduced into writing by
PW-21 and it was received by PW-18 at 9.00 p.m. Then he returned to Kalaghatagi, registered the
same and commenced the investigation. Therefore, this contention of delay in registering the FIR is
not acceptable.
86. Here it is relevant to refer the decision in the case of Ashok Kumar Pandey Vs. State of Delhi10
which lays down that, "it is a natural conduct of a normal human being to rush the injured persons
to the hospital, particularly, when they are his near and dear ones, instead of leaving them in the
place of occurrence to die and to go to the police station to give information about the occurrence."
In the said decision, there was delay in filing the FIR by a few hours. In para 9 it was observed that,
"the incident had occurred in the mid night and the FIR was received by the Magistrate at 7.30
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 37
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
hours and considering the same, the Apex Court held that it cannot be construed to be a delay".
87. The learned counsel for the accused has pointed out several discrepancies in the evidence of
PW-22 vis-a- vis, the statement under Section 164(5) of Cr.P.C. This (2002) 4 SCC 76 aspect has
been dealt with in the above paragraphs while considering his evidence as an eye witness. The
substantial evidence of PW-22 regarding the incident remain unimpeached. Whether PW-22 and
PW-12 visited the Kalaghatagi Police station after 10.00 p.m. to verify whether the case was
registered or not is not of much importance which would negate the entire evidence of PW-12 or
PW-22. Obviously, PW-22 was under pressure. His statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. says that
PW- 12, one Gurulingappa, Nagu, Eerappa had been to the police station to lodge the complaint.
Obviously, the complaint was received by PW-18 at 9.00 p.m. Under these circumstances, this
discrepancy pales into insignificance. Moreover, there is nothing wrong in PW-12 visiting the police
station on his return from hospital.
88. The defence has pointed out that all the supporting witnesses are the close relatives and
therefore, their evidence cannot be relied to base the conviction. We are afraid that such a
contention could hold any water. It is settled principles of law that, the evidence of the interested
witnesses, if it is clear, cogent and natural, can be the basis for conviction. The contradictions
pointed out by the defence in the evidence of PWs- 12 and 22 are the two perceptions of these
witnesses. None of these contradictions, like visiting the police station after 10.00 p.m., PW-22
seeing PW-12 in the evening, say of PW-22 that he was under fear, etc., do not go to the root of the
case. Rather they are only superficial in nature and bound to occur when the witnesses are deposing
out of their memory after certain period of time.
89. Another point raised by the defence is about the description of the weapons. The question is,
whether it is a machu or a long? When the witnesses have identified the weapons, the question
whether it is called as 'machu' or ' long' is not of much relevance. It is to be noted that if the blade of
the weapon is little longer, it is described as 'long' and if it is shorter, it is described as 'machu'.
Moreover, PW-6 in his opinion has stated that the injuries found on the body of the deceased may
be inflicted by the weapons seized and examined by him.
90. The last point raised by the learned counsel appearing for the accused is that, the accused could
not have known that PW-22 and deceased are visiting the land of PW-22. It is evident that the
investigation does not show a previous conspiracy among the accused to commit the crime. It is for
this reason that PW-22 feared the backlash that he may be the perceived to be the informant (of
movement of deceased) to the accused. However, PW-22 has deposed before the Court and also
before the Magistrate under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. that it was the accused Nos. 1 to 7 who had
assaulted the deceased Ningappa. Therefore, the question whether the accused had kept a
surveillance about the movements of the deceased Ningappa is not the subject matter of the
investigation and as such, this point raised is of no relevance. The fact remains that on 19-9-2015 the
accused as well as PW-12 and the deceased had faced each other at the panchayat office, when the
President of the panchayat had informed that there would be a meeting on 21-9-2015.
CONCLUSIONS:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 38
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
91. The above discussions show that the accused had the motive and they had also expressed that
one of the family member of the PW-12 would be killed or injured. The motive regarding the dispute
in respect of property Nos. 95 and 98 has been elicited in the cross- examination by the accused.
Ex.P24 is a clinching document to establish that the deceased had expressed about the threats to
him and his family. It has also come in the evidence of PW-12 that after the dispute regarding the
backyard commenced, there were police complaints filed by him as well as by the accused. This
aspect is elicited in the cross-examination of PW-12. It is not known whether investigation was done
in this regard. Therefore, the motive has been sufficiently proved by the prosecution. The Trial Court
holds that the motive is not proved by any clinching evidence. We are unable to accept the reasoning
by the Trial Court in this regard.
92. The revelations by the deceased while he was being taken to KIMS hospital, Hubballi, is spoken
by PW- 12 and PW-13. The presence of the PW-12 in the car is fortified by the evidence of
independent witness i.e., PW- 14-Mahaboob Sab. Though PW-7 denies the presence of PW-12, his
evidence has to be termed to be biased as he is cousin of accused Nos. 1 to 3. Therefore, the Trial
Court expressing that PWs 7 and 14 do not vouch for the dying declaration and it creates a doubt
cannot be accepted. It is trite law that such portion of the evidence of a hostile witness which is of
relevance to the prosecution case may be accepted. The Trial Court failed to note that the evidence of
PW-14 falsifies the say of PW-7 regarding the presence of PW-12 in the car. We see no reason not to
accept this evidence of PW-14 which supports the prosecution case regarding the presence of PW-12.
93. Soon after the deceased Ningappa was declared brought dead at KIMS Hospital, Hubballi,
PW-12 and his wife Yellavva were in grief. PW-12 has stated that he was in grief and do not know
who were the police authorities visited the hospital. It is also relevant to note that PW-12 was
cross-examined on 7 different dates. There is repetition of many facts in the cross-examination.
Therefore, it is quite natural that discrepancies creep in when the witness is deposing repeatedly on
the same aspect at different points of time. One cannot expect that on each occasion, the witness has
to depose in a parrot like manner.
94. The recovery of the weapons and clothes as discussed above show that on the basis of the
voluntary statement by the accused, PW-18 knew the place where they were hidden. Therefore, such
recovery of the weapons was known to PW-18 as may be seen from the voluntary statements and
therefore, such recovery do not fall within the scope of Section 27 of the Evidence Act. It is not a fact
which has been discovered. It has to be termed to be recovery simplicitor. The clothes of the accused
Nos. 1 and 6 are also the recovery simplicitor. These clothes of the accused Nos. 1 and 6 had the
bloodstains of AB+ human blood. The clothes of the deceased also bore the stains of AB+ human
blood. This circumstance, as may be found from the evidence of PW- s 20 and 18 is of some
relevance. The Trial Court has totally discarded the matching of the blood group by holding that
PW-6 had not collected the sample blood from the body of the deceased and PW-18 had not
collected the sample blood of the accused. Such observation could not have been the basis to hold
that the prosecution has failed to prove its case. Similarly, non-seizure of the motor cycle used by
PW-13 and 17 to bring the deceased Ningappa from the spot to Hireagasi and the non seizure of
clothes of PW-s-12, 13,17 and Yellavva, also cannot be a ground to disbelieve the prosecution case.
We note that the Investigating Officer has not seized the said motor cycle or the car used for ferrying
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 39
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
the deceased to the hospital. There are also certain lacunae in the investigation which we have
pointed out while considering the recoveries under the mahazars. Such lacunae in the investigation
cannot be a ground to hold that the prosecution has not proved its case if there is other evidence.
95. In this regard, the Apex Court in the case of Dhanaj Singh @ Shera and others Vs. State of
Punjab11 observed that the defective investigation would (2004) 3 SCC 654 not come in the way of
convicting the accused. It was held as below:
"5. In the case of a defective investigation the Court has to be circumspect in
evaluating the evidence. But it would not be right in acquitting an accused person
solely on account of the defect; to do so would tantamount to playing into the hands
of the investigating officer if the investigation is designedly defective.
6. In Paras Yadav v. State of Bihar (1999) 2 SCC 126 it was held that if the lapse or
omission is committed by the investigating agency or because of negligence the
prosecution evidence is required to be examined dehors such omissions to find out
whether the said evidence is reliable or not. The contaminated conduct of officials
should not stand in the way of evaluating the evidence by the courts; otherwise the
designed mischief would be perpetuated and justice would be denied to the
complainant party."
96. Sofar as the dying declaration is concerned, we have noticed that in the cross-examination of
PW-6 nothing is elicited that the injuries suffered by the deceased Ningappa incapacitated him from
speaking. PW- 6 was an expert and could have deposed about the time that would take for a person
to fade out and die after suffering the injuries as found on the body of the deceased. Therefore, there
is no reason to disbelieve the say of PW-s 12 and 13. We have noticed that the brain was intact and
there was fracture of C5 and C6 vertebrae. Therefore, we hold that the deceased was capable of
giving an account of the incident and divulging the names of the assailants. The decision in the case
of Parbin Ali and another Vs. State of Assam12 chronicles most of the decisions rendered by the
Apex Court till then, including the decision in the case of Lakshman Vs. State of Maharastra13. It is
held that the oral dying declaration have to be considered with care and caution and when there is
no cross- examination about the capability of the victim giving the dying declaration to the Medical
Officer, there was no reason to discard such dying declaration. In paras 11 to 21, it is held as below:
(2013) 2 SCC 81 (2002) 6 SCC 710 "PW- 1 (relative of deceased), PW- 2 (wife of
deceased), PW- 3 and PW- 5 (father-in-law of deceased), deposed that the deceased
had named three accused persons as the assailants. PW- 6, who came later to the
place of occurrence, had found that the deceased was not in a position to speak. PW-
8 did not support the prosecution case in entirety.
Thus, the real witnesses to the oral dying declaration were PW-s 1,2,3 and 5 and hence, the veracity
of their version is required to be scrutinized. The wife, father-in-law and two other relatives clearly
stated that the deceased had informed them about the name of the assailants. Nothing was elicited
in the cross-examination which would discredit the testimonies of the PW-s. They have deposed in a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 40
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
categorical manner that by the time they arrived at the place of occurrence, the deceased was in a fit
state of health to speak and make a statement and, in fact, he did make a statement as to who had
assaulted him. Nothing was suggested to these witnesses in cross-examination about the fitness of
deceased to make declaration. Again, the final opinion of PW- 4 (doctor who performed the post-
mortem) was that death was caused due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante-mortem
injuries in the abdomen caused by sharp weapon and which injuries were homicidal in nature. Said
opinion of the doctor was not challenged either before the trial court or before the High Court. The
doctor was not at all cross-examined. Hence, whether such a person (herein deceased), receiving
certain injuries, would be in a position to speak or not, was not brought out any where in the
evidence. In this backdrop, it can safely be concluded that the deceased was in a conscious state and
in a position to speak. Thus, it is difficult to accept that the wife, father-in-law and other close
relatives would falsely implicate the appellant-accused by attributing a false oral dying declaration
to the deceased. That apart, in the absence of any real discrepancy or material contradiction or
omission and additionally non-cross- examination of the doctor in this regard, makes the dying
declaration absolutely credible and conviction based on the same really cannot be faulted. Hence,
the conviction of the appellants is confirmed."
97. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant has also placed reliance on the decision in the
case of Kamal Kudal Vs. State of Assam14 wherein, it was observed as below:
"21. The law regarding the nature, scope and value as a piece of evidence of oral and
written dying declarations is now fairly well settled by various judicial decisions of
this Court. A dying declaration, oral or written, before it could be relied upon, must
pass a test of reliability as it is a statement made in the absence of the accused and
there is no opportunity to the accused even to put it through the fire of cross
examination to test is genuinity or veracity. The court has, therefore, to subject it to
close scrutiny. But once the court is satisfied that it is a truthful version as to the
circumstances in which the death resulted and the persons causing injuries, the law
does not expect that there should be corroboration before it can be relied upon.
However, 2022 SCC Online SC 882 if there are infirmities and the court does not find
it safe to base any conclusion on it without some further evidence to support it, the
question of corroboration arises.
22. We may refer to one of the decisions of this Court in the case of Heikrujam
Chaoba Singh v. State of Manipur, (1999) 8 SCC 458, wherein in para 3 this Court
observed as under:
"3. An oral dying declaration no doubt can form the basis of conviction, though the
Courts seek for corroboration as a rule of prudence. But before the said declaration
can be acted upon, the Court must be satisfied about the truthfulness of the same and
that the said declaration was made by the deceased while he was in a fit condition to
make the statement. The dying declaration has to be taken as a whole and the witness
who deposes about such oral declaration to him must pass the scrutiny of reliability.
..."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 41
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
23. "Truth sits upon the lips of a dying man."
98. The above facts and circumstances show that the Trial Court jumped to the conclusion that the
prosecution has not proved its case by cogent evidence. The reasons assigned by the Trial Court are
prima facie perverse and was not in the light of the settled principles of law governing the oral dying
declarations. There was no reason to hold that PW-12, PW-13 and PW-22 were deposing falsehood
and PW-7 was truthful. But it was otherwise. The Trial court also erred in holding that the motive is
also not proved. Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that the impugned judgment is not
sustainable under law.
99. The discussions made supra, clearly establish that the accused Nos. 1 to 7 came to the spot
knowing that the deceased Ningappa and PW-22 had come to the ground nut field of PW-22 by
forming an unlawful assembly. When PW-22 and deceased Ningappa were returning on their motor
cycle, way laid them, pulled them holding their shirts and made them to fall. While the deceased
Ningappa was beaten the PW-22 raised hue and cry and then he was also threatened which made
him to run. The assault on the deceased continued till he fell down. This shows that the accused had
come with preparations with weapons to assault the deceased Ningappa and to kill him. The object
of all the accused was to annihilate the deceased Ningappa.
100. The assault on the deceased was premeditated, with preparations and with an object of
preventing him from appearing before the Panchayat on the next day. The injuries sustained by the
deceased as may be found from Ex.P5 show that the assault was brutal and the deceased succumbed
to the injuries due to hemorrhage within a span of two hours. The intention of the accused was clear
and it was to annihilate the deceased Ningappa. Hence, we have no doubt in our mind that the act of
the accused is a culpable homicide amounting to murder.
101. Hence, the points raised above are answered accordingly and accused Nos. 1 to 7 are liable to be
convicted for the offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148, 341, 302 read with Section 149 of
IPC.
ORDER [i] Both the appeals are allowed.
[ii] The judgment in SC No.5/2016 by IV Additional District and Sessions Judge, Dharwad, dated
18-4-2019 acquitting the accused Nos. 1 to 7 for offences punishable under Sections 143, 147, 148,
341, 302 read with Section 149 of IPC is hereby set aside and the accused Nos.1 to 7 are convicted for
the said offences.
To hear on sentence, the matter is passed over.
(DR. H.B. PRABHAKARA SASTRY) JUDGE (C M JOSHI) JUDGE tsn* ORDER ON SENTENCE
102. Learned High Court Government Pleader appearing for State submitted that the accused have
taken the law into their hands and killed the deceased, who was a soldier. He submits that age of the
accused cannot be ground for seeking any lenient view since all the accused are aged more than 21
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 42
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
years. It is submitted that the criminal antecedents of these accused are also to be borne in mind
while awarding sentence coupled with the gravity of the offence committed by these accused. There
was motive, preparation and then the crime was executed. Therefore, he contends that the accused
Nos.1 to 7 are to be punished with the severest sentence possible. He also relied on the decision in
the case of Manoharan Vs. State by Inspector of Police, Variety Hall Police Station, Coimbatore15,
wherein it was held that opinion of the society and not the personal opinion of the 2020 (1) Crimes
335(SC) judge should be considered whilst awarding sentence of death.
103. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for accused Nos.1 to 7 submits that these accused are at
the prime of their age, have to look after their parents and families and therefore lenient view may
be taken. He has placed reliance on the decision in the case of Yogendra Alias Jogendra Singh vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh16 to contend that this case do not fall within the purview of rarest of the
rare case and by relying on the case of Machhisingh & others Vs. State of Punjab17 wherein the
Court has held that when there is no depravity or brutality in the acts of the accused, it does not fall
within the purview of rarest of the rare case. In Machhisingh & others Vs. State of Punjab18 the
Hon'ble Apex Court in para-39 laid down tests for the rarest of rare case as below-
(2019) 9 SCC 243 (1983)3 SCC 470 Supra "39. In order to apply these guidelines interalia the
following questions may be asked and answered:
(a) Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for life inadequate and calls for a death sentence?
(b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to impose
death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the mitigating
circumstances which speak in favour of the offender ?:
104. Learned counsel for accused submit that the benefit of set off may be given to
them under Section 428 of Cr.P.C.
105. Sentence prescribed for various offences under which the accused are convicted
are as below:
Sl. Indian Penal Maximum Minimum Fine
No. Code, 1860 ImprisonmentImprisonment
1. 143 unlawful 6 months - Or fine
assembly
2. 147 Rioting 2 years or - Or both
fine or both
3. 148 Rioting with 3 years or - Or both
fine or both
weapons -
4 341 1 month Fine of Rs.500 Or both
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 43
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
imprisonment
/ fine/ both
5 302 Death and Life shall
fine imprisonment
and fine
106. There has been much debate about the capital punishment and the sentencing
policy in the Country.
After such debate about the sentencing policy and catena of decisions rendered by Hon'ble Apex
Court, general agreement seems to be that there should be balancing of the mitigating and
aggravating circumstance and balance has to be struck between the two set of facts and adequate
and deterrent sentence has to be imposed. At the same time, the cardinal principle of any sentencing
that sentencing is based on reformative theory (of the convict) should not be forgotten. The decision
of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bachan Singh Vs. State of Punjab19 and thereafter, a
clarification issued by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Machhi Singh Vs. State of Punjab20 almost settled
all the issues in this regard. Over ruling of the judgment in the case of Rajendra Prasad Vs. State of
Uttar Pradesh21 by the decision of the Bachhan Singh Vs. State of Punjab22 clarifies the situation
applicable as of now. In Bachan Singh23 it was observed that judges should not be blood thirsty. A
real and abiding concern for the dignity of human life postulates resistance to taking life through
law's instrumentality. That ought not to be done say in the rarest of rare cases when the alternative
option is unquestionably foreclosed. This view was followed by the Courts in various subsequent
decisions. In the case of (1980) 2 SCC 684 Supra AIR 1979 SC 916 Supra Supra Machhi singh, the
Hon'ble Apex Court has laid down the two tests which are to be considered by the Court. It is in the
background of these tests laid down that the adequate sentence has to be imposed on the accused.
When we examine the factual matrix of the present case, it is evident that the aggravating
circumstances are that the i) deceased was a soldier, ii) he was killed with 36 injuries, majority of
which are on his head portion, iii) the crime involved preparation and motive to usurp property and
iv) the available civil remedy was ignored.
107. The circumstances which are contended to be mitigating one are: i) the accused are in the age
group of 21 years to 42 years and ii) they have families to look after.
108. Now the question is, whether it falls within the category of rarest of rare case. In order to
ascertain this aspect, the two questions raised in Machhi singh supra need to be answered. First one
is, is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of imprisonment for life
inadequate and calls for a death sentence? The urge of a person for wealth and pecuniary gain is the
cause for committing crimes. The accused No. 1 to 7 were trying to usurp the property of the
complainant and the deceased. They did not opt for the civil remedy which was available. The
criminal antecedents are not proved. There are no convictions against them. Mere pendency of a
case cannot be a proven criminal antecedent. Therefore, we do not find that aggravating
circumstances contended by the learned High Court Government Pleader would fall within the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 44
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
purview of rarest of rare case. Therefore, we are unable to accept the contention that there is
something uncommon about the crime which renders the sentence of imprisonment for life
inadequate.
109. Second question is - Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to
impose death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the mitigating circumstances
which speak in favour of the offender? It is relevant to note that the aggravating circumstances,
though indicate that there was planning and implementation, it cannot be said that there is no
alternative but to impose death sentence. In our considered opinion, life sentence would be
adequate since it is not brought to the notice of this Court that in any case of similar nature, accused
has been sentenced for capital punishment. Had they been suffering an earlier sentence, it could
have been said that there is no such alternative. In the circumstances of the case, except the fact that
they have families and parents to look after, none other contentions are mitigating factors.
110. It is the duty of the Court to consider grant of compensation to the victims of the crime. PW-12-
Somalingappa Yaliwal, is the father and CW21-Yellavva, is mother of the deceased-Ningappa. By act
of crime, they have lost their son, who was a soldier. It is not possible to fathom the loss of life of son
of parents. Compensation in terms of money cannot be equivalent of the loss. However, the law
takes into its fold to do its bit in compensating the victims. Hence they are to be compensated.
111. Hence, the following:
ORDER
(i) For offence under Section 302 r/w.
are sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay fine of `25,000/- each. In default to pay
the fine, they shall undergo additional imprisonment for six months each.
(ii) For offence under Section 143 r/w.
are sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for 6 months and each to pay a fine of `2,000/-. In
default to pay the fine, they each shall undergo imprisonment for three months each.
(iii) For offence under Section 147 r/w. are sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for two years
and to pay fine of `5,000/- each. In default to pay the fine, they each shall undergo imprisonment
for three months.
(iv) For offence under Section 148 r/w.
are sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for two years and to pay fine of `5,000/- each. In
default to pay the fine, they each shall undergo imprisonment for three months.
(v) For offence under Section 341 r/w.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 45
Somalingappa Yalival S/O Ningappa vs State Of Karnataka on 12 June, 2023
are sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for one month and to pay fine of `2,000/- each. In
default to pay the fine, they each shall undergo imprisonment for one month.
(vi) Term sentences of punishment for the above offences shall run concurrently, followed by life
imprisonment.
(vii) Convicts are entitled for set off under Section 428 of Cr.P.C. in respect of period of their
detention in judicial custody.
(viii) Out of fine amount, a sum of `1,00,000/- each is ordered to be paid to PW12-Somalingappa
Yaliwal and CW21- Yellavva, as compensation under Section 357 of Cr.P.C.
(ix) The Trial Court is directed to secure the accused No. 1 to 7 and commit them to suffer sentences.
(x) The Trial Court is also directed to pass appropriate orders regarding the disposal of the property
seized.
Registry to transmit a copy of this judgment to the Sessions Judge's Court, forthwith along with its
records, for doing the needful in the matter in securing the accused Nos.1 to 7 for serving the
sentence in accordance with law.
Accused Nos. 1 to 7 are entitled for free copies of this judgment immediately.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE tsn*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14808215/ 46
