Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29359
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 6743 of 2025
Applicant :- Sonu Kashyap
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Deepak Maurya,Ranu,Shashi Shekhar Maurya
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
1. Heard Mr. Shashi Shekhar Maurya, the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for
State-opposite party-1 and Mr. Nilesh Kumar Dubey, Advocate, who has put in appearance on behalf
of first informant/opposite party-2 by filing a short counter affidavit alongwith his vakalatnama in
Court today, which is taken on record.
2. Perused the record.
3. Applicant-Sonu Kashyap, who is a charge sheeted accused, has approached this Court by means of
present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. with the following prayer:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49117355/ 1
Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
" It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be
pleased to allow this application and quashing the cognizance order dated 01.01.2024
in Session Trail No.- 10/2024 in Case Crime No. 845/2023, U/S-376(2)(n) 406, 506
I.P.C. & 3(2)(V) Sc/ St Act & P.S. Baradari, District Bareilly as well as entire
proceeding in Session Trail No.- 10/2024 arising out from the Case Crime No.
845/2023, U/S-376(2)(n), 406, 506 I.P.C. & 3(2)(V) Sc/ St Act &, P.S.Baradari,
District - Bareilly against the applicant which has been pending before the court of
Pending in the court of Additional Session Judge / Special Judge (Pocso) Act,
Bareilly, District- Bareilly on basis of a registered marriage performed by the
applicant as well as victim an living together as a husband and wife happily.
It is also prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to stay the further
proceedings in entire proceeding in Session Trail No. 10/2024 arising out from the
Case Crime No. 845/2023, U/S-376(2)(n), 406, 506 I.P.C & 3(2)(V) Sc/ St Act & P.S.
Baradari, District - Bareilly against the applicant which has been pending before the
court of Pending in the court of Additional Session Judge / Special Judge (Pocso) Act,
Bareilly, District-Bareilly on basis of a registered marriage performed by theapplicant
as well as victim an living together as a husband and wife happily, otherwise
applicant / petitioner will suffer irreparable loss and injury, and/or pass such other
and further order which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper under the facts
and circumstances of the case."
4. Learned counsel for applicant submits that though applicant is a named and charge-sheeted
accused and also facing trial before court below in aforementioned Sessions Trial, however, in view
of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case as have emerged on record, the criminal
prosecution of applicant cannot be sustained.
5. In furtherance of aforesaid submission, the learned counsel for applicant submits that criminal
prosecution of applicant commenced when the F.I.R. dated 18.10.2023 was lodged by the
prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party-2,Akansha Kumari, which was registered as Case Crime
No. 0845 of 2023 under Sections 376(2)(n), 406, 506 I.P.C. and Sections 3(2)(V) SC/ St Act,
P.S.-Baradari, District - Bareilly. However, subsequent to aforesaid F.I.R., applicant solemnized
marriage with the prosecutrix on 23.10.2023. By reason of above, the prosecutrix became the legally
wedded wife of applicant. On account of above, the prosecutrix started residing with applicant as his
legally wedded wife. Bonafide of the parties is also explicit from the fact that the marriage of parties
has also been registered under the U.P. Marriage Registration Rules 2017. Photocopy of the
marriage registration certificate has been brought on record and is at page 62 of the paper book. On
the above premise, the learned counsel for applicant submits that once the marriage of the parties
has been registered, therefore, there is statutory presumption regarding legal and valid marriage of
the parties. It is thus urged by the learned counsel for applicant that in view of the aforementioned
subsequent developments, the criminality, if any, committed by applicant shall now stand washed
of. As such, no useful purpose shall be served in prolonging the criminal prosecution of applicant.
On the above conspectus, he therefore contends that criminal prosecution of applicant is liable to be
quashed. In case the criminal prosecution of applicant is allowed to continue, a happy family shall
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49117355/ 2
Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
stand broken. He therefore submits that present application is liable to be allowed by this Court.
6. Per Contra, the learned A.G.A. representing State-opposite party-1 does not oppose the present
application. He submits that once the prosecutrix has herself solemnized marriage with applicant
then in that eventuality no good ground now exists to prolong the criminal prosecution of applicant.
7. On the other hand, Mr. Nilesh Kumar Dubey, the learned counsel representing prosecutrix/first
informant/opposite party-2, submits that he has received instructions not to oppose the present
application. In the submission of the learned counsel representing prosecutrix/first
informant/opposite party-2, it is an admitted fact that the prosecutrix has solemnized marriage with
applicant and since thereafter, the prosecutrix started residing with applicant as his legally wedded
wife. He, therefore, submits that he cannot have any objection in case the present application is
decided by this Court taking into consideration the aforesaid fact.
8. Be that as it may, having heard the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for
State-opposite party-1, Mr. Nilesh Kumar Dubey, the learned counsel representing prosecutix/first
informant/opposite party-2 and upon perusal of record this court finds that subsequent to the F.I.R.
dated 18.10.2023 lodged by the prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party-2 and giving rise to
present criminal proceedings, the applicant has solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix.
Consequently, the prosecutrix is now the legally wedded wife of applicant. As such, they are living
together as husband and wife. Marriage of the parties has also been registered under the U.P.
Marriage Registration Rules, 2017. Once the marriage of the parties has been registered under the
U.P. Marriage Registration Rules 2017, there is statutory presumption regarding legal and valid
marriage of the parties. In view of aforesaid subsequent developments, the criminality, if any,
committed by accused/applicant now stands washed of. As such, no useful purpose shall be served
in prolonging the criminal prosecution of accused/applicant. On account of the facts as noted above,
the chances of conviction of accused/applicant are now not only remote but also bleak in view of the
compromise entered into by the parties. As such, in case the criminal prosecution of applicants is
allowed to continue, a happy family comprising of accused/applicant and the prosecutrix shall stand
broken.
9. At this juncture, reference be made to the judgements of Supreme Court in K. Dhandapani Vs.
The State By the Inspector of Police, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1056 and Mafat Lal and another Vs. The
State of Rajasthan, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 433. In the aforesaid judgements, the Apex Court quashed
the criminal prosecution of accused therein on the ground that accused had solemnized marriage
with the prosecutrix.
10. Since the judgement rendered by Apex Court in the case of K. Dhandapani (supra) is a short one
therefore the same is reproduced in its entirety:
"Leave granted.
The appellant who is the maternal uncle of the prosecutrix belongs to Valayar
community, which is a most backward community in the State of Tamilnadu. He
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49117355/ 3
Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
works as a woodcutter on daily wages in a private factory. FIR was registered against
him for committing rape under Sections 5(j)(ii)read with Section 6, 5(I) read with
Section 6 and 5(n) read with Section 6 of Protection of Child from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) Act, 2012. He was convicted after trial for committing the said offences and
sentenced to undergo rigorous Reason: imprisonment for a period of 10 years by the
Sessions Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruppur on 31.10.2018. The High Court,
by an order dated 13.02.2019, upheld the conviction and sentence. Aggrieved
thereby, the appellant has filed this appeal.
Mr. M.P.Parthiban, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that
allegation against him was that he had physical relations with the prosecutrix on the
promise of marrying her. He stated that, in fact, he married the prosecutrix and they
have two children.
The appellant submitted that this Court should exercise its power under Article 142 of
the Constitution and ought to do complete justice and it could not be in the interest of
justice to disturb the family life of the appellant and the prosecutrix.
After hearing the matter for some time on 08 th March, 2022, we directed the
District Judge to record the statement of the prosecutrix about her present status.
The statement of the prosecutrix has been placed on record in which she has
categorically stated that she has two children and they are being taken care of by the
appellant and she is leading a happy married life.
Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., learned counsel appearing for the State, opposed the grant of
any relief to the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was aged 14 years on the
date of the offence and gave birth to the first child when she was 15 years and second
child was born when she was 17 years. He argued that the marriage between the
appellant and the prosecutrix is not legal. He expressed his apprehension that the
said marriage might be only for the purpose of escaping punishment and there is no
guarantee that the appellant will take care of the prosecutrix and the children after
this Court grants relief to him.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the considered view
that the conviction and sentence of the appellant who is maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix deserves to be set aside in view of the subsequent events that have been
brought to the notice of this Court. This Court cannot shut its eyes to the ground
reality and disturb the happy family life of the appellant and the prosecutrix. We have
been informed about the custom in Tamilnadu of the marriage of a girl with the
maternal uncle.
For the aforesaid mentioned reasons, the conviction and sentence of the appellant is
set aside in the peculiar facts of the case and shall not be treated as a precedent. The
appeal is accordingly, disposed of. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49117355/ 4
Sonu Kashyap vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
of.
In case, the appellant does not take proper care of the prosecutrix, she or the State on
behalf of the prosecutrix can move this Court for modification of this Order."
11. The ratio laid down by the Apex Court in aforementioned judgement is squarely applicable to the
present case as applicant has solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix.
12. In view of the discussion made above, the present application succeeds and is liable to be
allowed.
13. It is accordingly allowed.
14. The entire proceedings is Sessions Trail No. 10 of 2024 (State Vs. Sonu Kasyap) arising out from
the Case Crime No. 845/2023, under Sections 376(2)(n), 406, 506 I.P.C and Sections 3(2)(V) SC/ St
Act, P.S. -Baradari, District-Bareilly now pending in the court of Additional Session Judge/Special
Judge, SC/ST Act, Bareilly, District-Bareilly, are hereby quashed.
15. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, parties shall bear their own costs.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 YK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49117355/ 5
