Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25
January, 2022
Author: K.Natarajan
Bench: K.Natarajan
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 25TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.NATARAJAN
WRIT PETITION No.14245/2021 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN
SRI ABBAS MOHAMMED KHAN
S/O LATE ILYAS MOHAMMED KHAN,
AGED ABOUT 46 YEARS,
NO.33, NORTH ROAD, CENTRE,
HUTCHINS ROAD,
MARUTI SEVANAGAR,
BENGALURU-560 084.
REPRESENTED BY HIS ATTORNEY HOLDER,
SRI HAFEEZ MOHAMMED KHAN,
S/O LATE ILYAS MOHAMMED KHAN
AGED ABOUT 48 YEARS,
R/AT NO.35, HAINES ROAD,
NEAR COLES PARK,
FRAZER TOWN,
BENGALURU-560 005. ...PETITIONER
(BY SRI KIRAN S JAVALI, SENIOR ADVOCATE ALONG WITH
SRI K CHANDRA SHEKARA, ADVOCATE (VIDEO
CONFERENCE))
AND
1. THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR
ENFORCEMENT DIRECTORATE ,
3RD FLOOR, B BLOCK,
BMTC BUILDING,
SHANTINAGAR, TTMC,
K H ROAD,
BENGALURU-560 027
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 1
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
BY PARASHIVAMURTHY M K
2. THE DIRECTOR OF ENFORCEMENT
REP BY ITS ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,
SHRI BASAVARAJ R MAGDUM,
BENGALURU ZONAL OFFICE,
2
3RD FLOOR, B BLOCK,
BMTC, SHANTHINAGAR,
TTMC, K H ROAD,
BENGALURU-560 027. ...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI MADHUKAR M DESHPANDE, SPECIAL COUNSEL)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226
AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA READ WITH
SECTION 482 OF CR.P.C., PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE
ORDER DATED 01.10.2019 TAKING COGNIZANCE IN SPL
C.C.NO.1088/2019 ANNXURE-B ON THE FILE OF THE XXI
ADDITIONAL CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE AND
PRINCIPAL SPECIAL JUDGE FOR CBI CASES BENGALURU
CITY.
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 11.01.2022 AND COMING ON
FOR PRONOUNCEMENT THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCING
THIS DAY, THE COURT PRONOUNCED THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
This writ petition is filed by the petitioner-accused No.9 through his Attorney Holder under Article
226 of the Constitution of India read with Section 482 of Cr.P.C. (hereinafter referred to as 'Cr.P.C.')
praying to quash the order dated 01.10.2019 passed in Spl. CC No.1088/2019 by the Principal City
Civil and Sessions Judge, (Special Judge for CBI Cases), Bengaluru.
2. Heard the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner and the learned Special Counsel for
respondent Nos.1 and 2.
3. Respondent No.2 the Assistant Director of the Directorate of Enforcement (hereinafter referred to
as 'ED') filed a complaint against the petitioner and others before the Special Court for the offences
punishable under Sections 44 and 45 read with Sections 3, 70, 4, and 8(5) of Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as 'PML Act') for punishing the accused persons of the
offences punishable under Sections 3 and 4 of the PML Act. It is alleged by the complainant in his
complaint that an FIR in Crime No.73/2019 was registered by the Commercial Street Police,
Bengaluru on 09.06.2019 against M/s. IMA Company Ltd., I Monetary Advisory Private Ltd.
(hereinafter referred to as 'M/s. IMA') and also against Mohammed Mansoor Khan, the Managing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 2
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
Director of M/s. IMA for the offences punishable under Sections 406 and 420 of IPC. It is alleged
that the Managing Director of M/s. IMA and other Directors of the company started Ponzy Scheme
in the name and style of various entities and received huge amount of money from general public
with a promise of high returns on their investments and diverted the fund and cheated more than
30,000 middle class people and lower middle class people. It is further alleged that the accused
entities and directors are indulged in the offences of money laundering by cheating the general
public and through Ponzy Scheme, generated proceeds of crime in the form of movable and
immovable properties and the offence under Section 420 is a scheduled offence under the provisions
of the PML Act. It is further alleged that on the statement of co-accused recorded by the police,
accused No.1 and its associates were charged with Section 420 of IPC, which is a scheduled offence
under the PML Act. Respondent No.1 Deputy Director of ED had conducted investigation and had
issued provisional attachment order on 27.06.2019 in ECIR/BGZO/03/2019 and sought
confiscation of those properties which were already challenged before the appellate Tribunal. The
appellate Tribunal is said to be allowed the prayer of the petitioner and released some of the
properties by furnishing some surety.
4. The petitioner has challenged the very authority of respondent No.2 by filing the complaint
against him before the Court by raising the questions of law, which are as under:
The petitioner submits that this Petition raises the following questions of law:
(a) Whether the Central Government has issued general or special authorization for
Officers on deputation to be Deputy Director in the office of the Directorate of
Enforcement, under the PML Act.
(b) Whether the Directorate of Enforcement could have bestowed powers on such an
Officer to be an Officer as provided under Section 48 of the PML Act.
(c) Whether the registration of ECIR by an Officer acting as Deputy Director the PML
Act, in the absence of general or special authorization, is valid at Law.
(d) Whether the provisional Attachment Order once issued and confirmed by the
adjudication Authority could have caused the Officer exercising power as Respondent
to conduct further investigation and issue another Provisional attachment Order
contrary to the provisions of the PML Act.
5. It is contended that the aforesaid questions of law go to the very root of exercise of power of
respondent No.1- Deputy Director of ED for initiation of proceedings under the PML Act.
6. The petitioner has also raised the following issues by challenging the authority of respondent No.1
Deputy Director of ED which is as under:
The Petitioner submits that this Writ Petition would also consequentially require
consideration by this Hon'ble Court to the following issues:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 3
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
(a) Whether the Central Government in issuing a vacancy circular in exercise of the
powers under Section 49(1) of Prevention of Money Laundering Act for appointing
officers from other departments as Deputy Director of Enforcement have been
authorized and communicated to the selected officers for appointment as Deputy
Director and exercise those powers.
(b) Whether the order of appointment issued by the Central Government represented
by Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, Government of India has specifically
authorized the selected officer viz Deputy Director on deputation basis, as
"Authority" for purposes of Section 2(1)(j) of Prevention of Money Laundering Act
2002 (15 of 2003)
(c) If the Central Government has not issued any appointment order specifying the
Deputy Director as an "Authority" under Prevention of Money Laundering Act, the
status and legality of the vacancy circular; the order of appointment issued by Central
Government;
and the posting order posting the Deputy Director on deputation basis in Enforcement Directorate
issued by the Director of Enforcement, for purposes of Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002,
and the legality thereof.
(d) Whether mere issue of vacancy
circular and issue of appointment order
appointing such officers as Deputy Director on deputation basis can be considered or assumed to be
authorization as "Authority" under Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002 (15 of 2003).
7. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner would contend that respondent No.2,
who is a Superintendent of Police working in Lokayukta, has been deputed to work as an Assistant
Director of ED and he is not at all eligible as he is a State Police Officer and respondent No.1 is a
Deputy Director of ED. Both these officers have no authority under the PML Act to proceed against
the petitioner and they have not been authorized to conduct investigation as per the definition under
Section 2(na) of PML Act. There is no specific authorisation given to respondent No.2, who is a
Group- B officer, authorizing him to investigate into the matter. There is no separate authorisation
or any notification issued under the PML Act for conducting investigation. The questions raised by
the petitioner in the petition para Nos.7 and 8 has not been answered. The respondent have no
authority of law and there is wrong exercise of power and the act done is not in accordance with law.
Therefore, the very complaint is not sustainable and nullity in the eye of law. The learned Senior
Counsel further submitted that respondent Nos.1 and 2 are the deputed officers. There is no
separate authorization issued as per Section 51 of the PML Act and the police cannot investigate the
matter as provided under Section 45(1A) of the PML Act. The appointment order of respondent
No.2-Assistant Director of ED under Order No.144/2017 is contrary to Section 45(1A) of the PML
Act and even the exercise of power also runs contrary to Section 2(na) of the PML Act. The learned
Senior Counsel further contended that the authorization of officials is different from the
appointment of officials. The language used in the Government Order cannot go against the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 4
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
provisions of the PML Act. He has no authority for filing the complaint and also to investigate into
the matter and therefore, the respondent could not have sought for confiscation of the properties
and hence, prayed for quashing of the complaint.
In support of his arguments, the learned Senior counsel has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court reported in the case of M/S. CANON INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED VS.
COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS reported in 2021 SCC ONLINE SC 200.
8. The respondents have appeared through the learned Special Counsel and filed statement of
objections. The sum and substance of the statement of objections is that the Deputy Director has
been appointed in accordance with Sections 48, 49 and 51 of the PML Act and once he has been
appointed as Deputy Director under the PML Act, he shall exercise the powers conferred under the
provisions of Section 51 of the Act. Once the Central Government has authorized the authorities
under the Act and has made any appointment by way of deputation, there is no requirement of any
separate authorization for carrying out the functions. The Deputy Director Sri Parashivamurthy has
been duly appointed and authorized as per Order No.101/2018 dated 22.06.2018. Therefore, the
contention of the petitioner cannot be acceptable.
The learned Special Counsel has also contended that the authorities under the Act appointing the
respondent Assistant Director was in accordance with the Government Order. Once he has
appointed and deputed to work in ED, the officer gets all the authority for investigating into the
matter. The contention of the petitioner's counsel that Grade-B officer cannot be appointed to a
Grade-A rank for carrying out of the functions, is not correct as the PML Act does not make any
distinction of Grade-A and Grade-B officers for the purpose of appointment. The PML Act
enumerates only the class of officers to be appointed as authorities and once the officer is duly
appointed as authority under the PML Act, the officer is empowered to exercise the functions in
terms of Section 51 of the PML Act. The learned Senior Counsel also contended that he is denying all
the averments made by the petitioner in the petition and also parawise allegations made in the
petition and accordingly, prayed for dismissing the petition.
In support of his arguments, the learned counsel for respondent relied upon the following
judgments:
(i) J Sekar Vs. Union of India (2018 SCC OnLine Del 6523)
(ii) Pradeep S. Wodeyar Vs. State of Karnataka (2021 SCC OnLine SC 1140)
9. Having heard the arguments of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner and
the counsel for respondent perused the records.
10. It is the specific case of the petitioner that Central Government did not issue any
special authorization for the officer on deputation to be worked as deputy director
and Assistant Director in the office of the Directorate of Enforcement and PML Act.
As such, no powers conferred on those officers under Section 48 of the PML Act,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 5
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
absolutely there is no authority or filing the complaint by the Assistant Director
against the petitioner under the PML Act. The vacancy circular also not available to
show the exercise of power under Section 49(1) of PML Act and on the deputation
basis as authority for the purpose of investigation no special order has been passed
therefore, the action taken by the respondent under the PML Act is nonest in the eye
of law. On the other hand the respondent counsel produced the documents in order
to show the appointment of the respondent 1 and 2 by way of notification issued by
the Central Government which is in accordance with the Section 45(1A) of the PML
Act and also if an officer deputed to the ED by showing their designation, the officers
will get all powers vested in the PML Act and they can exercise the jurisdiction under
the Act.
11. For the convenience, the second proviso to Section 45 as under:
"Provided further that the Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence
punishable under Section 4 except upon a complaint in writing made by -
(i) the Director; or
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised in
writing in this behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order made
in this behalf by that Government."
12. The amendment to Section 45 came into force with effect from 1.7.2005 as per
Section 45 (1-A) of PML Act as under:
"(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Prcedure, 1973 (2
of 1974), or any other provision of this Act, no police officer shall investigate into an
offence under this Act unless specifically authorised, by the Central Government by a
general or special order, and, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed."
13. On bare reading of Sub-section (2) to the 2nd proviso to the section 45 (1) of PML Act empowers
any officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorize in writing in this behalf by a
Central Government by a general or special order made in this behalf by that Government. The
amendment to provision 45 i.e., 45 (1-A) provides that no police officers shall investigate into an
offence under this Act unless specifically authorized by Central Government by a general or special
order and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
14. On perusal of the same in my opinion, the complaint in this case has been filed by respondent 2
who is the Assistant Director, working in Enforcement Directorate, (ED) filed the complaint by
exercising the power under the PML Act. The learned Senior counsel for the petitioner has
strenuously contended the Asst. Director post was filled up by deputation from the police
department and he is B group officer and he cannot be posted to Group A cadre but the respondent
counsel submits there is no such eligibility criteria prescribed for the posting and the Central
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 6
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
Government issued a notification posting the officers by exercising the power under Section 49 of
PML Act for convenience it is necessary to refer the Sections 48 and 49 of the Act as under:
"Section 48. Authorized under Act - There shall be the following classes of authorities
for the purposes of this Act, namely:-
(a) Director or Additional Director or Joint Director,
(b) Deputy Director,
(c) Assistant Director, and
(d) such other class of officers as may be appointed for the purposes of this Act."
"49. Appointment and powers of authorities and other officers.--
(1) The Central Government may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be
authorities for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government
may authorise the Director or an Additional Director or a Joint Director or a Deputy
Director or an Assistant Director appointed under that sub-section to appoint other
authorities below the rank of an Assistant Director.
(3) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may
impose, an authority may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or
imposed on it under this Act."
15. The counsel for the respondent produced the notifications issued by the Central Government for
the officers were being deputed to work in ED and exercise the power under the PML Act.
16. The counsel for the respondent also produced appointment order notification dated 1.7.2005
issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue in the Gazette
which is as under:-
"G.S.R.440(E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 49 of
the Prevention of Money-laundering Act 2002 (15 of 2003), the Central Government
hereby appoints, with effect from the 1st day of July, 2005, the Director of
Enforcement holding office immediately before the said date under the Foreign
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), as the Director to exercise the
exclusive powers conferred under Section 5, section 8, section 16, section 17, section
18, section 19, section 20, section 21, sub-section (1) of section 26, section 45, section
50, section 57, section 60, section 62 and section 63 of the said Act and the said
Director shall also concurrently exercise powers conferred by sub-section (3),
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 7
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) of section 26, section 39, section 40, section 41,
section 42, section 48, section 49, section 66 and section 69 of the afore-said Act."
17. The another general order dated 11.11.2014 which is read as under:-
"In exercise of the powers conferred under sub-section on ( ) of section 45 of the
prevention of Money laundering Act 2002 (15 of 2003) hereafter referred to as the
Act), the Central Government hereby authorizes the officers not below the rank of
Assistant Directors in the Directorate of Enforcement to file complaint under Section
45 of the Act before the designated Special Court constituted under sub-section (1) of
section 43 of the Act for trial of offence punishable under Section 4 of the Act."
18. On reading of the above said notifications, admittedly the officers working under ED are
deputation posts borrowing the officers from other office of the Central Government including the
police officials from the State Government. The notification dated 11.11.2014 the Government of
India authorizes the officers not below the rank of Assistant Directors in the ED are empowered
under Section 45 of the PML Act to file the complaint before the special Court constituted under
Section 43 (1) of the PML Act for the trial of offence punishable under Section 4 of the PML Act.
19. The respondent counsel also produced the administrative order of the ED issued by the Central
Government of India dated 18.8.2017 by order (admission) No.144/2017, at Sl.No.14. Basavaraj R.
Magdum who is ranked Superintendent of Police worked in Karnataka Lokayuktha has been
selected and appointed as Assistant Director of ED on the deputation basis. The said notification of
the Central Government in respect of the deputation of Basavaraj as Assistant Director on 18.8.2017.
This notification was not challenged by any person aggrieved before the court or set aside by any
court. Once a police officer of DSP rank has been deputed to work as Assistant Director in ED, and
the said officer become an authorized officer under Section 45 (1A) of the PML Act and once he has
taken charges as Asst. Director of ED he can exercise the power to investigate the matter as provided
under Section 2(na) of the PML Act.
20. On bare reading of Section 48, it refers the classes of authorities for the purpose of PML Act as
Director or Additional Director or Joint Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director and such
other classes of officers as may be appointed for the purpose of this Act. Here in this case, Basavaraj
Magdum was a Deputy Superintendent of Police, Lokayukta and he has been selected and appointed
as Assistant Director by the Central Government exercising the power under Section 49(1) of the
PML Act.
21. As I have already stated above, the order of appointment issued by the Central Government
dated 01.07.2005 empowers the officers for appointment to be worked as authorities under the ED.
By an appointment order dated 18.08.2017 Basavaraj Magdum was selected and appointed on
deputation basis and posted to work as Assistant Director until further orders with effect from
29.09.2017. This administrative order (Admn. No.144/2017) clearly reveals that, on 29.09.2017, the
said officer Basavaraj R. Magdum took charge as Assistant Director on deputation basis. Therefore,
once the officer is posted as an Assistant Director, the Government by exercising power under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 8
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
Section 49(1) of the PML Act, he becomes the Assistant Director for the purpose of Section 48(1)(c)
of the PML Act.
22. Sub-Section (2) of Section 49 of PML Act defines that without prejudice to the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Central Government may authorise the Director or an Additional Director or a Joint
Director or a Deputy Director or an Assistant Director appointed under that sub-section to appoint
other authorities below the rank of an Assistant Director. Sub-section (3) of Section 49 imposes
conditions and limitations as the Central Government may impose, an authority may exercise the
powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on it under this Act. On this background of
appointment of respondent No.2 as Assistant Director, he can exercise the power under the PML Act
for filing the complaint as per Section 45 of the PML Act in view of the notification dated 11.11.2014.
23. Therefore, respondent No.2 as an Assistant Director who after taking charge, is empowered to
file the complaint before the Special Court under Section 45 of PML Act. The complainant has
categorically stated in the complaint at first para stating that the complaint being filed under
Sections 44 and 45 of the PML Act for commission of offence defined under Section 3 of the PML
Act read with Section 70 and 8(5) and Section 4 of the PML Act and the complainant has been an
authorized officer for filing this complaint in view of authorization issued by the Government of
India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, New Delhi in F. No.6/14/2008-ES dated
11.11.2014. Therefore, once the officer is posted as an Assistant Director, he has exercised the power
and filed the complaint before the Special Court. Therefore, the contention of the learned Senior
Counsel that respondent No.2 has no authority to file the complaint cannot be accepted.
24. Though the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of M/s. Canon India Private Limited. (supra) in respect of the
Customs Act before the Central Excise against the order in respect of the matter dealt with the
Central Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal. But, in the facts and circumstances of the case,
the said judgment is not applicable to the case on hand for the reason stated above.
25. Another contention raised by the learned Senior Counsel is in respect of the appointment of the
1st respondent-Deputy Director in respect of issuing the provisional attachment order on
27.06.2019 under Section 5(1) of the PML Act where the provisional attachment order has been
challenged by him before the Appellate Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal said to have allowed the
claim of the petitioner and passed an order. The provisional attachment order has not been
challenged before this Court and therefore, the question of challenging the appointment of one
Parashivamurthy M.K. as Deputy Director does not arise. The order under Section 5 of the PML Act
is nothing but an administrative order which was challenged before the Appellate Tribunal and the
order of the Tribunal is not before this Court and not challenged in this petition. Therefore, the
question of considering the power of the respondent No.1 cannot be dealt with by this Court in this
petition. Respondent No.2 has filed the complaint as Assistant Director which is in the nature of
charge sheet and there are two different proceedings in view of the order passed under Section 5 and
filing complaint under section 45 of the PML Act. Therefore, the contention of the petitioner's
counsel at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the petition questioning the authority of respondent Nos.1 and 2 is
not sustainable and the respondents are the authorities under the PML Act and who have been duly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 9
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
appointed by the Central Government and they exercised their power under the Act which is within
the jurisdiction under the PML Act. The Hon'ble Supreme Court settled the issue in respect of the
proceedings under Section 5(1) of the PML Act regarding provisional attachment orders passed by
the Deputy Director has been upheld in the case of J. SEKAR VS. UNION OF INDIA reported in
2018 SCC Online DEL 6523. Therefore, this Court cannot find any illegality or irregularity in filing
the complaint by respondent No.2 in order to set aside the same.
26. The other contention raised by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is that the Special
Court has not applied its mind while taking cognizance and has also not passed a detailed order. In
this regard, I have perused the order of taking cognizance by the Special Court, wherein the Special
Court has stated that it has perused the charge sheet and taken cognizance against accused Nos.1 to
26 for the offences under Sections 3 and 4 of the PML Act and ordered to register a special case and
issued summons to the other accused persons and NBW to the petitioner herein. It is submitted that
accused No.9 is in abroad and not in Bengaluru and he has appeared through his attorney Holder.
In this regard, the learned counsel for respondent has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in PRADEEP S. WODEYAR VS. STATE OF KARNATAKA report in 2021 SCC online
SC 1140. The Hon'ble Supreme Court while referring the case of Afroz Mohammed Hasanfatta and
also the Pepsi Foods Ltd. case, at paragraph 86, has categorically held as under:
86. xxxxxx "23. Insofar as taking cognizance based on the police report is concerned,
the Magistrate has the advantage of the charge-sheet, statement of witnesses and
other evidence collected by the police during the investigation.
Investigating officer/SHO collects the necessary evidence during the investigation conducted in
compliance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code and in accordance with the rules of
investigation. Evidence and materials so collected are sifted at the level of the investigating officer
and thereafter, charge- sheet was filed. In appropriate cases, opinion of the Public Prosecutor is also
obtained before filing the charge-sheet. The court thus has the advantage of the police report along
with the materials placed before it by the police. Under Section 190(1)(b) CrPC, where the
Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence upon a police report and the Magistrate is satisfied
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate directs issuance of process. In case of
taking cognizance of an offence based upon the police report, the Magistrate is not required to
record reasons for issuing the process. In cases instituted on a police report, the Magistrate is only
required to pass an order issuing summons to the accused.
Such an order of issuing summons to the accused is based upon satisfaction of the Magistrate
considering the police report and other documents and satisfying himself that there is sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused. In a case based upon the police report, at the stage of
issuing the summons to the accused, the Magistrate is not required to record any reason. In case, if
the charge-sheet is barred by law or where there is lack of jurisdiction or when the charge-sheet is
rejected or not taken on file, then the Magistrate is required to record his reasons for rejection of the
charge-sheet and for not taking it on file."
(emphasis supplied)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 10
Sri Abbas Mohammed Khan vs The Deputy Director on 25 January, 2022
27. In view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Pradeep S. Wodeyar's case (supra), the
trial Court need not pass a lengthy order for taking cognizance in respect of the challan filed by the
police after the investigation. The application of mind and the detailed order is required only while
taking cognizance in the private complaint filed by the complainant. Therefore, the contention of the
learned Senior Counsel that the trial Court has not applied its mind while taking cognizance cannot
be acceptable.
28. On perusal of the entire records, respondent No.2 is an authorised officer under the PML Act
appointed as per Section 49 of the PML Act and he is one of the officers specified under Section 48
of the PML Act. By issuing the notifications, the Central Government has empowered the officer to
file the complaint before the Special Court and respondent No.2 is not officer who comes below the
rank of the Assistant Director. Therefore, the question of quashing the complaint/challan filed by
the respondent No.2 before the Special Court does not call for any interference.
29. I have already held that appointment of respondent No.1 is within the jurisdiction and
appointment by the Central Government by issuing notification. Even otherwise, the provisional
attachment order passed by respondent No.1 was challenged before the appellate Tribunal. The
petitioner is said to have obtained interim order. Such being the case, the contention of the
petitioner challenging the appointment of respondent No.1 is not acceptable and the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has also upheld the proceedings under Section 5 of the PML Act in Sekar's case
(supra).
The writ petition is devoid of merit and hence, liable to be dismissed. Accordingly, it is dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE CS/AKV
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/36597376/ 11
