Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March,
2022
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF MARCH, 2022 R
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
CRIMINAL PETITION No.1892 OF 2022
BETWEEN:
SRI PRAVEEN SURENDIRAN
S/O SURENDIRAN SHIVARAMAKRISHNAN
AGED ABOUT 34 YEARS,
R/AT NO. A2052, ASSETZ EAST POINT
MARATHAHALLI OUTER RING ROAD,
BELLANDUR, BENGALURU - 560 103.
ADDRESS SHOWN IN
THE ADDITIONAL CHARGE SHEET
MANKIRI, II CROSS STREET,
KAMARAJA TENVADAL ROAD,
MANAGIRI, MADURAI, TAMIL NADU - 625 020.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI ASHOK HARANAHALLI, SR.ADVOCATE A/W
SRI SRINIVAS RAO S.S., ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA BY
CUBBON PARK POLICE STATION,
REPRESENTED BY SPP
HIGH COURT BUILDING
BENGALURU - 560 001.
2. M/S MEMG INTERNATIONAL INDIA PVT. LTD.,
M/S MANIPAL INTEGRATED SERVICES PVT. LTD.,
15TH FLOOR, JW MARRIOTT HOTEL
24/1, VITTAL MALLYA ROAD,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 1
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
2
BENGALURU - 560 001
REPRESENTED BY ITS GROUP CEO
S.VAITHEESWARAN.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SMT.YASHODA K.P., HCGP FOR R1;
SRI S.K.VENKATA REDDY, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 482 OF
CR.P.C., PRAYING TO QUASH THE IMPUGNED ORDER DATED
02.03.2022 PASSED IN C.C.NO.7559/2019 BY THE IV ADDL.C.M.M.,
BENGALURU AND CONSEQUENTLY ALLOW THE APPLICATION
SEEKING RELEASE OF THE PETITIONER PASSPORT.
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 09.03.2022, COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE
FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
The petitioner is before this Court calling in question order dated 02-03-2022 passed in
C.C.No.7559 of 2019 by which, the IV Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore rejects
the application of the petitioner for release of his passport.
2. Brief facts leading to the filing of the present petition, as borne out from the records, are as
follows:-
On 26-12-2018 a case is registered against six accused for offences punishable under
Sections 420, 465, 467, 468 and 471 of the IPC on a complaint registered by one
Vaitheeswaran S, Group Chief Executive Officer of MEMG International India Private
Limited. After completion of investigation, the police filed a preliminary charge sheet
in C.C.No.7559 of 2019 against five persons mentioned therein and others for
offences punishable under Sections 120B, 406, 408, 409, 465, 467, 468, 471, 477A,
506, 201 and 420 read with Section 34 of the IPC. Later, on further investigation, the
police filed first additional charge sheet on 14.09.2019 adding accused 6 to 9. At this
point in time, the petitioner was not arrayed as an accused.
3. A further report was made on further investigation and the police laid a second additional charge
sheet on 11-01-2021. It is here the name of the petitioner figures and is arrayed as accused No.10.
Several proceedings have gone on since then. The petitioner being aggrieved by the aforesaid
proceedings had preferred Writ Petition No.21035 of 2021 and this Court on 09-12-2021 has stayed
all further proceedings in C.C.No.7559 of 2019 against the petitioner. On 20-12-2021 the petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 2
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
was enlarged on bail by imposing two conditions viz., the petitioner was directed to execute a
personal bond for Rs.1,00,000/- and furnish such documents of surety.
4. The present case concerns an application made by the petitioner before the trial Court seeking
release of his passport on the ground that the son of the petitioner studies in a school at Paris -
Sports Etudes Concept and was attending classes virtually. Since classes have now started
physically, the petitioner wanted to accompany his son for getting him admitted in the school. This
application is rejected by the trial Court. It is the rejection of the application that is called in
question in the present proceedings. Therefore, these proceedings concern with the rejection of
release of passport of the petitioner and not any other issue that is pending in plethora of cases
between the parties.
5. Heard Sri.Ashok Haranahalli, learned senior counsel along with Sri.Srinivas Rao.S.S., learned
counsel for petitioner and Smt.K.P.Yashoda, learned High Court Government Pleader for
respondent No.1 and Sri.S.K.Venkata Reddy, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
6. Learned senior counsel Sri Ashok Haranahalli would submit that several proceedings between the
parties are pending consideration. The Apex Court has stayed all further proceedings in other cases.
The case at hand is not an offshoot of those cases, but an independent case of an application, where
the passport of the petitioner is seized, not impounded by the police and there is grave urgency for
the petitioner to leave the country and get his son admitted to the school at France.
7. On the other hand, the learned counsel Sri S.K.Venkata Reddy appearing for the 2nd
respondent/de-facto complainant, by filing elaborate objections, would contend that if the petitioner
is let off, he would run away from the country and funds which have been misappropriated by the
petitioner along with others would be parked elsewhere, thereby it would become difficult to secure
presence of the petitioner in future, since several proceedings are pending consideration between
the parties. Therefore, the order rejecting release of passport does not call for any interference.
8. The learned High Court Government Pleader appearing for the State would also toe the lines of
the learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent.
9. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and in furtherance whereof, the issue that falls for my consideration is, 'whether the order rejecting
release of passport of the petitioner, in the facts and circumstances of the case, is tenable in law?'
10. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The petitioner, though was not arrayed as an accused
in the initial stages of investigation, is now accused No.10. When the petitioner was arrayed as an
accused, he had gone absconding pursuant to which, the learned trial Judge in C.C.No.7559 of 2019
had issued a non-bailable warrant against the petitioner on 01-10-2021 and later on, being unable to
trace the petitioner, a look out notice was issued on 26-10-2021 and the information was
transmitted to all the Authorities including the Airport Authorities regarding issuance of
non-bailable warrant and a look out notice. On 18-11-2021 when the petitioner/accused is alleged to
have made an attempt to flee from the country he was arrested by the immigration department at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 3
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
the Bangalore International Airport and taken to custody till 20-11-2021 and the passport was also
seized.
11. The trial Court, considering the bail application of the petitioner, refused to grant regular bail by
coming to conclude that the petitioner may abscond. It is after rejection of the bail application, the
petitioner preferred Writ Petition No.21035 of 2021 and this Court granted an interim order of stay
of all further proceedings against the petitioner in C.C.No.7559 of 2019. Pursuant to the interim
order of stay of further proceedings in a petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. the petitioner was
released on bail. The interim bail granted on 20.12.2021 imposing two conditions was only on the
ground that this Court by an interim order stayed further proceedings in the aforesaid case.
12. The petitioner has now come up with an application seeking release of passport for the reason
that he has to travel to France for his son to get admitted to the school. The trial Court, considering
the application filed by the petitioner and the objections to the said application, has passed an order
rejecting the said application on the likelihood that the petitioner would abscond from the country.
It is this order that drives the petitioner to this Court. Since it is an interlocutory order passed
rejecting the application and its tenability that falls for consideration, it is germane to notice the
application itself filed by the petitioner and it reads:
"INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATION FOR RELEASE OF PASSPORT.
The 10th Accused submits as follows:
1. The 10th Accused was granted bail in the above proceedings by this Hon'ble Court
vide order dated 20.12.2021 wherein this Hon'ble Court was pleased to impose two
conditi9ons wherein Accused No.10 has to execute a personal bond for Rs.1,00,000/-
with a surety for like sum and cash security of Rs.10,000/- and Accused No.10 was
directed to furnish documents relating to surety's identity and also if there is a
change in the address of Accused No.10, the said Accused was directed to file an
affidavit with full address and documents.
2. It is submitted that the complainant police while arresting 10th Accused on
18-11-2021 collected the passport of the 10th Accused and filed a requisition to keep
the same in safe custody. Hence, the passport of the 10th Accused is currently in the
custody of this Hon'ble Court.
3. It is submitted that the son of the 10th Accused i.e., Kum.Ishan Praveen goes to
school in France at Sports Etudes Concept currently studying in 8th Standard (4th
Grade in France) and due to the ongoing pandemic was attending classes virtually.
The classes are about to commence physically due to which the son of the 10th
Accused has to travel with his son to France from 03.03.2022 to 1-08-2022. Hence,
since the passport is in the custody of this Hon'ble Court, the 10th Accused has
preferred this application.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 4
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
4. It is submitted that the above proceedings insofar as the 10th Accused has already
been stayed in W.P.No.21035 of 2021 vide order dated 9-12-2021. Further, no
condition pertaining to the passport of the 10th Accused or with respect to travel
restrictions were imposed while granting bail in favour of Accused No.10. Hence,
there is no legal embargo for this Hon'ble Court to consider the Application of
Accused No.10.
5. It is submitted that the 10th Accused if the above application is not considered the
10th Accused would be put to immense hardship and loss which cannot be
compensated in any manner whatsoever as the education of the minor child of the
10th Accused would be immensely affected and on the other hand no hardship would
be caused to the other side as investigation has already concluded and the
proceedings pertaining to Accused No.10 has been stayed. The Accused No.10 is
willing to return the passport immediately upon his return.
Wherefore, Accused No.10 most respectfully prays that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to release
his passport bearing No.Z5551511 and Old passport No.P3821785 in the interest of justice and
equity."
(Emphasis added) A perusal of the afore-extracted application would indicate that the petitioner
wants to fly to France with his son to get his son admitted to the School and wants to stay at France
from 03-03-2022 to 1-08-2022 close to six months and since the passport is in the custody of the
Court, the application is filed.
13. The surety that the petitioner offers is that of his parents and, therefore sought release of the
passport. The order passed upon the said application after considering the objections reads as
follows:
"02-03-2022 State by Sr.APP Accused For orders.
ORDER ON APPLICATION FILED FOR RELEASE OF PASSPORT Sri AML,
Advocate for accused No.10 - Praveen Surendiran filed this application praying court
for release of passport of accused No.10 - Praveen Surendiran and in support of his
application relied on Parvez NoordinLokhandwalla v. State of Maharashtrea and
another - (2020) 10 SCC 77.
2. Special PP filed objections and prays to reject the application.
3. Sri S.K.V.R. Advocate for de facto complainant filed objections through Spl.PP and
prays to reject the application.
4. I heard both side and perused all materials on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 5
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
5. Accused No.10 contended that his son is studying in 8th standard at Paris and he
attended classes virtually. The classes are about to commence physically and his son
has to attend the classes physically. Hence, Accused No.10 has to travel to France
with his son Ishan and produced e- mails, birth certificate and certificate of schooling
of Ishan. It is submitted that, at the time of granting bail there is no condition for
travel restrictions. Hence, matter against accused No.10 is stayed and sought to
release of passport.
6. This Court released accused No.10 on bail as per order dated 20-12-2021. This
Court has not expressly imposed any restrictions on travelling of accused No.10,
because at the time of grant of bail his passport was seized and produced in this
Court. It is also important to note that passport of accused No.10 is seized in the
present case for temporary period i.e., till conclusion of trial. Hence, if passport is
released inn favour of accused No.10, he will fly to France and then it is difficult to
secure Accused No.10. Hence, looking at contents of application absolutely accused
No.10 has not made grounds to allow his application. I went through Parvez Noordin
Lokhandwalla v. State of Maharashtra and another - (2020) 10 SCC 77 and said
decision will not be helpful to accused No.10, because present facts and grounds
urged in the application are entirely different from that of said decision. Hence,
under these circumstances and looking at facts and circumstances of the case, I
proceed to pass following:
ORDER The application filed by Accused No.10 - Praveen Surendiran for release of
passport is hereby rejected.
Sd/-
IV ACMM, Bangalore"
(Emphasis added)
14. In terms of the order (supra) what becomes necessary to be considered is, whether the trial Court
could have rejected the application for release of the passport and further order retention of the
passport till the conclusion of the trial. To consider this issue, it is germane to notice the provisions
of the Criminal Procedure Code which empowers seizure. Section 102 of the Cr.P.C. empowers the
Police to seize certain properties. Section 102 of the Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
"102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.--(1) Any police officer may
seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which
may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any
offence.
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall
forthwith report the seizure to that officer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 6
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure
to the Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it
cannot be conveniently transported to the Court, 2 [or where there is difficulty in
securing proper accommodation for the custody of such property, or where the
continued retention of the property in police custody may not be considered
necessary for the purpose of investigation, he may give custody thereof to any person
on his executing a bond undertaking to produce the property before the Court as and
when required and to give effect to the further orders of the Court as to the disposal
of the same:
Provided that where the property seized under sub- section (1) is subject to speedy
and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is
unknown or absent and the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees, it
may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police
and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be practicable,
apply to the net proceeds of such sale.
(Emphasis supplied) Section 104 of the Cr.P.C. deals with power of the Court to
impound the document that is produced and reads:
"104. Power to impound document, etc., produced.--Any Court may, if it thinks fit,
impound any document or thing produced before it under this Code."
The seizure of the passport, in the case at hand, has happened invoking power of the Police under
Section 102 of the Cr.P.C. and the passport is retained by the Court, purportedly in terms of power
under Section 104 of the Cr.P.C.
15. Issuance of passport and its impounding is dealt with under special enactment - The Passports
Act, 1967 ('the Act' for short). Section 10 of the Act reads as follows:-
"10. Variation, impounding and revocation of passports and travel documents.--(1)
The passport authority may, having regard to the provisions of sub- section (1) of
Section 6 or any notification under Section 19, vary or cancel the endorsements on a
passport or travel document or may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, vary or cancel the conditions (other than the prescribed conditions)
subject to which a passport or travel document has been issued and may, for that
purpose, require the holder of a passport or travel document, by notice in writing, to
deliver up the passport or travel document to it within such time as may be specified
in the notice and the holder shall comply with such notice.
(2) The passport authority may, on the application of the holder of a passport or a
travel document, and with the previous approval of the Central Government also vary
or cancel the conditions (other than the prescribed conditions) of the passport or
travel document.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 7
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
(3) The passport authority may impound or cause to be impounded or revoke a
passport or travel document,--
(a) if the passport authority is satisfied that the holder of the passport or travel
document is in wrongful possession thereof;
(b) if the passport or travel document was obtained by the suppression of material
information or on the basis of wrong information provided by the holder of the
passport or travel document or any other person on his behalf:
Provided that if the holder of such passport obtains another passport, the passport
authority shall also impound or cause to be impounded or revoke such other
passport.
(c) if the passport authority deems it necessary so to do in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of India
with any foreign country, or in the interests of the general public;
(d) if the holder of the passport or travel document has, at any time after the issue of
the passport or travel document, been convicted by a court in India for any offence
involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not
less than two years;
(e) if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the
holder of the passport or travel document are pending before a criminal court in
India;
(f) if any of the conditions of the passport or travel document has been contravened;
(g) if the holder of the passport or travel document has failed to comply with a notice
under sub-
section (1) requiring him to deliver up the same;
(h) if it is brought to the notice of the passport authority that a warrant or summons for the
appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the holder of the passport or travel document has been
issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or if an order prohibiting the departure
from India of the holder of the passport or other travel document has been made by any such court
and the passport authority is satisfied that a warrant or summons has been so issued or an order has
been so made.
(4) The passport authority may also revoke a passport or travel document on the application of the
holder thereof.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 8
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
(5) Where the passport authority makes an order varying or cancelling the endorsements on, or
varying the conditions of, a passport or travel document under sub- section (1) or an order
impounding or revoking a passport or travel document under sub-section (3), it shall record in
writing a brief statement of the reasons for making such order and furnish to the holder of the
passport or travel document on demand a copy of the same unless in any case, the passport
authority is of the opinion that it will not be in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India,
the security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country or in the interests of the
general public to furnish such a copy.
(6) The authority to whom the passport authority is subordinate may, by order in writing, impound
or cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel document on any ground on which it may
be impounded or revoked by the passport authority and the foregoing provisions of this section
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the impounding or revocation of a passport or travel
document by such authority.
(7) A court convicting the holder of a passport or travel document of any offence under this Act or
the rules made thereunder may also revoke the passport or travel document:
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise the revocation shall
become void.
(8) An order of revocation under sub-section (7) may also be made by an appellate
court or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision.
(9) On the revocation of a passport or travel document under this section the holder
thereof shall, without delay surrender the passport or travel document, if the same
has not already been impounded, to the authority by whom it has been revoked or to
such other authority as may be specified in this behalf in the order of revocation.
(Emphasis supplied) Sub-section (3) of Section 10 empowers the Passport Authority to impound or
cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or travel document, subject to the conditions that are
stipulated in sub-section (3) of Section 10 of the Act.
16. One such condition of impounding of passport is that, if the proceedings in respect of an offence
alleged to have been committed by the holder of the passport are pending before a criminal court in
India. Therefore, the power of the Impounding Authority i.e., the Competent Authority under the
Act is traceable to clause (e) of sub-section 3 of Section 10 of the Act which is the only provision
applicable to the case at hand.
17. It is not in dispute that the petitioner is facing criminal proceedings before the competent
criminal Court and the Police after investigation have also filed charge sheet in the matter in which,
the petitioner is arrayed as Accused No.10. Therefore, it is not a case where the passport of the
petitioner cannot even be seized or impounded, but, by whom is the question.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 9
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
18. The Passport Act is a special enactment and is trite that it being a special enactment would
prevail over Section 102 or Section 104 of the Cr.P.C., which empower the Police to seize and the
Court to impound any document. Impounding of any document produced before the Court cannot
stretch to an extent that it can impound the passport. Therefore, the deposit of passport before the
Court or passport being held before the Police, both will become without authority of law. The
further observation of the Court that it would be in its custody till conclusion of trial is, clearly on
the face of it, without authority of law, as it would amount to impounding the passport. This very
issue fell for consideration before the Apex Court in the case of SURESH NANDA v. CBI1 wherein
the Apex Court has held as follows:-
"8. Sub-section (5) of Section 165 CrPC provides that the copies of record made under
sub-section (1) or sub- section (3) shall forthwith be sent to the nearest Magistrate
empowered to take cognizance of the offence whereas Section 104 CrPC authorises
the court to impound any document or thing produced before it under the Code.
Section 165 CrPC does not speak about the passport which has been searched and
seized as in the present case. It does not speak about the documents found in search,
but copies of the records prepared under sub-section (1) and sub-section (3).
9. "Impound" means to keep in custody of the law. There must be some distinct
action which will show that documents or things have been impounded. According to
Oxford Dictionary "impound" means to take legal or formal possession. In the
present case, the passport of the appellant is in possession of CBI right from the date
it has been seized by CBI. When we read Section 104 CrPC and Section 10 of the Act
together, under CrPC, the court is empowered to impound any document or thing
produced before it whereas the Act speaks specifically of impounding of the passport.
10. Thus, the Act is a special Act relating to a matter of passport, whereas Section 104
CrPC authorises the court to impound document or thing produced before it. Where
there is a special Act (2008) 3 SCC 674 dealing with specific subject, resort should be
had to that Act instead of general Act providing for the matter connected with the
specific Act. As the Passports Act is a special Act, the rule that "general provision
should yield to the specific provision" is to be applied. See DamjiValji Shah v. LIC of
India [AIR 1966 SC 135], Gobind Sugar Mills Ltd. v. State of Bihar [(1999) 7 SCC 76]
and Belsund Sugar Co.
Ltd. v. State of Bihar [(1999) 9 SCC 620: AIR 1999 SC 3125].
11. The Act being a specific Act whereas Section 104 CrPC is a general provision for impounding any
document or thing, it shall prevail over that section in CrPC as regards the passport. Thus, by
necessary implication, the power of court to impound any document or thing produced before it
would exclude passport.
12. In the present case, no steps have been taken under Section 10 of the Act which provides for
variation, impounding and revocation of the passports and travel documents. Section 10-A of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 10
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
Act which provides for an order to suspend with immediate effect any passport or travel document;
such other appropriate order which may have the effect of rendering any passport or travel
document invalid, for a period not exceeding four weeks, if the Central Government or any
designated officer on its satisfaction holds that it is necessary in public interest to do without
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in Section 10 by approaching the Central
Government or any designated officer. Therefore, it appears that the passport of the appellant
cannot be impounded except by the Passport Authority in accordance with law. The retention of the
passport by the respondent (CBI) has not been done in conformity with the provisions of law as
there is no order of the Passport Authorities under Section 10(3)(e) or by the Central Government or
any designated officer under Section 10-A of the Act to impound the passport by the respondent
exercising the powers vested under the Act.
13. The learned Additional Solicitor General has submitted that the police has power to seize a
passport in view of Section 102(1) CrPC which states:
"102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.--(1) Any police officer may
seize any property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which
may be found under circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any
offence."
14. In our opinion, while the police may have the power to seize a passport under Section 102(1)
CrPC, it does not have the power to impound the same. Impounding of a passport can only be done
by the Passport Authority under Section 10(3) of the Passports Act, 1967.
15. It may be mentioned that there is a difference between seizing of a document and impounding a
document. A seizure is made at a particular moment when a person or authority takes into his
possession some property which was earlier not in his possession. Thus, seizure is done at a
particular moment of time. However, if after seizing of a property or document the said property or
document is retained for some period of time, then such retention amounts to impounding of the
property or document. In Law Lexicon by P. Ramanatha Aiyar (2nd Edn.), the word "impound" has
been defined to mean, "to take possession of a document or the like for being held in custody in
accordance with law". Thus, the word "impounding" really means retention of possession of goods
or a document which has been seized.
16. Hence, while the police may have power to seize a passport under Section 102 CrPC if it is
permissible within the authority given under Section 102 CrPC, it does not have power to retain or
impound the same, because that can only be done by the Passport Authority under Section 10(3) of
the Passports Act. Hence, if the police seizes a passport (which it has power to do under Section 102
CrPC), thereafter the police must send it along with a letter to the Passport Authority clearly stating
that the seized passport deserves to be impounded for one of the reasons mentioned in Section 10(3)
of the Act. It is thereafter for the Passport Authority to decide whether to impound the passport or
not. Since impounding of a passport has civil consequences, the Passport Authority must give an
opportunity of hearing to the person concerned before impounding his passport. It is well settled
that any order which has civil consequences must be passed after giving opportunity of hearing to a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 11
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
party (vide State of Orissa v. Binapani Dei [AIR 1967 SC 1269] ).
17. In the present case, neither the Passport Authority passed any order of impounding nor was any
opportunity of hearing given to the appellant by the Passport Authority for impounding the
document. It was only the CBI authority which has retained possession of the passport (which in
substance amounts to impounding it) from October 2006. In our opinion, this was clearly illegal.
Under Section 10-A of the Act retention by the Central Government can only be for four weeks.
Thereafter it can only be retained by an order of the Passport Authority under Section 10(3).
18. In our opinion, even the court cannot impound a passport. Though, no doubt, Section 104 CrPC
states that the court may, if it thinks fit, impound any document or thing produced before it, in our
opinion, this provision will only enable the court to impound any document or thing other than a
passport. This is because impounding of a "passport" is provided for in Section 10(3) of the
Passports Act. The Passports Act is a special law while CrPC is a general law. It is well settled that
the special law prevails over the general law vide G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory Interpretation
(9th Edn., p. 133).
This principle is expressed in the
maxim generaliaspecialibus non derogant. Hence,
impounding of a passport cannot be done by the court under Section 104 CrPC though it can
impound any other document or thing.
19. For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the impugned order of the High Court and direct the
respondent to hand over the passport to the appellant within a week from today. However, it shall
be open to the respondent to approach the Passport Authorities under Section 10 or the authorities
under Section 10-A of the Act for impounding the passport of the appellant in accordance with law."
(Emphasis supplied) The Apex Court dealt with the very issue as to who would be the Authority to
impound the passport. The Apex Court holds that neither the Police nor the Court invoking powers
under Section 102 or Section 104 of the Cr.P.C. can seize or impound a passport. Impounding of a
passport is by the Authority vested under the Act as depicted therein. It is not in dispute that the
Authority under the Act is not even made aware of seizure or retention of the passport by the Police
or before the Court.
19. The reliance placed on the judgment in the case of PARVEZ NOORDIN LOKHANDWALLA v.
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ANOTHER2 would not come in aid to the contentions advanced
by the learned senior counsel in the light of the fact that the issue before the Apex Court was entirely
different than what is obtaining in the case at hand. The appellant therein was permitted to travel in
the light of only a FIR pending consideration and the status of the appellant therein. There were no
proceedings instituted by the Authorities under the Act in the aforesaid case. Therefore, the same
would not be applicable to the facts obtaining in the case at hand.
20. The judgment in the case of SURESH NANDA (supra) is what covers the issue at hand and not
the judgment in PARVEZ (supra). On a fusion of the facts, the Code, the Act and the judgment in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 12
Sri Praveen Surendiran vs State Of Karnataka By on 21 March, 2022
case of SURESH NANDA what would unmistakably emerge is that the Police do have power to seize
the passport under Section 102 of the Cr.P.C. The passport so seized cannot lie indefinitely with the
hands of the Police as (2020) 10 SCC 77 beyond a certain period seizure would amount to
impounding, which have a world of difference between them and which power is not conferred to
the Police under Section 102 of the Cr.P.C.
21. The power of impounding a document under Section 104 of the Cr.P.C. is available to a Court.
This cannot stretch to an extent of impounding the passport. The passport coming within the
purview of the Act and it being a special law would prevail over the provisions of Section 104 of the
Cr.P.C. The Court can impound any document, but not the passport as it is dealt with under a
special enactment. The power of impounding is available only to the Competent Authority under the
Act, in terms of Section 10 of the Act. Wherefore, the order rejecting the release of passport by the
Court observing that it is held in safe custody till the conclusion of the trial is unsustainable.
Therefore, the petitioner becomes entitled for release of passport in his favour, as right to hold a
passport and travel is, without doubt, held to be a fundamental right in plethora of judgments.
22. Since criminal proceedings are pending against the petitioner, the apprehension of the 2nd
respondent that he would abscond and not be available for trial also requires to be considered.
Fleeing justice or thwarting the course of justice would undermine the majesty of the law.
Wherefore, to strike a balance between the rights of the petitioner and course of justice, I deem it
appropriate to pass the following:
ORDER
(i) Criminal Petition is allowed in part. The order rejecting release of passport by the
trial Court stands quashed and a direction is issued to hand over the passport to the
petitioner within 3 weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
(ii) It is open to the respondents to approach the Passport Authority under Section 10
of the Passports Act, 1967 for impounding the passport of the petitioner in
accordance with law, after affording a reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
(iii) The travel of the petitioner beyond the shores of this nation shall be only on
further orders in Writ Petition No.21035 of 2021 pending before this Court.
Sd/-
JUDGE bkp CT:MJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39759282/ 13
