Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24
February, 2020
Bench: G.Narendar, M.Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH R
DATED THIS THE 24TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE G.NARENDAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION NO.205398/2019 (S-KAT)
BETWEEN:
SRI SANJEEV KUMAR
S/O ZHARANAPPA
AGE 43 YEARS,
OCC: PANCHAYAT DEVELOPMENT OFFICER,
NOW AT SULEPET,
TQ:CHINCHOLI,
DIST: KALABURAGI - 585 306.
....PETITIONER
(BY SRI MAHESH PATIL, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
REPRESENTED BY ITS
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
RURAL DEVELOPMENT & PANCHAYAT
RAJ DEPARTMENT, M.S.BUILDING,
BENGALURU - 560 001.
2
2. THE REGISTRAR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 1
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA,
M.S.BUILDINGS,
BENGALURU - 560 001.
....RESPONDENTS
(BY SMT.ARCHANA P TIWARI, AGA FO R1;
SRI SUBHASH MALLAPUR, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226
AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO
ISSUE A WRIT IN THE NATURE OF CERTIORARI BY
QUASHING THE ORDER DATED 03.10.2019 (VIDE ANNEXURE
- D) PASSED BY THE KARNATAKA STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
TRIBUNAL, KALABURAGI, BENCH IN APPLICATION
No.2127/2017, ETC.
THIS WRIT PETITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION,
THIS DAY, NARENDAR J. AND NAGAPRASANNA J., MADE
THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
Being aggrieved by the order dated 3.10.2019 passed in application No.2127/2017 whereby the
Karnataka Administrative Tribunal, Bengaluru (hereinafter referred to as 'Tribunal' for short)
rejected the challenge to the entrustment of enquiry into the hands of the 2nd respondent
Lokayukta by the 1st respondent-Government, the instant writ petition is filed.
2. The material facts necessary for appreciation of the controversy are as follows:
The Water Resources Department introduced a project called Mullamari Irrigation
Project in Chincholi Taluk, Kalaburagi District, to provide water facilities for
irrigation purpose. Rehabilitation Centres were established to provide shelters to the
displaced families of the submerged land in respect of three villages in Chincholi
Taluk. Accordingly, the Executive Engineer/Assistant Executive Engineer of
respective divisions and sub-
divisions were empowered to allot sites for displaced families. It transpires that on
20.4.2007, the then Secretary and Panchayat Development Officer (hereinafter
referred to as 'PDO' for short) of Gadalingadalli Gramapanchayat on the direction of
Karnataka Neeravari Nigam Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'KNNL' for short)
issued a letter of allotment in respect of site No.86 along with sanctioned plan for
construction of a house in favour Smt. Mahananda, W/o. Adeppa Huli under the
Rehabilitation Scheme with certain conditions. The rehabilitation Scheme was
managed by the KNNL.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 2
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
3. It is pleaded that instead of constructing a house on Site No.86, Smt. Mahananda built a house in
the place reserved for a civic amenity i.e., a park. Immediately, the Assistant Executive Engineer of
the project, KNNL, caused a notice to Smt. Mahananda in the year 2007. During the pendency of
these proceedings, in terms of the notice, it transpires that one Sri Lingaraju, son of Surya Kanth of
Chennur village, Chincholi Taluk made an application on 1.4.2013 to the Assistant Executive
Engineer, KNNL, Dam Sub-Division, ChimmanChooda, alleging that Smt. Mahananda had
constructed a house in an area reserved for civic amenity under the Scheme. In response to the
application made, the Assistant Executive Engineer replied that notices were issued on 10.11.2006
to Smt. Mahananda that the construction of the house building in the civic amenity site was illegal
and the same had been replied by Smt. Mahananda stating that she had not built any house in the
place that was alleged, but the house was built in a farm land which belonged to her and she was
ready for a resurvey of the land.
4. After getting this reply from KNNL, Sri Lingaraju gave a complaint to the 2nd
respondent-Lokayukta alleging that no action is taken against the owner of the house built on the
civic amenity site and the construction not demolished. The 2nd respondent-Lokayukta conducted
an investigation in the matter under Section 9 of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act (hereinafter referred
to as 'Act' for short) and framed its report under Sub-section (3) of Section 12 of the Act and
communicated the same to the 1st respondent recommending that a departmental enquiry be
conducted against the petitioner and the same be entrusted to it under Rule 14-A under Karnataka
Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as 'Rules' for
short).
5. The Government by its order dated 2.1.2017 entrusted the departmental enquiry to be conducted
against the petitioner to the hands of Lokayukta in terms of Rule 14-A of the Rules. In terms of
which, the Lokayukta nominated Additional Registrar of Enquiry-III as the enquiry officer to
conduct departmental enquiry against the petitioner. At that stage, the petitioner approached the
Tribunal in application No.2127/2017 and the Tribunal, on 11.4.2017, granted interim order of stay
of further proceedings. Finally, the Tribunal by its order dated 3.10.2019, following the judgment of
a Division Bench of this Court, has dismissed the application filed by the petitioner on the ground
that it is not the stage at which the Tribunal could interfere in the matter as there is prima facie
material to show the involvement of the petitioner in the alleged acts and dismissed the application.
Feeling aggrieved, the applicant before the Tribunal has filed the instant writ petition.
6. We have heard. Sri. Mahesh Patil, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner, Smt. Archana P.
Tiwari, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for respondent No.1 and Sri. Subhash
Mallapur, learned Counsel appearing for respondent No.2.
7. Learned Counsel for the petitioner would contend that the petitioner took charge of the post of
PDO of Gadalingadalli Gramapanchayat on 9.10.2012. By then, the earlier PDO appears to have
issued a notice to Smt. Mahananda with regard to construction of the house. The property was still
under the control of the KNNL and had not yet been handed over to the Gadalingadalli
Gramapanchayat. It was a matter of 2007 and he had taken charge on 9.10.2012.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 3
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
7.1. Learned Counsel for petitioner would further contend that pursuant to the complaint before the
KNNL with regard to construction of the house in the civic amenity site, notices came to be issued
by the KNNL to Smt. Mahananda, but the complainant not being satisfied, approached the
Lokayukta.
7.2. It is further contended that under Section 8(2) of the Act, the complaint, involving an allegation
made after five years, should not have been entertained by the Lokayukta. It is also contended by the
learned Counsel that in terms of Section 9(3) of the Act, the investigation report that was pursuant
to the complaint ought to have been made available to the petitioner and not having done so is in
violation of the mandatory provision of the Act.
7.3. The learned Counsel for the petitioner would further contend that the 1st respondent
Government ought to have applied its mind before entrusting the matter to the hands of the 2nd
respondent to the conduct of enquiry and the Government order dated 7.1.2017 is in blatant
violation of Section 12(4) of the Act, in the light of the fact that the petitioner had contended in his
reply that the property had not been transferred to the hands of Panchayat and was still under the
control of KNNL and he had no control or jurisdiction over the area in question and hence, could
not have acted against the individual.
7.4. It is also contended that the Tribunal has grossly erred in rejecting the application
notwithstanding the aforementioned grounds as also on the ground that it was not a stage at which
the Tribunal would interfere in the proceedings.
8. Per contra, the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta contends that the Lokayukta
has discretion to entertain a complaint involving an allegation even after the expiry of five years and
the bar contained under Section 8 is only directory and not mandatory.
8.1. He would contend that there is no obligation on the part of the Lokayukta to furnish a copy of
the investigation conducted by the Lokayukta under Section 9 of the Act and it would suffice that if a
copy of the complaint is given to the delinquent official.
8.2. He would further contend that the application filed before the Tribunal was premature as it
challenged an order entrusting the enquiry to the Lokayukta and appointment of the enquiry officer
to frame the charge.
8.3. It is also his contention that the order entrusting enquiry to the Lokayukta under Section 12(4)
of the Act is in consonance with the provisions as every material is recorded and all the contentions
are addressed.
8.4. Learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent Lokayukta further vehemently contends that once the
investigation is taken up by the Lokayukta, the Government/competent authority has no choice but
to entrust the enquiry to the Lokayukta. The competent authority also looses its right to conduct
disciplinary proceedings against its employee. Once the investigation is conducted by the Lokayukta,
a report under Section 12(3) is furnished to the competent authority. It is his submission that it is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 4
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
immaterial as to whether the order entrusting the enquiry under Rule 14-A contains reasons or
otherwise.
8.5. By way of a memo dated 12.2.2020, the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent has placed
before us the complete proceedings right from the date of filing of the complaint till the date of the
order passed by the Tribunal.
9. The learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for respondent No.1 would submit in
support of the order entrusting the enquiry to the hands of the Lokayukta and reiterate the
submissions made by the learned Counsel for 2nd respondent and would also support the order of
the Tribunal contending that the application before the Tribunal as well as the writ petition now
preferred, are all premature and not the stage at which the Writ Court could interfere with the
proceedings. The learned Additional Government Advocate would however dispute with regard to
the contention that once the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta investigates into the complaint, the enquiry
has to be entrusted to its hands. Insofar as the submission of the 2nd respondent that the enquiry
has to be entrusted to the Lokayukta, the learned Additional Government Advocate would submit
that the discretion is always available with the Government and he disputes the submission made by
the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent.
10. We have given our anxious consideration to the contentions urged on behalf of the parties and
have perused the writ papers as well as the complete records pertaining to the complaint against the
petitioner.
11. In consequence thereof, the following points would arise for our consideration:
(i) Whether the order entrusting the enquiry is in compliance with Section 12(4) of
the Act ?
(ii) Whether an enquiry should mandatorily be entrusted to the 2nd respondent
Lokayukta, once the investigation is conducted by the Lokayukta on a complaint and
a report is submitted under Section 12(3) of the Act ?
(iii) Whether the order of the Tribunal requires interference ?
12. Re. point No.1:
Since the issue involves an interplay between Section 12(4) of the Act, Rule 14-A of
the Rules and discretion of the competent authority/disciplinary authority, the
relevant provisions are required to be extracted for the purpose of ready reference.
Section 12(1) to (4) of the Act reads as follows:
1. If, after investigation of any action involving a grievance has been made, the
Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta is satisfied that such action has resulted in injustice or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 5
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
undue hardship to the complainant or to any other person, the Lokayukta or an
Upalokayukta shall, by a report in writing, recommend to the competent authority
concerned that such injustice or hardship shall be remedied or redressed in such
manner and within such time as may be specified in the report.
2. The competent authority to whom a report is sent under sub-section(1) shall,
within one month of the expiry of the period specified in the report, intimate or cause
to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upalokayukta the action taken on the report.
3. If, after investigation of any action involving an allegation has been made, the
Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta is satisfied that such allegation is substantiated either
wholly or partly, he shall by report in writing communicate his findings and
recommendations along with the relevant documents, materials and other evidence
to the competent authority.
4. The Competent authority shall examine the report forwarded to it under
sub-section (3) and within three months of the date of receipt of the report, intimate
or cause to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upalokayukta the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the basis of the report.
5. If the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta is satisfied with the action taken or
proposed to be taken on his recommendations or findings referred to in sub-sections
(1) and (3), he shall close the case under information to the complainant, the public
servant and the Competent Authority concerned; but where he is not so satisfied and
if he considers that the case so deserves, he may make a special report upon the case
to the Governor and also inform the Competent Authority concerned and the
complainant.
In terms of the afore-extracted provisions of the Act, Sub- section (1) of Section 12 of the Act vests
consideration of a complaint involving a grievance which has resulted in injustice or undue hardship
to the complainant or to any other person, a report is to be submitted to the competent authority.
Sub-section (3) of Section 12 of the Act revolves around a complaint involving an allegation and
upon being satisfied that such allegation is either wholly or partly substantiated, report shall be
made to the competent authority with the recommendations along with relevant documents,
materials and other evidence for further action.
13. It is after the receipt of the report under Section 12(3) of the Act, the competent authority is
required to examine the report forwarded to it under Section 12(3) of the Act and action taken or
proposed to be taken on the basis of the report, should be communicated to the Lokayukta by the
competent authority within three months. In terms of Section 12(4) of the Act, the competent
authority has to examine the report forwarded to it under Section 12(3) and intimate or cause to be
intimated the action taken or proposed to be taken on the basis of the said report of the Lokayukta
under Section 12(3). Section 12(5) of the Act comes into play in the event the action taken is to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 6
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
satisfaction of the Lokayukta or the Upa Lokayukta, he shall close the case under information to the
complainant, the public servant and the Competent Authority concerned, or if it is not satisfied and
if it is so considered by the Lokayukta or the Upa Lokayukta may, make a special report to the
Governor. Section 12(7) of the Act further provides that on receipt of a report under Section 12(5) or
annual report under Section 12(6), a Governor shall cause a copy thereof together with an
explanatory memorandum to be laid before each house of the State Legislature. The issue, in the
instant case, is whether there has been compliance with the provisions of the afore-extracted
sections in particular of Section 12(4) of the Act and qua the facts obtaining in the case on hand.
14. One Lingaraju registered a complaint before the KNNL on 1.4.2013 alleging that Smt.
Mahananda has constructed her house on a civic amenity site and a notice was issued by the KNNL
on 10.11.2006 and there was no reply to the notice or any action by the KNNL against Smt.
Mahananda for such construction. It was also sought in the complaint that in the event it is found
that she has constructed a house in the civic amenity site, it should be demolished and a park should
be constructed.
15. On 7.6.2013, the Assistant Executive Engineer examining the complaint of Sri Lingaraju, replied
that they would examine by conducting survey and if it is found that the house is constructed on a
civic amenity site, it would be demolished and a park would be put in its place.
16. To a query by the petitioner, as to whether the alleged property had been transferred to the
panchayat or still remained with KNNL, the KNNL communicated on 5.2.2015, that the papers are
put up for transferring the property to the Panchayat but the decision to transfer the same is not yet
taken and the property still remains under the control of the KNNL.
17. The learned Counsel appearing for the KNNL was also directed to seek information as to whether
the property had been transferred from the KNNL to the Panchayat, and on instructions and
verification, the learned Counsel submitted that the property is still with KNNL and is not yet
transferred to the jurisdictional Panchayath.
18. The petitioner, being a PDO of Gadilingadalli Grama Panchayath, could not have even thought of
acting against a property that did not come under his jurisdiction. Notwithstanding the clear
information furnished to Lingaraju, Lingaraju lodged a complaint before Lokayukta on 14.5.2015.
The form of the complaint and the letter communicated did not disclose any allegation against the
petitioner. It was his grievance that, on 7.6.2013, a notice had been issued to Smt. Mahananda and
nothing had been done thereafter, and vaguely states that the PDO and the Assistant Executive
Engineer have colluded in not taking any action to demolish the house. A notice was issued to the
petitioner, enclosing the complaint, to which the petitioner had replied. It appears that the
Lokayukta without considering the reply submitted by the petitioner, a report under Sub-section (3)
of Section 12 of the Act was sent to the competent authority for entrustment of enquiry to the hands
of the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta.
19. It is after this, the disciplinary authority/competent authority is required to take a call under
Section 12(4) of the Act of entrusting the enquiry under Rule 14-A of the Rules. Sub-section (3) of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 7
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
Section 12 mandates that report of the Lokayukta along with his findings, recommendations,
relevant documents, materials and other evidence be forwarded to the competent authority. The gist
of the report under Section 12(3) of the Act has found its place in the order of entrustment of the
enquiry to the hands of the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta and is extracted hereunder for the purpose of
ready reference.
1. "An investigation was taken up under section 9 of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, on the basis of
complaint filed by shriLingaraju S/o Suryakanthhuli, Channur, Chincholi Taluk, Kalaburagi District
(hereinafter referred to as 'Complainant' for short) against (1) Shri.Nagendrappa S/o Sharanappa,
Assistant Engineer, Lower Bund Mullamari Project Sub - Division, Chimanachoda, Chincholi Taluk,
Kalaburgi and (2) Shri.Sanju Kumar, PDO, GandilingadhahalliGrama Panchayath, Chincholi Taluk,
Kalaburgi District (hereinafter referred to as 'respondents 1 & 2 respectively' for short).
2. The allegation in the complaint is that the respondents have allowed on Smt. Mahananda W/o
AdeppaHuli to construct a house in the land reserved for park near Chennur Rehabilitation Centre.
3. The respondents have offered comments.
The respondents have admitted the construction put up by the said Smt. Mahananda W/o Adeppa
Huli in the land reserved for park.
4. The respondents have not taken effective steps to remove the construction made on the land
reserved for public park. The comments of respondents are not satisfactory. There is a prima - facie
dereliction of duty on the part of the respondents. Therefore, he respondents have failed to maintain
absolute integrity, devotion to duty and have acted in a manner which is unbecoming of a
Government Servant for which they have made themselves liable for departmental action."
20. Based upon this, the Government entrusted the enquiry to the hands of the 2nd
respondent-Lokayukta on 7.1.2017 and a charge sheet was issued by the nominated Additional
Registrar of Enquiry, Karnataka Lokayukta on 13.1.2017. The entire records pertaining to the
enquiry was placed before us by the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta and it is
necessary to extract the same from the inception till the issuance of the charge sheet. Relevant
extracts of the order sheets pertaining to the case on hand maintained by the Karnataka Lokayukta,
read as follows:
" 1. Complaint stands Allotted to : DRE - 3 SCRUTINY AND OPINION Examine and
put up on or before 18.05.2015.
Sd/-
Upalokayukta - 1
14.05.2015
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 8
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
2) I/c - DRE - 3 prays time to verify and put up preliminary scrutiny note by 28.06.2015.
Submitted for kind orders Sd/-
18.05.2015
I/c - DRE - 3
3) xxxx
4) xxxx
5) I/c DRE - 3
The respondents have not submitted comments. The postal ack. is also not returned by the postal
authority.
Hence My Lord if approved, delivery status may be secured through postal website and in the mean
time comments of respondents may be awaited by 24.10.2015.
Submitted for kind orders Sd/-
22/7/15
I/c DRE -3
6) xxxx
7) I/c DRE - 3
The respondents have not submitted comments.
Hence my Lord, if approved, a reminder may be sent to respondents and comments may be awaited
by 13.01.2016.
Submitted for kind orders
Sd/-26/10
I/c DRE - 3
8) xxxx
9) xxxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 9
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
10) DRE - 3
The respondent No.1 has submitted comments by denying the complaint allegation whereas the
respondent No.2 has not submitted comments. But the reminder was sent to him by an ordinary
post.
Hence, my Lord if approved, one more reminder may be sent to respondent No.2 through our police
at Gulbarga and his comments may be awaited by 04.04.2016.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
13.1.2016
DRE - 3
11) xxxx
12) xxxx
13) xxxx
14) DRE - 3
The PI, KLA, Kalaburgi has submitted a letter dated 01.02.2016 requesting one more time to serve
the endorsement on respondent.
Hence my Lord, if approved, time may be granted to PI, KLA, Kalaburgi to serve the notice on
respondent and served copy from the PI and comments from the respondent may be awaited by next
date of hearing.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
4/2/16
DRE - 3
15) xxxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 10
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
16) xxxx
17) xxxx
18) DRE - 3
The respondent No.2 has submitted his comments dated 25.02.2016 by denying the complaint
allegations. The respondent no.1 has already submitted his comments.
Hence, my lord, if approved, rejoinder may be called for from the complainant by forwarding copy
of comments of respondents 1 and 2 and same may be awaited.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
2/3/16.
DRE - 3
19) xxxx
20) xxxx
21) xxxx
22) DRE - 3
The complainant has not submitted rejoinder. The Postal Ack. is also not returned by the postal
authorities.
Hence, my lord, if approved, the complainant may be reminded over phone and the rejoinder of the
complainant may be awaited.
Submitted for kind orders Sd/-
05.04.16.
DRE - 3
23) xxxx
24) xxxx
25) DRE - 3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 11
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
When contacted the complainant
over phone to submit rejoinder. The
complainant has replied that he has not received this office endorsement and copy of comments of
respondents.
Hence, my lord, if approved, a fresh notice may be sent to complainant through SP, KLA, Kalaburgi
and his rejoinder may be awaited.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
23/5/16.
DRE-3
26) Hon'ble Upalokayukta -1
Send notice directly to the address of the complainant for rejoinder by 20.7.16.
Sd/-
23.05
27) xxxx
28) xxxx
29) DRE- 3
The RPAD cover sent to complainant calling his rejoinder is returned unserved with the postal
endorsement as 'the party is no in the station, returned to sender.' Hence, My Lord, if approved a
fresh endorsement may be sent to complainant through Lokayukta Police at Kalaburagi and his
rejoinder may be awaited.
Submitted for kind orders Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 12
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
20.7.16
DRE - 3
30) xxxx
31) xxxx
32) DRE - 3
It is respectfully submitted that due to paucity of time, Final Scrutiny Note could not be prepared
and submitted today in this case.
33) Therefore, My Lord, if approved, time may kindly be granted to put up Final Scrutiny Note.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/ 26.8.16.
DRE - 3
34) xxxx
35) xxxx
36) DRE - 3
It is respectfully submitted that due to paucity of time, Final Scrutiny Note could not be prepared
and submitted today in this case.
37) Therefore, My Lord, if approved, time may kindly be granted to put up Final Scrutiny Note.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
22.9.16
DRE - 3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 13
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
38) xxxx
39) xxxx
40) DRE - 3
It is respectfully submitted that due to paucity of time, Final Scrutiny Note could not be prepared
and submitted today in this case.
41) Therefore, my lord, if approved, time may kindly be granted to put up Final Scrutiny Note.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
02.11.16
DRE - 3
42) Hon'ble Upalokayukta -1
The complainant has alleged that respondents have allowed one Smt.Mahananda W/o AdeppaHuli
to construct a house in the land reserved for park near Chennur Rehabilitation Centre.
43) The respondents have offered
comments. The respondents have
admitted the construction put up by the above Smt. Mahananda W/o AdeppaHuli in the land
reserved for park.
44) The respondents have not taken effective steps to remove the construction made on the land
reserved for public park. There is prima facie dereliction of duty on the part of respondents. Put up
draft of report under section 12(3) of Karnataka Lokayukta Act, in terms of this FSN by 18.11.2016
Sd/- 5/11 (JUSTICE N. ANANDA) Upalokayukta - 1 State of Karnataka, Bengaluru.
45) DRE-3 Draft report under Sec.12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 has been prepared
and submitted for kind perusal and approval.
Submitted for kind orders Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 14
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
18.11.16.
DRE-3
46) xxxx
47) DRE - 3
Fair copy of report under Sec.12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 as approved by his
Lordship has been prepared and submitted for kind perusal and signature.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
03.12.16
DRE-3
48) xxxx
49) DRE - 3
The Acknowledgement for having
received the report under Sec.12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 along with required
records by the office of Secretary to Gvoernment, RDPR & Secretary to Government, Water
Resource Department are submitted for your honour's kind perusal.
The Competent Authorities have not issued compliance as required under Sec.12(4) of the
Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984.
50) Hence, My Lord, if approved, Government Order from the Competent - Authorities may be
awaited.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
7.12.2016
DRE - 3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 15
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
51) xxxx
52) DRE - 3
The Competent Authority has issued Government Order vide No. RDP 863 GPS 2016, Bengaluru
dated 07.01.2017 to hold departmental enquiry against respondent No.2 / Shri. Sanju Kumar, PDO,
Gadilingadhalli, Chincholi Taluk, Kalaburgi District (Date of retirement 30.06.2035). The
Government Order issued by the Competent Authority is in accordance with the recommendation
made in the report under Sec. 12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984.
Copies of the report under Sec.12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 dated 03.12.2016 &
Government Order dated 07.01.2017 are submitted herewith for the favour of issuing nomination
order.
In this case, no nomination order has been issued earlier.
Further, with respect to non receipt of Government order pertaining to respondent No.1, a separate
note will be submitted before the Hon'ble Upalokayukta - 1 seeking further orders.
Sd/-
12.1.17.
DRE-3
53) Hon'ble Registrar
Put up draft nomination proceedings.
Sd/-13/1 Registrar
54) In view of the submission made by the Scrutiny Officer i.e., DRE-3, in Pre-paras, draft
proceedings in No.UPLOK-1/DE/61/2017, for nominating the Inquiry Officer is submitted in the file
for kind perusal.
Sd/- 13.01.2017
Gazetted Assistant
55) Hon'ble Registrar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 16
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
The Additional Registrar of Enquiries
- 3 may kindly be nominated as the Inquiry Officer. Accordingly, draft proceedings are placed in the
file for kind approval.
Sd/- 13/1
Registrar
56) Hon'ble Upalokayukta
ARE - 3 - is nominated
Sd/- 13/1
Upalokayukta,
State of Karnataka.
57) Registrar
Copies of Nomination proceedings
signed.
Sd/- 13/1
Registrar
58) DRE - 3
In this case 12(3) report was sent
against respondents 1 & 2.
The Competent Authority of respondent No.2 has issued Government Order. Based on the said
Government Order, nomination order has already been issued and departmental enquiry against
him is under process.
With respect to respondent No.1 who is an official belongs to Water Resource Department, the
Competent Authority has not issued Government Order to hold departmental enquiry against him.
59) Hence, my lord, if approved, a reminder may be sent to the Competent Authority of respondent
no.1 and G.O.against him may be awaited.
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-8.2.17
DRE - 3
60) xxxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 17
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
61) DRE - 3
In this case Nomination Order vide No.Uplok-1/DE/61/2017 has already been issued to hold
departmental inquiry against respondent No.2. The said enquiry has been entrusted to ARE - 3.
Now, the Competent Authority of respondent no.1 has issued Government Order vide No. WRD 193
SDE 2016, Bengaluru dated 13.02.2017 to hold departmental enquiry against Shri.Nagendrappa S/o
Sharanappa, Assistant Engineer, Lower0 Bund Mullamari Project sub-Division, Chimmanachola
(respondent no.1). The Government Order issued by the Competent Authority is in accordance with
the recommendation made in the report under Sec. 12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984.
Copies of the report under Sec.12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 dated 03.12.2016 &
Government Order dated 13.02.2017 along with copy of earlier nomination order are submitted
herewith for the favour of issuing nomination order.
The date of retirement of respondent no.1 is 31.05.2030.
Sd/-
DRE - 3 1.3.17.
62) Hon'ble Registrar Put up draft nomination proceedings.
Sd/- 3/3 Registrar
63) In view of the submissions made by the Scrutiny Officer i.e., DRE-3, at pre-paras, draft
proceedings in No.UPLOK-1/DE/340/2017, for nominating the Inquiry Officer is submitted in the
file for kind perusal.
Sd/-
Sr.J.W
03.03.17
64) Registrar
The Additional Registrar of Enquiries - 3 may kindly be nominated as the Inquiry Officer.
Accordingly, draft proceedings are placed in the file for kind approval.
Sd/-
Registrar
65) Hon'ble Upalokayukta
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 18
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
ARE - 3 - is - nominated
Sd/-
Upalokayukta
State of Karnataka
66) Registrar
Copies of Nomination Proceedings
signed.
Sd/- 4/3
Registrar
67) DRE - 3
In view of the nomination orders vide No.UPLOK-1/DE/61/2017 dtd.13.01.2017 &
UPLOK-1/DE/340/2017dtd. 03.03.2017, records have been sent to ARE-3 to proceed with the
enquiry against the respondents.
68) Hence, kind orders are sought to send this complaint file to records under 'B' disposal
Submitted for kind orders.
Sd/-
13.3.17
DRE - 3
69) xxxx "
Two glaring facts emerge from the entire order sheet maintained by the office of the 2nd
respondent-Lokayukta concerning the enquiry against the petitioner would clearly indicate that the
Lokayukta insisted upon the enquiry to be entrusted to its hands and at note No.61, it is clearly
indicated that the competent authority had issued the Government Order entrusting the enquiry to
the Lokayukta and the Government Order issued was in accordance with the recommendation made
in its report under section 12(3) of the Act.
21. Thus, it becomes clear that no discretion is exercised by the competent authority to take a
decision, as to whether the enquiry has to be entrusted into the hands of the 2nd
respondent-Lokayukta or otherwise. It is a clear case of the competent authority abdicating its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 19
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
discretion to an external agency like the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta.
22. Sub-section (4) of Section 12 of the Act casts a duty upon the competent authority to examine the
report forwarded to it and then take a decision after such examination. A bare perusal of the order
entrusting the enquiry under Rule 14-A of the Rules depicts flagrant violation of Section 12(4) of the
Act as the competent authority has not even examined as required under Section 12(4) of the Act as
to whether enquiry requires to be entrusted to Lokayukta or is there any grievance worthwhile to
hold an enquiry again the petitioner. All that the order dated 7.1.2017 would say is the extract of the
findings in the report to the Lokayukta under Section 12(3) of the Act and the fact that the
Upa-Lokayukta has sought enquiry to be entrusted to itself and in those circumstances, the enquiry
was entrusted. Perusal of the order sheet would clearly indicate that the reminders were sent to the
competent authority by the 2nd respondent to entrust the enquiry to itself.
23. The unequivocal fact that would emerge, from our consideration above, is that the disciplinary
authority/competent authority has surrendered its discretion of decision making to the dictates of
the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta thereby abdicating its duty cast under Section 12(4) of the Act.
Abdication of ones discretion in decision making and capitulating to the dictates of the external
agency amounts to itself non- application of mind in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in case of STATE OF U.P. VS. MAHARAJA DHARMANDER PRASAD SINGH
reported in (1989)2 SCC 505, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court at paragraph 55 has held as
follows :
55. It is true that in exercise of powers of revoking or cancelling the permission is
akin to and partakes of a quasi-judicial complexion and that in exercising of the
former power the authority must bring to bear an unbiased mind, consider
impartially the objections raised by the aggrieved party and decide the matter
consistent with the principles of natural justice.
The authority cannot permit its decision to be influenced by the dictation of others as this would
amount to abdication and surrender of its discretion. It would then not be the authority's discretion
that is exercised, but someone else's. If an authority "hands over its discretion to another body it
acts ultra vires". Such an interference by a person or body extraneous to the power would plainly be
contrary to the nature of the power conferred upon the authority. De Smith sums up the position
thus:
"The relevant principles formulated by the courts may be broadly summarised as
follows. The authority in which a discretion is vested can be compelled to exercise
that discretion, but not to exercise it in any particular manner. In general, a
discretion must be exercised only by the authority to which it is committed. That
authority must genuinely address itself to the matter before it: it must not act under
the dictation of another body or disable itself from exercising a discretion in each
individual case. In the purported exercise of its discretion it must not do what it has
been forbidden to do, nor must it do what it has not been authorised to do. It must
act in good faith, must have regard to all relevant considerations and must not be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 20
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
swayed by irrelevant considerations, must not seek to promote purposes alien to the
letter or to the spirit of the legislation that gives it power to act, and must not act
arbitrarily or capriciously. Nor where a judgment must be made that certain facts
exist can a discretion be validly exercised on the basis of an erroneous assumption
about those facts. These several principles can conveniently be grouped in two main
categories: failure to exercise a discretion, and excess or abuse of discretionary
power. The two classes are not, however, mutually exclusive."
In a subsequent judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case ANIRUDHSINHJI
KARANSINHJI JADEJA V. STATE OF GUJARAT reported in (1995) 5 SCC 302 at paragraphs 12 to
14 has held as follows :
12. Reference may be made in this connection to Commr. of Police v. Gordhandas
Bhanji [1952 SCR 135 : AIR 1952 SC 16] , in which the action of Commissioner of
Police in cancelling the permission granted to the respondent for construction of
cinema in Greater Bombay at the behest of the State Government was not upheld, as
the rules concerned had conferred this power on the Commissioner, because of which
it was stated that the Commissioner was bound to bear his own independent and
unfettered judgment and decide the matter for himself, instead of forwarding an
order which another authority had purported to pass.
13. It has been stated by Wade and Forsyth in Administrative Law, 7th Edn. at pp.
358-59 under the heading "Surrender, Abdication, Dictation" and sub-heading
"Power in the wrong hands" as below:
"Closely akin to delegation, and scarcely distinguishable from it in some cases, is any
arrangement by which a power conferred upon one authority is in substance
exercised by another. The proper authority may share its power with someone else, or
may allow someone else to dictate to it by declining to act without their consent or by
submitting to their wishes or instructions. The effect then is that the discretion
conferred by Parliament is exercised, at least in part, by the wrong authority, and the
resulting decision is ultra vires and void. So strict are the courts in applying this
principle that they condemn some administrative arrangements which must seem
quite natural and proper to those who make them....
Ministers and their departments have several times fallen foul of the same rule, no
doubt equally to their surprise...."
14. The present was thus a clear case of exercise of power on the basis of external dictation. That the
dictation came on the prayer of the DSP will not make any difference to the principle. The DSP did
not exercise the jurisdiction vested in him by the statute and did not grant approval to the recording
of information under TADA in exercise of his discretion.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 21
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
24. In terms of the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the afore extracted judgments, it
becomes unmistakably clear that discretion, which is surrendered to an external agency, would itself
suffer from the vice of non-application of mind.
25. The report under Section 12(3) of the Act is communicated by the 2nd respondent-Lokayukta to
the competent authority and in terms of the report, entrustment of enquiry was ordered to the
hands of the 2nd respondent under Section 12(4) of the Act. The statute mandates examination of
the material before the enquiry is entrusted. The word 'examine' means to 'test critically' as defined
in the Major Law Lexicon 4th edition 2010 Lexis-Nexis-Butterworth-Wadhwa-Nagpur at page 2455.
The words 'consider' and 'examine' are synonyms (see Roget's International Thesaurus, 3rd Edition
Oxford Book Company, page No.765 and 316). The importance of the word consider and its purport
has been elucidated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of BARIUM CHEMICALS LTD AND
ANOTHER VS. SH. A. J. RANA AND OTHERS reported in (1972)1 SCC 240 wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has interpreted the word 'consider' which is nothing but examination. In paragraphs
14 and 15 of the aforesaid judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:
14. The words "considers it necessary"
postulate that the authority concerned has thought over the matter deliberately and
with care and it has been found necessary as a result of such thinking to pass the
order. The dictionary meaning of the word "consider" is "to view attentively, to
survey, examine, inspect (arch), to look attentively, to contemplate mentally, to think
over, meditate on, give heed to, take note of, to think deliberately, bethink oneself, to
reflect" (vide Shorter Oxford Dictionary). According to Words and Phrases --
Permanent Edition Vol. 8-A "to consider" means to think with care. It is also mentioned that to
"consider" is to fix the mind upon with a view to careful examination; to ponder; study; meditate
upon, think or reflect with care. It is therefore, manifest that careful thinking or due application of
the mind regarding the necessity to obtain and examine the documents in question is sine qua non
for the making of the order. If the impugned order were to show that there has been no careful
thinking or proper application of the mind as to the necessity of obtaining and examining the
documents specified in the order, the essential requisite to the making of the order would be held to
be non-existent.
15. A necessary corollary of what has been observed above is that mind has to be applied with regard
to the necessity to obtain and examine all the documents mentioned in the order. An application of
the mind with regard to the necessity to obtain and examine only a few of the many documents
mentioned in the order, while there has been no such application of mind in respect of the
remaining documents, would not be sufficient compliance with the requirements of the statute. If,
however, there has been consideration of the matter regarding the necessity to obtain and examine
all the documents and an order is passed thereafter, the Court would stay its hand in the matter and
would not substitute its own opinion for that of the authority concerned regarding the necessity to
obtain the documents in question. Subsequently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of LIC Vs.
A. MASILAMANI, reported in (2013) 6 SCC 530 at paragraph 19 has held as follows :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 22
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
19. The word "consider" is of great significance. The dictionary meaning of the same
is, "to think over", "to regard as", or "deem to be". Hence, there is a clear connotation
to the effect that there must be active application of mind. In other words, the term
"consider" postulates consideration of all relevant aspects of a matter. Thus,
formation of opinion by the statutory authority should reflect intense application of
mind with reference to the material available on record.
The order of the authority itself should reveal such application of mind. The appellate authority
cannot simply adopt the language employed by the disciplinary authority and proceed to affirm its
order. (Vide Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. v. Santosh Kumar [(2006) 11 SCC 147 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 388]
and BhikhubhaiVithlabhai Patel v. State of Gujarat [(2008) 4 SCC 144 : AIR 2008 SC 1771] .) If the
case on hand is examined in terms of the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as extracted
herein above, it unequivocally demonstrates non-application of mind by the competent authority. It
is apposite to refer to a Judgment of the learned Division Bench of this Court in an identical case
involving a challenge to the order of entrustment in the case of KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTHA Vs.
H.N. NIRANJAN & ANOTHER reported in 2017(6) KLJ 80, wherein it is held as follows :
3. It appears that the tribunal has exercised the power of allegiance breach and non-
compliance to the provisions of section 12(4) of the Karnataka Lokayukta act, 1984. The relevant
reasoning recorded by the tribunal in the impugned order at para-7 reads as under:
One other ground urged on behalf of the applicant is that there is non-compliance of
Section 12(4) of the Lokayukta Act by the first respondent while taking further action
on the recommendation made by the Hon'ble UpaLokayukta in the report under
Section 12(3) of the Lokayukta Act. Section 12(4) o the Lokayukta Act reads as
follows:-
" The Competent Authority shall examine the report forwarded to it under sub-
section (3) and within three months of the date of receipt of the report, intimae or
cause to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upa-Lokayukta the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the basis of the repot."
Inviting our attention to Section 12(4) of the Lokayukta Act, it is contended by the learned Counsel
for the applicant that a reading of he impugned order dated 12.11.2013 prima facie indicates that
there is non-compliance for Section 12(4) of the Karnataka Act by the first respondent, for the
reason that the first respondent has failed to examine the report forwarded under Section 12(3) of
the Lokayukta Act before ordering departmental enquiry in the matter. In the preamble to the
Government Order dated 12.11.2013, paras - 1 and 2 relate to the substance of the recommendation
made by the UpaLokayukta. In para - 3 of the Government Order, it is stated that as recommended
by the Hon'ble UpaLokayukta, it has been decided to hold disciplinary proceedings against the
applicant and to entrust the same to UpaLokayukta. It has not been mentioned in the impugned
order dated 12.11.2013, that the first respondent has examined the report sent under Section 12(3) of
the Lokayukta Act. When the statute mandates examination of the report sent under Section 12(3) of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 23
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
the Lokayukta Act, it is the bounden duty of the Competent Authority to which the said report is
sent, to examine the report before taking any decision on the recommendation made in the report
under Section 12(3) of the Lokayukta Act. The object of examination of the report sent under Section
12(3) of the Lokayukta Act is to ensure that the public servant concerned is not subjected to any
unwarranted disciplinary action. When the statute mandates examination of the report, the
Competent Authority has to comply such mandates and failure in that regard invalidates the
decision taken on such report. A reading of the impugned Government Order dated 12.11.2013 no
where indicates that the first respondent has examined the report sent under Section 12(3) of the
Lokayukta Act. It is only stated that as recommended by the Hon'ble UpaLokayukta, it has been
decided to hold disciplinary proceedings and to entrust the same to UpaLokayukta concerned. It can
be certainly said that the omission of the first respondent in this regard, which amount to
non-compliance of the mandatory requirement of Rule 12(4) of the Lokayukta Act, has resulted in
the vitiation of the order dated 12.11.2013 passed by the first respondent. We have to note in this
case that in the complaint filed before the Karnataka Lokayukta in the matter, there was no
allegation against the applicant the name of the applicant figures in the case for the first time in the
report submitted by the Technical Wing of the Karnataka Lokayukta. It Is Submitted On Behalf Of
the Applicant That the Assistant Executive Engineer concerned was the implementation officer as
regard to the concerned work and that the applicant cannot be held to be liable for any irregularity
in the matter. The contentions of the applicant in this regard in the above facts are required to be
examined by the first respondent while considering the recommendation made by the
Upa-Lokayukta in the report under section 12(3) of the Lokayukta act. It is for the said reason, the
competent authority concerned has been mandated to examine the report forwarded to it under
section 12(3) of the Lokayukta act. At the cost of repetition, we may point out that nowhere in the
impugned order report under section 12(3) of the Lokayuktha act has been examined by the first
respondent before passing the order dated 12.11.2013 directing initiation of departmental inquiry
against the applicant. The Competent Authority has blindly accepted the recommendation made in
the report sent under section 12(3) of the Lokayukta Act and directed initiation of inquiry against
the applicant. Having regard to the same, the order of initiation of departmental inquiry against the
applicant and entrustment of the inquiry to the Hon'ble Upa-Lokayukta as per order dated 12.11.20
13 will have to be quashed. Consequently, all further proceedings pursuant to the said order,
particularly issuance of articles of charge dated 20.01.2014 cannot be sustained. However, the first
respondent will be at liberty to examine the report and take appropriate action in the matter."
5. It is not the case of the petitioner herein, that the State Government has independently
considered the matter under section 12(4) Of the Lokayukta Act and thereafter had passed the
order. But the only contention raised by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that in
the preamble of the order the State Government has referred to the contents of the recommendation
of the Lokayukta and therefore it may be considered as deemed consideration by the State
Government and resultantly compliance to section 12(4) of the Act.
6. We are afraid that such contention can be accepted. What is required to be considered as per the
provisions of 12(4) of the act is consideration and application of mind by the Government for
concurring with the opening of the Lokayukta, for initiation of inquiry. When There Is No
Examination of the Case by the Government under Section 12(4) of the Act. It cannot be said that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 24
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
the tribunal had committed any error which may call for any interference by this Court.
In terms of the facts narrated hereinabove, perusal of the entire order sheet pertaining to the case
and the law declared in the afore-extracted judgments, the order of entrustment impugned,
entrusting the enquiry to the hands of the 2nd respondent to the hands of the 2nd respondent -
Lokayukta suffers from non application of mind and is vitiated. The point is answered accordingly.
26. Re. Point No.2:
To consider this point in terms of the submission made by learned Counsel for the
respondent No.2- Lokayukta, the provisions under which the Lokayukta would get
jurisdiction to hold an enquiry against a Government Servant requires to be noticed.
The relevant Rule i.e. Rule 14-A of the Rules is extracted hereunder for the purpose of
ready reference.
" Rule 14-A: Procedure in cases
entrusted to the Lokayukta: (1) The
provisions of sub-rule (2) shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in rule 9 to 11A and 13, be applicable for
purposes of proceeding against Government Servants whose alleged misconduct has
been investigated into by the Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta either under the
provisions of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 or on a reference from Government.
3 [or where offences alleged against them punishable under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been
investigated by the Karnataka Lokayukta Police before 21st day of December, 1992.]
(2) (a) Where on investigation into any allegation against -
(i) a member of the State Civil Services Group-A or Group-B; or
(ii) a member of the State Civil Services Group-A or Group-B and a member of the
State Civil Services Group-C or Group-D; or
(iii) a member of the State Civil Services Group-C or Group-D, [the Lokayukta or the
Upa-lokayukta or, (before the twenty first day of December, 1992), the Inspector
General of Police of the Karnataka Lokayukta Police is of the opinion], that
disciplinary proceedings shall be taken, he shall forward the record of the
investigation along with his recommendation to the Government and the
Government, after examining such record, may either direct an inquiry into the case
by the Lokayukta or the Upalokayukta or direct the appropriate Disciplinary
Authority to take action in accordance with Rule 12.
(b) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry into a case under clause (a) the enquiry
may be conducted either by the Lokayukta or the Upalokayuka, as the case may be, or
an officer on the staff of the Lokayukta authorised by the Lokayukta, or the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 25
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
Upalokayukta to conduct the inquiry;
Provided that the inquiry shall not be conducted by an officer lower in rank than that of Government
servant against whom it is held.
Provided further that an inquiry against a Government Servant not lower in rank than that of a
Deputy Commissioner shall not be conducted by any person other than the Lokayukta or the
Upalokayukta or an Additional Registrar (Inquiries).
Provided also that an officer on the staff of the Lokayukta authorised to conduct an inquiry under
clause (b) shall not have the power to appoint another officer to conduct it wholly or in part.
(c) The Lokayukta, the Upalokayukta or the Officer authorised under clause (b) to conduct an
inquiry shall conduct it in accordance with the provisions of rule 11 in so far as they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this rule and for that purpose shall have the powers of the
Disciplinary Authority referred to in the said Rule.
(d) After the inquiry is completed, the record of the case along with the findings of the Inquiring
Officer and the recommendation of the Lokayukta or the Upalokayukta, as the case may be, shall be
sent to the Government.
(e) On receipt of the record under clause
(d) the Government shall take action in accordance with the provisions of 1 [xxx] Rule 11-A and in all
such cases the Government shall be the Disciplinary Authority competent to impose any of the
penalties specified in Rule 8.
(3) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall be applicable to members of the Karnataka Judicial Service or
Government servants under the administrative control of such members or of the High Court of
Karnataka.
(Explanation.- In this rule, the expressions 'Lokayukta' and 'Upalokayukta' shall respectively have
the meaning assigned to them in the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984, and the expression 'Karnataka
Lokayukta Police' means the Police Wing established under Section 15 of the Karnataka Lokayukta
Act, 1984 and includes, so far as may be, the corresponding establishment under the Karnataka
State Vigilance Commission Rules, 1980, and the Expression 'Inspector General of Police' shall be
construed accordingly.
27. Relying upon the afore-extracted provisions, learned Counsel for the respondent No.2 in
particular Rule 14-A (2) (a) (iii) would contend that if the investigation is conducted by the
Lokayukta, the Government has no other option, but to entrust the enquiry to the Lokayukta.
28. We are unable to accept the contention. Rule 14-A(2) (a) (iii) cannot be read in isolation, it has
to be read along with the other clauses under Rule 14-A. Rule 14-A(1) enumerates classes of cases to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 26
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
which Rule 14-A would apply Sub-Rule (2) commands that record of investigation should be
forwarded by the Lokayukta to the disciplinary authority with his recommendation and Government
after examining such record shall take a decision either to entrust the inquiry to the Lokayukta or
Upa-Lokayukta or direct the appropriate authority to resort to Rule 12 which would be for
imposition of a minor penalty. A further reading of the other clauses would clearly indicate the
purport of the provision relied on by the learned counsel for the second respondent, Clauses
(d) and (e) of Rule 14-A would clearly indicate that after the inquiry is completed, the record of the
case along with the findings of the inquiring officer and the recommendation of the Lokayukta or the
Upa Lokayukta as the case may be, Shall be sent to the Government, clause
(e) mandates that on receipt of the record under clause
(d) the Government shall take action in accordance with the provisions of Rule 11-A and in all such
cases the Government shall be the disciplinary authority competent to impose any of the penalties
specified in Rule 8.
29. A conjoint reading of the provisions indicated hereinabove would unequivocally make it clear
that the discretion is available to the Government to entrust the inquiry to the second respondent or
otherwise in case the Government is of the opinion that it is a case only for imposition of minor
penalty under Rule 12, where there is no necessity to hold regular departmental inquiry, it may
advise the appropriate disciplinary authority to take action for imposition of such minor penalty,
this provision would not mean that when the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that a major
penalty should be imposed or in all cases where proceedings under minor penalties are not taken up,
the inquiry has to be entrusted to the Lokayukta. This interpretation of the second respondent that
the inquiry has to be entrusted to the Lokayukta, once the investigation is conducted by them and a
report is submitted to the Government under Section 12(3) would render the power of the
Government or the discretion of the Government being completely taken away and rendering the
provision nugatory. This is not the purport of the statute. The law with regard to discretion as
discussed in the preceding paragraphs with regard to point No.1, would be applicable to this
contention as well. This point is accordingly answered in favour of the petitioner.
30. Re. Point No.3 The Tribunal, by the impugned order, has rejected the challenge of the petitioner
to the order of entrustment on the ground that it is premature and the petitioner does not have a
right to question the order of entrustment at that stage of the proceedings. The Tribunal has
followed the judgment rendered by a Coordinate Bench in Writ Petition No.104460/2018 and
connected cases, by its order dated 10.09.2018. The facts obtaining in the aforementioned judgment
of learned Division Bench are completely distinguishable with the facts obtaining in the instant case
on hand. The Tribunal has failed to notice that the grounds that were urged before the Tribunal in
the instant case where completely different to the one considered in the aforementioned judgment.
The issue before the learned Division Bench was not with regard to non-application of mind by the
competent authority at the time of entrustment of the inquiry to the hands of the second respondent
or that of the abdication of the decision making power by the competent authority to the hands of an
external agency like that of the second respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 27
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
31. The issues in the present case never fell for consideration before the learned Division Bench in
the writ petition mentioned hereinabove. The Tribunal has misdirected itself in placing reliance on
the judgment of the coordinate bench without looking into the facts and issues considered therein.
There can be no dispute with the principle laid down in the judgment of the coordinate bench
following the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, on the issue as to whether a writ petition
would be maintained on merits of the charge sheet, but its applicability qua the facts had to be
analysed.
32. Though the charge sheet issued subsequent to the order of entrustment is under challenge in the
instant writ petition, the principal challenge is to the order of entrustment and the examination by
the Tribunal ought to have been with regard to the order of entrustment. The Tribunal has placed
reliance on the judgment of the coordinate bench without looking into the facts of the case that was
considered by the learned Division Bench. It is settled principle of law that each case depends on its
own facts and a close similarity between one case and another is not enough because even a single
significant detail may alter the entire aspect. One additional or different fact may make a difference
between conclusions in two cases.
33. As stated hereinabove, the facts of the case before the Tribunal were different from the facts in
the judgment which the Tribunal has placed reliance on. On the contrary, the finding of the Tribunal
runs completely counter to the law laid down by the by this court in the case of H.N. Niranjan
(Supra), wherein it is clearly affirmed that the if the order of entrustment does not bear application
of mind, it would sometimes result in unnecessary proceedings against the Government servant.
Here is also a case, if the proceedings are permitted to be continued would result in unnecessary
hardship to the petitioner as the property alleged to have constructed is in civic amenity site, which
comes under the rehabilitation scheme / project of the KNNL and the petitioner being a PDO of the
Gram Panchayat will not get jurisdiction to demolish the property of another department unless the
property is brought under the Gram Panchayat. This is an admitted fact by the 2nd
respondent-Lokayukta and the learned Counsel appearing for KNNL and the Government that the
property is yet to be transferred to the hands of the jurisdictional Grama Panchayat. When the
property itself is not coming under the jurisdiction of the petitioner, there can be no dereliction of
duty, as alleged by the Lokayukta in its report under Section 12(3) of the Act. If the petitioner had no
duty to perform with regard to the allegations, it cannot be alleged to be dereliction of his duty
amounting to misconduct. Thus, the Tribunal ought to have interfered with the order of entrustment
dated 7.1.2017 as it was completely contrary to law. In the peculiar facts of the case, the order of the
Tribunal, impugned herein, warrants appropriate interference.
34. For the aforementioned reasons, we pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The writ petition is allowed.
(ii) The order of the Tribunal dated order dated 3.10.2019 is set aside and the
application No.2127/2017 is allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 28
Sri.Sanjeev Kumar vs The State Of Karnataka & Anr on 24 February, 2020
(iii) The order of entrustment dated 7.1.2017, issued by Government/Competent
Authority/Disciplinary Authority and the consequent charge sheet dated 13.1.2017 are hereby
quashed.
(iv) There shall be no order as to costs.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE Cs/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30485918/ 29
