Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December,
2020
Bench: B.V.Nagarathna, N S Sanjay Gowda
- : 1 :-
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 01ST DAY OF DECEMBER, 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MRS.JUSTICE B.V.NAGARATHNA
AND
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE N.S.SANJAY GOWDA
W.A.No.1415/2018 (LA - BDA)
BETWEEN:
SRI. L.RAMAREDDY,
SON OF LATE LINGA REDDY,
AGED ABOUT 73 YEARS,
RESIDING AT No.10/1, 26TH MAIN ROAD,
HSR LAYOUT, AGARA VILLAGE,
AGARA POST,
BENGALURU - 560 034. ... APPELLANT
(BY SRI. SAMPATH BAPAT, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA,
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT,
VIDHANA SOUDHA,
BENGALURU - 560 001.
REPRESENTED BY SECRETARY.
2. THE COMMISSIONER,
BENGALURU DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY,
KUMARA PARK WEST,
BENGALURU - 560 020.
3. THE SPECIAL LAND ACQUISITION OFFICER,
BENGALURU DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY,
- : 2 :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 1
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
KUMARA PARK WEST,
BENGALURU - 560 020.
4. NANDA RANGASWAMY,
WIFE OF RANGASWAMY,
AGED ABOUT 38 YEARS,
RESIDING AT No.213, D BLOCK,
BRIGADE PALM SPRING
APARTMENT,
J.P.NAGAR 7TH PHASE,
BENGALURU - 560 078.
5. SHAMEEM FATIMA,
WIFE OF M.ENAYATH
ULLA SHARIFF,
AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS,
REPRESENTED BY GPA HOLDER,
M.BARKATHULLAH SHARIFF,
S/O.MR. M ENAYATH ULLA SHARIFF,
RESIDING AT NO.16, 5TH CROSS,
17TH MAIN, 5TH BLOCK,
KORAMANGALA LAYOUT,
BENGALURU - 560 095. ... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. T.L. KIRAN KUMAR, AGA FOR R-1, SRI
I.G.GACHCHINAMATH, ADVOCATE FOR R-2 & R-3, SRI.
JOSEPH ANTHONY, ADVOCATE FOR R-4 & R-5)
*****
THIS APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 4 OF THE
KARNATAKA HIGH COURT ACT PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE
ORDER DATED 16/04/2018 IN W.P.NO.17432/2014
[LA-BDA] AND ALLOW THE WRIT PETITION AS PRAYED FOR.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR ORDERS THIS DAY,
NAGARATHNA, J., DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
- : 3 :-
JUDGMENT
Though this appeal is listed for orders with the consent of learned counsel on both sides, it is heard
finally.
2. The petitioner in W.P.No.17432/2014 has preferred this intra Court appeal assailing the order of
the learned Single Judge dated 16.04.2018. By the said order, the writ petition filed by the
petitioner/appellant herein has been dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 2
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
3. Briefly stated the facts are that the petitioner claims to be the owner of 20 guntas of land in
Sy.No.146 of Agara Village [hereinafter, referred to as "the land in question", for the sake of
convenience]. The said land was a part of larger extent of land measuring 21 acres and 33 guntas,
out of which, the subject land of 20 guntas is stated to be in the ownership of the petitioner. The
respondent/Bangalore Development Authority ('BDA' for the sake of convenience) issued
preliminary notification dated 15.12.1984 under Section 17(1) of the Bangalore Development
Authority Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as
- : 4 :-
'the BDA Act' for the sake of brevity) intending to acquire, inter alia, the land in
question. The said notification was followed by a declaration and final notification
dated 28.12.1986 issued under Section 19(1) of the BDA Act. It is stated at the Bar
that the award in respect of the subject land was passed on 07.07.1987 and the
possession was taken on 15.07.1987.
4. When the matter stood thus, the petitioner had filed W.P.No.18044/2000 before
this Court. A Division Bench of this Court by judgment dated 18.08.2000 dismissed
the said writ petition. While dismissing the writ petition, the Division Bench had
recorded that the petitioner was not entitled to the relief sought for in the writ
petition under Section 38C(2) of the BDA Act as amended by the Amended Act, 1999
(Karnataka Act 1 of 2000). As the said provision was not brought into force and
subsequently repealed by Karnataka Ordinance 4 of 2000, the said Section was no
more in the statute book and the validity of the said repealing Ordinance had been
upheld by this Court in John B. James vs.
- : 5 :-
Bengaluru Development Authority [ILR 2000 KAR 4134].
5. Thereafter, the petitioner had filed Original Suit No.8279/2000 before XVI
Additional City Civil Judge, Bengaluru City. It was a suit for declaration of title by
way of adverse possession against the defendant/BDA and consequential reliefs in
respect of the land in question. By judgment dated 15.11.2010, the said suit was
dismissed.
Being aggrieved, the petitioner had preferred RFA.No.306/2011, which was also dismissed by this
Court by judgment dated 04.10.2012. Subsequently, the petitioner had preferred SLP No.8132/2013
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which was also dismissed on 10.01.2014. However, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court granted liberty to the petitioner to make a representation seeking de-notification of
the subject land. Instead the petitioner filed W.P.No.17432/2014 seeking the following reliefs:
"Wherefore it is prayed that this Hon'ble Court be pleased to:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 3
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
- : 6 :-
(a) Call for the record from the respondents.
(b) Issue a Writ of mandamus directing the respondents not to enforce the scheme
called "HSR Layout as against Petitioners land bearing Sy.No.146 measuring 0.20
guntas of Agara Village, Begur Hobli, Bangalore South Taluk more fully described in
the schedule below in view of lapsing of acquisition in terms of Section 27 r/w Section
36 of the Bangalore Development Authority Act 1976, based on the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Offshore holdings private limited Vs. Bangalore
Development Authority, reported in (2011) 3 SCC 139 para - 124.
(c) Declare that the acquisition proceedings initiated under the provisions of BDA Act, 1976 for the
scheme called "HSR layout"
has lapsed under Section 27 in view of the fact that there is no vesting of the land and
land is free from acquisitions (Annexures - A & B) (C(i)) Issue any appropriate writ or
order or directions declaring that the acquisition
- : 7 :-
proceedings under the preliminary
notification dated 15.12.1984 (Annexure-
A) and the final Notification dated
28.11.1986 (Annexure-B) have lapsed
under Section 24(2) of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 in so far as 20 guntas of
Petitioner's Lands in Sy.No.146 of Agara Village Begur Hobli, Bangalore South Taluk
is concerned;
(C-ii) Issue a writ of certiorari quashing the Mahazar dated 15.07.1987 (Annexure-Z)
insofar as it pertains to Petitioners lands.
(d) Grant such other reliefs as this Hon'ble Court may deems fit under the facts and
circumstances of case."
6. Pursuant to liberty reserved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to seek de-notification of the subject
land, the petitioner also made a representation dated 29.01.2014 seeking issuance of NOC to the
effect that the land in question may be deleted from acquisition. But in reply, there
- : 8 :-
was an endorsement issued on 01.06.2015 by the BDA stating that the land in
question had been acquired.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 4
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
7. In the writ petition filed by the petitioner/appellant herein, the learned Single Judge considered
the rival contentions and on noting the aforesaid facts came to the conclusion that there was no
merit in the writ petition, accordingly, dismissed the petition by impugned order dated 16.04.2018.
Being aggrieved, the petitioner/appellant herein has preferred this appeal.
8. We have heard Sri.Sampath Bapat, learned counsel for the appellant, learned Additional
Government Advocate for respondent No.1, Sri.I.G.Gachchinamath, learned counsel for respondent
Nos.2 and 3 and Sri.Joseph Anthony, learned counsel for respondent Nos.4 and 5. We have perused
the material on records.
9. Appellant's counsel contended that the land in question in fact has not been utilized by the BDA
and the same continues in his possession. Therefore, he is entitled to
- : 9 :-
de-notification of the said land and the said aspect of the matter ought to have been
considered by the learned Single Judge. If the same had been considered in that
perspective, the appellant would have been granted the reliefs sought for in the writ
petition. He submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in SLP.No.8132/2013 had
reserved liberty to the appellant to seek de-notification of the land in question. In
fact, there was a prima facie approval for the said de- notification but there had been
no further steps taken in that regard. Therefore, the appellant was constrained to file
the writ petition seeking the reliefs. The learned Single Judge ought to have
considered the reliefs sought for by the appellant and allowed the writ petition. He
submitted that the order of the learned Single Judge may be set aside and the relief
sought for by the petitioner/appellant herein may be granted on the basis of Section
27 of the BDA Act and Section 24(2) of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013
(hereinafter, referred to as "the Act, 2013" for the sake of convenience).
- : 10 :-
10. Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for respondent No.1 submitted
that there is no merit in the writ petition as the land has already been acquired, award has been
passed, possession has been taken and allotments have been made to third parties. Therefore, at this
point of time, issuance of de-notification would not arise at all. He submitted that as there is no
merit in the appeal, the same may be dismissed.
11. Learned counsel for the respondent/BDA also submitted that the acquisition of the land is
complete and the scheme has been implemented. It is called 'HSR Layout' and the preliminary and
final notifications were issued way back at 1984 and 1986. The award was passed on 07.07.1987 and
the possession was taken on 15.07.1987. Subsequently, the allotments have been made to
respondent Nos.4 and 5. The appellant has been unsuccessful in the suit and the first appeal, in
respect of the land in question. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in several cases that once the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 5
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
possession of the land has been taken, the issue of de- notification would pale into insignificance.
The learned Single
- : 11 :-
Judge has rightly dismissed the writ petition. Therefore, there is no merit in this
appeal.
12. Learned counsel for respondent Nos.4 and 5/allottees also contended that the allotments have
been made by the BDA on the acquisition of the land in question and by execution of the scheme.
The petitioner/appellant herein has been repeatedly filing the cases before this Court or before the
City Civil Court and has not been successful in any of them. The object of the appellant is only to
fester litigation and harass the bona fide allottees or purchasers from the allottees such as,
respondent Nos.4 and 5. Therefore, there is no merit in the appeal and hence may be dismissed.
13. Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties, the following points would arise for
consideration:
1. Whether the learned Single Judge was right in dismissing the writ petition filed by
the petitioner/appellant herein?
2. What order?
- : 12 :-
14. The detailed narration of facts and contentions would not call for reiteration except highlighting
the relevant facts. It is not in dispute that the subject land measuring 20 guntas, out of a larger
extent of 21 acres and 33 guntas was a part of preliminary notification dated 15.12.1984 issued under
Section 17(1) of the BDA Act. It was followed by declaration and final notification dated 28.02.1986.
The award in respect of the land in question was made 07.07.1987 and possession of the same was
taken on 15.07.1987. Ultimately, in the year 2014, the allotment was made in favor of Respondent
Nos.4 and 5. The appellant herein had filed several proceedings which have been narrated above
including the W.P.No.18044/2000 before this Court and subsequently W.P.No.17432/2014, out of
which this appeal arises. In the interregnum, the appellant had filed OS.No.8279/2000, RFA
No.306/2011 and SLP.No.8132/2013 seeking declaration of the title on the basis of adverse
possession and consequential reliefs, in all of which the appellant has been unsuccessful. On the
strength of liberty reserved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court to make representation at Annexure - M
and was made on
- : 13 :-
29.01.2014, which was also responded to by the BDA on 01.06.2015. In the
interregnum, the writ petition was filed seeking the aforesaid reliefs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 6
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
15. The basis for seeking the reliefs in this second writ petition is under Section 27
read with Section 36 of the BDA Act. Secondly, Section 24(2) of the 2013 Act has
been invoked.
16. Though the appellant has relied upon Offshore Holding Private Limited vs.
Bengaluru Development Authority, reported in [(2011) 3 SCC 139] (Offshore Holding
Private Limited), it is relevant to note that the said judgment itself stated that even if
for any reason the scheme lapses, the acquisition would not. Moreover, on the facts of
this case, it is pertinent to note that the 'HSR layout' scheme for the purpose of which
the acquisition of the subject land, amongst the other lands, was initiated and has not
lapsed, inasmuch as, the scheme has been implemented and there is a full fledged
HSR layout, which has come into existence.
- : 14 :-
Thus, we have considered the contentions of learned counsel for appellant on the
basis of the aforesaid provisions.
17. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the benefit under Section 24 of
the LA Act, 1984 must be given to the appellant. According to him, any acquisition
made under the provisions of the BDA Act, is akin to an acquisition made under the
provisions of the LA Act, 1894.
Hence, it is necessary to delve further on the question despite the use of the expression "in any case
of land acquisition proceedings initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894" in both
sub-section(1) as well as sub-section (2) of Section 24 of the 2013 Act. In this regard, it will be useful
to compare the provisions of the LA Act, 1894, with the provisions of the BDA Act. The LA Act, 1894,
though a pre- constitution legislation and since repealed, could be traced to Entry-42, List-III
(Concurrent List) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, whereas the BDA Act has been
enacted by the State Legislature on the strength of Entry-5, List-II (State List) of the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution. The said entries are extracted for immediate reference as under:
- : 15 :-
"Seventh Schedule, List III-Concurrent List, Entry 42 - Acquisition and
requisitioning of property."
"Seventh Schedule, List II- State List, Entry- 5 - Local government, that is to say, the
constitution and powers of municipal corporations, improvement trusts, district
boards, mining settlement authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of
local self- government or village administration."
Thus, both the Acts have been enacted under two different Entries of two distinct Lists of the
Seventh Schedule. Moreover, the object and purpose of the two Acts are distinct.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 7
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
18. The object and purpose of the LA Act, 1894, is for acquisition of the land for public purposes and
for companies. The expression public purpose is defined in Section 3(f) of the said Act. It is an
inclusive definition and not an exhaustive one. Section 3(f) is substituted by the Karnataka
Amendment with effect from 24.08.1961. On the other hand, the object of the BDA Act, which has
substituted City Improvement Trust Board Act, is to provide for the establishment of a Development
Authority for the development of the city of
- : 16 :-
Bangalore, now Bengaluru, and areas adjacent thereto and matters connected
therewith. Whereas, the provisions of LA Act, 1894, is to acquire land for public
purposes, determination of compensation and matters connected therewith and is a
general enactment, the object and purpose of the BDA Act is for planned
development of Bangalore Metropolitan Area and acquisition of land under Sections
17 and 19 of the BDA Act by issuance of Preliminary and Final Notifications is
incidental which is for the purpose of development schemes, as enunciated in
Chapter III of the BDA Act, for Bangalore Metropolitan Area. For that purpose, the
BDA has authority to acquire land by agreement with the land owners as per Section
35 of the said Act or the State Government could transfer land to the BDA belonging
to it or to Corporation or a local authority as per Section 37 or, BDA could directly
acquire land from land owners under Chapters III and IV of the said BDA Act.
19. The object and purpose of the BDA Act has been considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Bondu Ramaswamy and others vs. Bangalore
- : 17 :-
Development Authority and others [(2010) 7 SCC 129] (Bondu Ramaswamy), which
was a case concerning challenge to acquisition made by BDA for the purpose of
formation of Arkavathi Layout, at Paragraph No.47, by holding that, the purpose and
object of the BDA is to act as a development authority for the development of the city
of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto. The Preamble of the BDA Act describes it as
"an Act to provide for the establishment of a Development Authority for the
development of the city of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto and for matters
connected therewith". The development contemplated by the BDA Act is "carrying
out of building, engineering or other operations in or over or under land or the
making of any material change in any building or land and includes redevelopment"
(vide Section 2(j) of BDA Act). Therefore, the purpose of BDA Act is to make lay outs,
construct buildings or carry out other operations in regard to land."
20. Further, on comparing the provisions of LA Act, 1894, with BDA Act, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held as under:
- : 18 :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 8
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
"79. This question arises from the contention raised by one of the appellants that the
provisions of section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ("the LA Act", for short) will
apply to the acquisitions under the BDA Act and consequently if the final declaration
under section 19(1) is not issued within one year from the date of publication of the
notification under sections 17(1) and (3) of the BDA Act, such final declaration will be
invalid. The appellants' submissions are as under: the notification under Sections
17(1) and (3) of the Act was issued and gazetted on 3-2-2003 and the declaration
under Section 19(1) was issued and published on 23-2- 2004. Section 36 of the Act
provides that the acquisition of land under the BDA Act within or outside the
Bangalore Metropolitan Area, shall be regulated by the provisions of the LA Act, so
far as they are applicable. Section 6 of LA Act requires that no declaration shall be
made, in respect of any land covered by a notification under Section 4 of the LA Act,
after the expiry of one year from the date of the publication of such notification under
section 4 of LA Act. As the provisions of LA Act have been made applicable to
acquisitions under the BDA Act, it is necessary that the declaration under Section
19(1) of BDA Act (which is equivalent to the final declaration
- : 19 :-
under Section 6 of the LA Act) should also be made before the expiry of one year from
the date of publication of notification under Sections 17(1) and (3) of BDA Act (which
is equivalent to Section 4(1) of LA Act).
80. The BDA Act contains provisions relating to acquisition of properties, up to the
stage of publication of final declaration. The BDA Act does not contain the
subsequent provisions relating to completion of the acquisition, that is, issue of
notices, enquiry and award, vesting of land, payment of compensation, principles
relating to determination of compensation etc. Section 36 of the BDA Act does not
make the LA Act applicable in its entirety, but states that the acquisition under BDA
Act, shall be regulated by the provisions, so far as they are applicable, of LA Act.
Therefore it follows that where there are already provisions in the BDA Act regulating
certain aspects or stages of acquisition or the proceedings relating thereto, the
corresponding provisions of LA Act will not apply to the acquisitions under the BDA
Act. Only those provisions of LA Act, relating to the stages of acquisition, for which
there is no provision in the BDA Act, are applied to the acquisitions under BDA Act.
- : 20 :-
81. The BDA Act contains specific provisions relating to preliminary notification and
final declaration. In fact the procedure up to final declaration under the BDA Act is
different from the procedure under the LA Act relating to acquisition proceedings up
to the stage of final notification. Therefore, having regard to the Scheme for
acquisition under Sections 15 to 19 of the BDA Act and the limited application of the
LA Act in terms of Section 36 of the BDA Act, the provisions of Sections 4 to 6 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 9
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
LA Act will not apply to the acquisitions under the BDA Act. If Section 6 of LA Act is
not made applicable, the question of amendment to Section 6 of the LA Act providing
a time-limit for issue of final declaration, will also not apply."
(underlining by us)
21. Further, in Offshore Holdings Private Limited vs. Bangalore Development Authority [(2011) 3
SCC 139] (Offshore Holdings), the scheme under the BDA Act, 1976, has been alluded to in detail by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court as under:
"Scheme under the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976
- : 21 :-
17. ... The primary object of the BDA Act was to provide for establishment of the
development authority for development of the city of Bangalore and areas adjacent
thereto and for the matters connected therewith.
18. For different reasons, various provisions of this Act were amended from time to
time. The term "development" under Section 2(j) of the BDA Act, with its
grammatical variations, means "the carrying out of building, engineering, or other
operations in or over or under land or the making of any material change in any
building or land and includes redevelopment". Similarly, Section 2(r) defines the
word "to erect" which in relation to any building includes:
"2. (r)(i) any material alteration or enlargement of any building;
(ii) the conversion by structural alteration into a place for human habitation of any
building not originally constructed for human habitation;
(iii) the conversion into more than one place for human habitation of a building originally
constructed as one such place;
- : 22 :-
(iv) the conversion of two or more places of human habitation into a greater number
of such places;
(v) such alterations of a building as affect an alteration of its drainage or sanitary
arrangements, or materially affect its security;
(vi) the addition of any rooms, buildings, houses or other structures to any building;
and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 10
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
(vii) the construction in a wall adjoining any street or land not belonging to the owner
of the wall, or a door opening on to such street or land;"
The definitions aforestated clearly show that they were given a very wide meaning to
ensure that the check on haphazard and unauthorized development is maintained.
19. The Authority came to be constituted in terms of Section 3 of the BDA Act. The
object of the Authority has been spelt out in Section 14 of the BDA Act which states
that the Authority shall "promote and secure the development of the Bangalore
Metropolitan Area and for that purpose, the Authority shall have the power to
acquire, hold, manage and dispose of
- : 23 :-
moveable and immoveable property, whether within or outside the area under its
jurisdiction, to carry out building, engineering and other operations and generally to
do all things necessary or expedient for the purpose of such development and for
purposes incidental thereto".
The language of this section shows that powers of wide magnitude are vested in the Authority and
the purpose for which such powers are vested is absolutely clear from the expression "to do all
things necessary or expedient for the purpose of such development and for purposes incidental
thereto". In other words, the primary purpose is planned development and other matters are
incidental thereto. The acquisition of immoveable property is, therefore, also for the said purpose
alone.
20. Chapter III of the BDA Act deals with development plans. Under Section 15, the Authority has to
draw up detailed schemes termed as "Development Scheme". The Government in terms of Section
15(3) is empowered to direct the Authority to take up any development scheme subject to such terms
and conditions as may be specified by it. In terms of
- : 24 :-
Section 16(1) of the BDA Act, every development scheme has to provide, within the
limits of the area comprised in the scheme, for the acquisition of any land which, in
the opinion of the Authority, will be necessary for or affected by the execution of the
scheme. It should, inter alia, also provide for laying and re-laying out all or any land
including the construction/ reconstruction of buildings and formation and alteration
of streets, drainage, water supply and electricity, forming open spaces for betterment
and sanitary arrangements. The Authority may provide for construction of houses
within or without the limits of the area comprised in the scheme. It is clear that the
development scheme has to provide for every detail in relation to development of the
area under the scheme as well as acquisition of land, if any, required. It may be
noticed, even at the cost of repetition, that such acquisition is only in regard to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 11
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
development scheme.
21. Once the development scheme has been prepared, the Authority is expected to draw up a
notification stating that the scheme has been made and give all the particulars required under
Section 17 of the BDA Act including a statement specifying the land which is proposed to be acquired
and land on which betterment tax is to
- : 25 :-
be levied. A copy of this notification is required to be sent to the Government through
the Corporation which is obliged to forward the same to the appropriate Government
within the specified time along with any representation, which the Corporation may
think fit to make, with regard to the scheme. After receiving the scheme, the
Government is required to ensure that the notification is published in the Official
Gazette and affixed in some conspicuous part of its own office as well as in such other
places as the Authority may consider necessary.
22. In terms of Section 17(5) of the BDA Act, within 30 days from the date of publication of such
notification in the Official Gazette, "the Authority shall serve a notice on every person whose name
appears in the assessment list of the local authority or the land revenue register as being primarily
liable to pay the property tax or land revenue assessment on any building or land which is proposed
to be acquired in executing the scheme or in regard to which the Authority proposes to recover
betterment tax"
and to issue show-cause notice giving thirty days' time to the person concerned, as to
why such
- : 26 :-
acquisition of building or land and the recovery of betterment tax should not be
made.
23. Thus, the provisions of Section 17 of the BDA Act are of some significance. They describe various
time-frames within which the Authority/Government is expected to take action. A deemed fiction is
introduced in terms of Section 17(4) of the BDA Act where if the Corporation does not make a
representation within the time specified under Section 17(2), the concurrence of the Corporation
shall be deemed to have been given to enable the authorities to proceed with the matter in
accordance with Section 17(5) of the Act. Having gone through the prescribed process, the Authority
is required to submit the scheme for sanction of the Government.
24. The Authority has been given power to modify the scheme keeping in view the representations
received. The scheme shall also provide for the various details as required under Sections 18 (1)(a) to
18(1)(f) and 18(2) of the BDA Act. After considering this proposal, the Government may give
sanction to the scheme in terms of Section 18(3). Upon sanction of the scheme, the Government
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 12
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
shall publish, in the Official Gazette, a declaration stating the fact of
- : 27 :-
such sanction and that the land proposed to be acquired by the Authority for the
purposes of the scheme is required for a public purpose. This declaration shall be
conclusive evidence that the land is needed for a public purpose.
25. The Authority has also been given the power to alter or amend the scheme if an improvement
can be made. If the scheme, as altered, involves acquisition otherwise than by an agreement, then
the provisions of Sections 17, 18 and 19(1) shall apply to the scheme in the same manner as if such
altered part were the scheme. This entire exercise is to be taken in terms of Section 19 of the BDA
Act post grant of sanction in terms thereof."
22. Adverting to Section 27 of BDA Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that it places an
obligation upon the Authority (BDA), to complete the scheme within a period of five years and if the
scheme is not substantially carried out within that period, it shall lapse and the provisions of Section
36 shall become inoperative, i.e. this is a provision which provides for serious consequences in the
event the requisite steps are not taken within the specified time.
- : 28 :-
23. Observing that some land may have to be acquired for the purpose of completing
the scheme; such land has to be identified in the scheme itself as per Section 16 of the
BDA Act. Chapter IV of the BDA Act deals with "acquisition of land". Adverting to
Sections 35 and 36 of the BDA Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that
these provisions postulate acquisition of land by two modes. Firstly, by entering into
an agreement with the owner of the land; and secondly, otherwise than by agreement
which shall be regulated by the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, in so far as
they are applicable. Where the lands are acquired by agreement, there would be
hardly any dispute either on fact or in law. Controversies, primarily, would arise in
the cases of compulsory acquisition under the provisions of the Act. The intention of
the Legislature, thus, is clear to take recourse to the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act to a limited extent and subject to the supremacy of the provisions of
the State Act.
24. Comparing BDA Act with Maharashtra Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
observed that a very important
- : 29 :-
aspect which, unlike the MRTP Act, (Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act),
is specified in the BDA Act is that, once the land is acquired and it vests in the State
Government in terms of Section 16 of the LA Act, 1894 then the Government, upon
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 13
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
(a) payment of the cost of acquisition and (b) the Authority, agreeing to pay any
further cost, which may be incurred on account of acquisition, shall transfer the land
to the BDA whereupon, it shall vest in the BDA. The Government is further vested
with the power to transfer land to the BDA belonging to it or to the Corporation as
per Section 37 of the BDA Act.
25. By contrast, the scheme of the LA Act, 1894, which is since repealed by 2013 Act
was an expropriatory legislation to provide for acquisition of land for public purposes
and for companies. Section 4 of the said Act dealt with publication of Preliminary
Notification while Section 5-A provided for hearing objections with regard to the
proposed acquisitions.
Section 6 dealt with the issuance of a declaration and Final Notification that the land was required
for a public purpose. The said declaration was conclusive evidence that the land
- : 30 :-
was needed for a public purpose or for a Company, as the case may be. After making
such a declaration, the appropriate government could acquire the land in accordance
with the Act. In fact, Part II of the LA Act, 1894, dealt with acquisition which
contemplated procedure for the passing of an award; notifying persons interested
and taking possession of the land. Part II of the said Act, dealt with the provisions
dealing with enhancement of compensation by the reference Court by the land owner
seeking a reference for a higher compensation. Part IV dealt with apportionment of
compensation, while Part V of the said Act concerned with payment. Acquisition of
land for companies was dealt with in Part VII of the said Act and a special procedure
was prescribed. Part VIII pertained to miscellaneous provisions. Thus, the whole
object and scheme of LA Act, 1894, was to acquire land for a public purpose or for the
benefit of companies, whereas the object and scheme of the BDA Act is to have
planned development of Bangalore Metropolitan Area and in that regard acquisition
of land under the BDA Act read with the provisions of the LA Act, 1894 is only
incidental to and not the primary object of BDA Act.
- : 31 :-
26. More specifically, the controversy as to, whether, Sections 6 and 11-A of the LA
Act, 1894, were applicable to provisions of the BDA Act or not were considered by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Munithimmaiah vs. State of Karnataka and
others [(2002) 4 SCC 326];
Offshore Holdings Private Limited, and Bondu Ramaswarmy, the latter two cases have been
referred to above as well as two other cases which are referred to as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 14
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
a) In Munithimmaiah vs. State of Karnataka and others [(2002) 4 SCC 326]
(Munithimmaiah), while referring to the decisions of this Court in Khoday Distilleries
Ltd., vs. State of Karnataka [ILR 1997 Kar. 1419], in the context of whether Section 6
of the LA Act, 1894, was applicable to Section 19 of the BDA Act (both dealing with
declaration and final notification), Hon'ble Supreme Court has at Paragraph No.15,
categorically observed as under:
"15. So far as the BDA Act is concerned, it is not an Act for mere acquisition of land
but an Act to provide for the establishment of a Development Authority to facilitate
and ensure a planned growth and development of the city of Bangalore and areas
adjacent thereto and
- : 32 :-
acquisition of lands, if any, therefore is merely incidental thereto. In pith and
substance the Act is one which will squarely fall under, and be traceable to the powers
of the State Legislature under Entry 5 of List II of the Seventh Schedule and not a law
for acquisition of land like the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 traceable to Entry 42 of
List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, the field in respect of
which is already occupied by the Central Enactment of 1894, as amended from time
to time. If at all, the BDA Act, so far as acquisition of land for its developmental
activities are concerned, in substance and effect will constitute a special law
providing for acquisition for the special purposes of the BDA and the same was not
also considered to be part of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. It could not also be
legitimately stated, on a reading of Section 36 of the BDA Act that the Karnataka
legislature intended thereby to bind themselves to any future additions or
amendments, which might be made by altogether a different legislature, be it the
Parliament, to the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The procedure for acquisition under
the BDA Act vis-à-vis the Central Act has been analysed elaborately by the Division
Bench, as noticed supra, in our view, very rightly too, considered to constitute a
special and self-
- : 33 :-
contained code of its own and the BDA Act and Central Act cannot be said to be
either supplemental to each other, or pari materia legislations. That apart, the BDA
Act could not be said to be either wholly unworkable and ineffectual if the subsequent
amendments to the Central Act are not also imported into consideration. On an
overall consideration of the entire situation also it could not either possibly or
reasonably stated that the subsequent amendments to the Central Act get attracted or
applied either due to any express provision or by necessary intendment or
implication to acquisitions under the BDA Act. When the BDA Act, expressly
provides by specifically enacting the circumstances under which and the period of
time on the expiry of which alone the proceedings initiated thereunder shall lapse
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 15
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
due to any default, the different circumstances and period of limitation envisaged
under the Central Act, 1894, as amended by the amending Act of 1984 for completing
the proceedings on pain of letting them lapse forever, cannot be imported into
consideration for purposes of BDA Act without doing violence to the language or
destroying and defeating the very intendment of the State Legislature expressed by
the enactment of its own special provisions in a
- : 34 :-
special law falling under a topic of legislation exclusively earmarked for the State
Legislature. A scheme formulated, sanctioned and set for implementation under the
BDA Act, cannot be stultified or rendered ineffective and unenforceable by a
provision in the Central Act, particularly of the nature of Sections 6 and 11-A, which
cannot also on its own force have any application to actions taken under the BDA Act.
Consequently, we see no infirmity whatsoever in the reasoning of the Division Bench
of the Karnataka High Court in Khoday Distilleries Ltd. case to exclude the
applicability of Sections 6 and 11-A as amended and inserted by the Central
Amendment Act of 1984 to proceedings under the BDA Act. The submissions to the
contra on behalf of the appellant has no merit whatsoever and do not commend for
our acceptance."
(underlining by us)
b) While considering the question as to whether Section 11-A of the LA Act, 1894, applies to
acquisitions made under the BDA Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Offshore Holdings Private
Limited, has emphatically held that Section 11-A does not apply to acquisitions made under the BDA
Act, by observing as follows:
- : 35 :-
"33. The provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, which provide for time-frame for
compliance and the consequences of default thereof, are not applicable to acquisition
under the BDA Act. They are Sections 6 and 11-A of the Land Acquisition Act. As per
Section 11-A, if the award is not made within a period of two years from the date of
declaration under Section 6, the acquisition proceedings will lapse. Similarly, where
declaration under Section 6 of this Act is not issued within three years from the date
of publication of notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act [such
notification being issued after the commencement of the Land Acquisition
Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 but before the commencement of
Central Act 68 of 1984] or within one year where Section 4 notification was published
subsequent to the passing of Central Act 68 of 1984, no such declaration under
Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act can be issued in any of these cases.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 16
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
34. A three Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Bondu Ramaswamy v. Bangalore
Development Authority while dealing with the contention that notification issued in
terms of Section 17(1) and (3) of the BDA Act appears to
- : 36 :-
be equivalent to Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act and the declaration under
Section 19(1) of the BDA Act appears to be equivalent to the final declaration under
Section 6 of the Land acquisition Act, held that all the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act will not apply to the acquisition under the BDA Act and only those
provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, relating to stages of acquisition, for which
there is no corresponding provision in the BDA Act, are applicable to an acquisition
under the BDA Act. The provisions of Sections 4 and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act
would not be attracted to the BDA Act as the Act itself provides for such mechanism.
35. Be that as it may, it is clear that the BDA Act is a self-contained code which
provides for all the situations that may arise in planned development of an area
including acquisition of land for that purpose. The scheme of the Act does not admit
any necessity for reading the provisions of Sections 6 and 11-A of the Land
Acquisition Act, as part and parcel of the BDA Act for attainment of its object. The
primary object of the State Act is to carry out planned development and acquisition is
a mere incident of such planned development. The provisions of the Land Acquisition
Act, where the land is to be acquired
- : 37 :-
for a specific public purpose and acquisition is the sum and substance of that Act, all
matters in relation to the acquisition of land will be regulated by the provisions of
that Act. The State Act has provided its own scheme and provisions for acquisition of
land.
36. The co-relation between the two enactments is a very limited one. The provisions
of the Land Acquisition Act would be attracted only in so far as they are applicable to
the State law. Where there are specific provisions under the State Act the provisions
of Central Act will not be attracted. Furthermore, reading the provisions of default
and consequences thereof, as stated under the Central Act into the State Act, is bound
to frustrate the very scheme formulated under the State Act. Only because some of
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act are attracted, it does not necessarily
contemplate that all the provisions of the Central Act would per se be applicable to
the provisions of the State Act irrespective of the scheme and object contained
therein. The Authority under the BDA Act is vested with complete powers to prepare
and execute the development plans of which acquisition may or may not be a part.
The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 17
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
- : 38 :-
provisions of the State Act can be implemented completely and effectively on their
own and reading the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act into the State Act, which
may result in frustrating its object, is not called for. We would be dealing with various
facets which would support this view shortly.
37. The provisions of Section 27 of the BDA Act mandate the Authority to execute the
scheme, substantially, within five years from the date of publication of the
declaration under sub- section (1) of Section 19. If the Authority fails to do so, then
the scheme shall lapse and provisions of Section 36 of the BDA Act will become
inoperative. The provisions of Section 27 have a direct nexus with the provisions of
Section 36 which provide that the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, so far as
they are applicable to the State Act, shall govern the cases of acquisition otherwise
than by agreement. Acquisition stands on a completely distinct footing from the
scheme formulated which is the subject- matter of execution under the provisions of
the BDA Act.
38. On a conjunctive reading of the provisions of Sections 27 and 36 of the State Act,
- : 39 :-
it is clear that where a scheme lapses, the acquisition may not. This, of course, will
depend upon the facts and circumstances of a given case. Where, upon completion of
the acquisition proceedings, the land has vested in the State Government in terms of
Section 16 of the Land Acquisition Act, the acquisition would not lapse or terminate
as a result of lapsing of the scheme under Section 27 of the BDA Act. An argument to
the contrary cannot be accepted for the reason that on vesting, the land stands
transferred and vested in the State/Authority free from all encumbrances and such
status of the property is incapable of being altered by fiction of law either by the State
Act or by the Central Act. Both these Acts do not contain any provision in terms of
which property, once and absolutely, vested in the State can be reverted to the owner
on any condition. There is no reversal of the title and possession of the State.
However, this may not be true in cases where acquisition proceedings are still
pending and land has not been vested in the Government in terms of Section 16 of the
Land Acquisition Act.
39. What is meant by the language of Section 27 of the BDA Act, i.e. "provisions of
Section 36 shall become inoperative", is that if
- : 40 :-
the acquisition proceedings are pending and where the scheme has lapsed, further
proceedings in terms of Section 36(3) of the BDA Act, i.e. with reference to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 18
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act shall become inoperative. Once the land
which, upon its acquisition, has vested in the State and thereafter vested in the
Authority in terms of Section 36(3); such vesting is incapable of being disturbed
except in the case where the Government issues a notification for re-vesting the land
in itself, or a Corporation, or a local Authority in cases where the land is not required
by the Authority under the provisions of Section 37(3) of the BDA Act.
40. This being the scheme of the acquisition within the framework of the State Act,
read with the relevant provisions of the Central Act, it will not be permissible to bring
the concept of "lapsing of acquisition" as stated in the provisions of Section 11-A of
the Land Acquisition Act into Chapter IV of the BDA Act.
44. One of the apparent and unavoidable consequences of reading the provisions of
Section 11-A of the Central Act into the State Act would be that it is bound to
adversely affect the "development scheme" under the State Act and
- : 41 :-
may even frustrate the same. It is a self- defeating argument that the Government can
always issue fresh declaration and the acquisition in all cases should lapse in terms of
Section 11-A of the Central Act."
(underlining by us)
c) Further, in the case of Girnar Traders (3) vs. State of Maharashtra and others [(2011) 3 SCC 1],
(Girnar Traders), the Hon'ble Supreme Court on comparing the provisions of Maharashtra Regional
and Town Planning Act, 1966, (MRTP Act) which is an Act similar to BDA Act with the provisions of
the LA Act, 1894, has observed as under:
"130. While referring to Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, the State Legislature
has not adopted, specifically or otherwise, the period mentioned in proviso to Section
6(1) of the Land Acquisition Act. On the contrary, different time- frames have been
postulated under different provisions of the MRTP Act. If those limitations of time
are not adhered to by the authorities concerned, the consequences have also been
provided therefor. From the stage of initiation of steps for preparation of draft plans
to the finalization of the scheme, it takes considerable time. Furthermore, its
implementation at the
- : 42 :-
ground level, takes still much more time. If this entire planned development which is
a massive project is permitted to lapse on the application of Section 11-A of the
Central Act, it will have the effect of rendering every project of planned development
frustrated. It can hardly be an argument that the Government can always issue fresh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 19
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
declaration in terms of Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act and take further
proceedings. Recommencement of acquisition proceedings at different levels of the
hierarchy of the State and Planning Authority itself takes considerable time and,
thus, it will be difficult to achieve the target of planned development.
131. This clearly demonstrates that all the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act
introduced by later amendments would not, per se, become applicable and be
deemed to be part and parcel of the MRTP Act. The intent of the legislature to make
the State Act a self-contained Code with definite reference to required provisions of
the Land Acquisition Act is clear."
X X X
134. However, if the provisions of section 11-A of the Central Act were permitted to punctuate a
scheme of the State Act and the award is not made within two years from the date
- : 43 :-
of declaration under Section 6 of the Central Act, the acquisition proceedings will
lapse which will frustrate the rights of the State as well as the scheme contemplated
under Section 126 as well as Section 127 of the State Act and that would not be
permissible in law. This being legislation by incorporation, the general reference to
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act shall stand excluded.
X X X
137. The Court cannot lose sight of one very important fact that the MRTP Act is an
Act relating to planned development and acquisition is an incidental aspect thereof.
Planned development is quite different from merely "achieving a public purpose" for which the land
is acquired under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. Development plan, Regional Plan and
town planning scheme are major events in the development of a State. They are controlled and
guided by different financial, architectural and public interest for the development including macro
and micro planning of the entire State.
138. The provisions relating to planned development of the State or any part thereof, read in
conjunction with the object of the Act, show that different time-frames are required for
- : 44 :-
initiation, finalization and complete execution of such development plans. The period
of 10 years stated in Section 127 of the MRTP Act, therefore, cannot be said to be
arbitrary or unreasonable ex facie. If the provisions of Section 11-A of the Land
Acquisition Act, with its serious consequence of lapsing of entire acquisition
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 20
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
proceedings, are bodily lifted and read into the provisions of MRTP Act, it is bound to
frustrate the entire scheme and render it ineffective and uncertain. Keeping in view
the consequence of Section 11-A of the Central Act, every development plan could
stand frustrated only for the reason that period of two years has lapsed and it will
tantamount to putting an end to the entire development process.
X X X
140. Thus, in our view, reading of Section 11-A of the Land Acquisition Act into
Chapter VII of the MRTP Act will render the substantive provisions of the State Act
ineffective, unworkable and may frustrate the object of the Act materially."
(underlining by us)
d) Recently, in Special Land Acquisition Officer, KIADB, Mysore and another vs. Anasuya Bai (D) by
LRs. and others (AIR 2017 SC 904) (Anasuya Bai), the
- : 45 :-
question under consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court was, as to, whether
relief under Section 24 of the 2013 Act could be granted to landowners when
acquisition was made under the provisions of the Karnataka Industrial Areas
Development Act, (KIAD Act). After referring to the judgment of this Court which
was appealed against before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in light of Section 24 of the
2013 Act, Hon'ble Supreme Court noted the observations made by the Division Bench
of this Court in the following words:
"24. The Division Bench of the High Court by the impugned judgment, however, has
quashed the acquisition proceedings itself holding that they have lapsed. For this
purpose, the High Court has taken aid of Section 24 of the New LA Act in the
following manner:
"13. It is also noted that the acquisition proceedings including preliminary and final
declaration have been passed under the provisions of the KIADB Act. But there is no
provisions under the KIADB Act to pass an award and award has to be passed only
under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894. If the award has to be passed under LA Act,
whether the new act can be pressed into service to hold
- : 46 :-
the acquisition proceedings are lapsed on account of non-passing of award within a
period of 5 years u/S 11. If the award is passed under LA Act, the enquiry has to be
conducted by the Deputy Commissioner or Collector before passing the award.
Section 11-A contemplates if the award is not passed within 2 years from the date of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 21
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
publication of the final declaration, the entire proceedings for acquisition of the land
shall automatically stands lapsed. It is no doubt true the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of M.Nagabhushana Vs. State of Karnataka and Others (2011) 3 SCC 408:
(AIR 2011 SC 1113) has held that Section 11-A of the Act is no application in respect of
the land acquired under the provisions of the Karnataka Industrial Areas
Development Act. We have to consider in this appeal as to whether Section 24(2) of
the New Act is applicable in order to hold that the acquisition proceedings deemed to
be lapsed due to non-payment of compensation and non- passing of the award within
a period of five years from the date of declaration and with effect from non-payment
of compensation to the land owners.
- : 47 :-
14. The New Act does not say whether the Act is applicable to the land acquired under
the provisions of the Karnataka Land Acquisition Act 1894. What Section 24 says that
if the award is not passed u/S.11 of the Act and the compensation is not paid within 5
years or more prior to new act, if the physical possession of the land is taken or not
especially the compensation is not paid or deposited in Court such proceedings deem
to have been lapsed. In the instant case, it is not case of the respondent that award is
not required to be passed under the provisions of LA Act. When the award is required
to be passed under LA Act, the respondents cannot contend that the provisions of
New Act cannot be made applicable on account of non payment of compensation
within a period of five years."
25. This approach of the High Court, we find, to be totally erroneous. In the first instance, matter is
not properly appreciated by ignoring the important aspects mentioned in para 24 above. Secondly,
effect of non-applicability of Section 11A of the Old LA Act is not rightly understood."
27. In the aforesaid case, after comparing the provisions of the LA Act, 1894 with KIAD Act, Hon'ble
Supreme Court on
- : 48 :-
the basis of the decisions rendered under the provisions of the BDA Act, in the cases
of Munithimmaiah, Offshore Holdings Private Limited and Girnar Traders (3)
(referred to above) has held as under:
"32. In Munithimmaiah v. State of Karnataka [(2002) 4 SCC 326] : (AIR 2002 SC
1574) this Court held that the provisions of Sections 6 and 11-A of the said Act do not
apply to the provisions of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (the BDA
Act). In SCC para 15 at p. 335 of the Report this Court made a distinction between the
purposes of the two enactments and held that all the provisions of the said Act do not
apply to the BDA Act. Subsequently, the Constitution Bench of this Court in Offshore
Holdings (P) Ltd. v. Bangalore Development Authority [(2011) 3 SCC 139 : (2011) 1
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 22
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
SCC (Civ) 662 : (2011) 1 Scale 533], held that Section 11-A of the said Act does not
apply to acquisition under the BDA Act.
33. The same principle is attracted to the present case also. Here also on a
comparison between the provisions of the said Act and the KIAD Act, we find that
those two Acts were enacted to achieve substantially different purposes. Insofar as
the KIAD Act is concerned, from its Statement of Objects and Reasons, it is
- : 49 :-
clear that the same was enacted to achieve the following purposes:
"It is considered necessary to make provision for the orderly establishment and
development of industries in suitable areas in the State. To achieve this object, it is
proposed to specify suitable areas for industrial development and establish a board to
develop such areas and make available lands therein for establishment of industries."
28. Next, it is necessary to discuss Smt. K.M. Chikkathayamma and others vs. The State of
Karnataka and others [ILR 2016 KAR 1603], which is a judgment rendered by a learned Single
Judge of this Court.
(a) One of the points for determination in the said case was:
"Whether the provisions of the LA Act, 1894 or the LA Act, 2013, should be applied to
acquisition proceedings under the provisions of the KUDA Act and the BDA Act, if
the proceedings are not completed as on the date of coming into force of the LA Act,
2013".
- : 50 :-
Learned Single judge has culled out the ingredients of the said sub-section which is
extracted later.
b) The primary contention canvassed in the aforesaid case was, as to, whether 2013
Act would be applicable to acquisitions initiated under the provisions of the
Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987 (KUDA Act) and BDA Act. If the
answer to the same was in the affirmative, then the acquisition proceeding in the
aforesaid case which concerned BDA Act also was deemed to have lapsed.
c) In that case, the contention of learned Senior Counsel and learned Counsel for the
petitioners was, where a statute is cited by a reference (the cited statute) (LA Act,
1894) into an another statute (the referring statute) (BDA Act/KUDA Act) any repeal
or amendment of the cited statute is automatically carried over or reflected in the
referring statute. This was in contrast, to a case of legislation by incorporation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 23
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
wherein the repeal or amendment of the
- : 51 :-
incorporated statute does not automatically affect the incorporating statute. It was
further contended in the said case that in Offshore Holdings Private Limited, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held, Section 36 of the BDA Act (a provision in pari materia
with Section 36 of KUDA Act) to be a case of legislation by incorporation. But, the
repeal of LA Act, 1894 and substitution of 2013 Act created an exception and when
the exception applied, the effect would be one of legislation by reference. It was
contended that, if LA Act, 1894, was to be applied to acquisitions made under the
KUDA Act post 01.01.2014, the quantum of compensation to the land owners in
relation to acquisitions under the KUDA Act would be lesser than the compensation
vis-à-vis acquisition made under 2013 Act, even though the purpose of the
acquisition is same (urban or town planning and allotment of house sites).
Similarly, the additional benefits in relation to rehabilitation and resettlement of affected families
would also not be available to the land owners even though the purpose of the acquisition remains
the same. It was emphasized in that case that the provisions of 2013 Act are more beneficial to the
land owners and affected families in land acquisition
- : 52 :-
proceedings. The discriminatory effect as regards compensation and other benefits
would occur because there is a complete change in the legislative approach in relation
to land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement under 2013 Act which is more
beneficial to the land owners. It was further contended in the said case that the land
owners would thus be entitled to different rates of compensation and other
resettlement and rehabilitation benefits, depending upon which Act the acquisition is
made, whether under the BDA Act or KUDA Act or the central land acquisition
enactments resulting in a discriminatory effect being in violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution.
d) Per contra, the State through learned Advocate General submitted in the said case that the
intention of Section 24 in 2013 Act is different and distinct in that the said section has specific
reference to acquisition proceedings initiated under LA Act, 1894. That the object and purpose of
Section 24 is not only to save acquisition initiated under LA Act, 1894, but also to declare lapse of
acquisition under sub- section (2) of Section 24 and to also give the benefit of the
- : 53 :-
2013 Act under certain circumstances. It was further contended that Section 27 of
KUDA Act as well as BDA Act provide for lapse of scheme of development and
consequent in-operation of Section 36 of the Act. That BDA Act being a complete
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 24
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
code by itself, lapse of acquisition has to be considered under that Act only. It was
further contended that Section 24 is more in the nature of a transitory provision and
an exception and operates as a link between LA Act, 1894 and 2013 Act.
e) While considering point No.2 extracted above, learned Single Judge in the said
case held with regard to interpretation of sub-section (2) of Section 24 of the 2013
Act as under:-
"Section 24(2) of the LA Act, 2013 provides for lapse of acquisition proceedings
commenced under the LA Act, 1894, on the satisfaction of certain conditions, which
are as follows:
a. The award of compensation should have been passed five years or more prior to
the commencement of the LA Act, 2013. In that, it should have been passed prior to
01.01.2009;
AND
- : 54 :-
b. Physical possession of the land has not been taken;
OR
c. Compensation has not been paid.
The Apex Court has interpreted the
requirement of possession being taken under Section 24(2) of the LA Act, 2013, to
mean that actual physical possession has to be taken and mere symbolic possession
would not suffice."
(emphasis by us) Although learned Single Judge has noticed that sub- section (2) of Section 24 of
the 2013 Act applies to acquisition proceedings commenced under the LA Act, 1894, nevertheless
has also held that the "answer to the second point for consideration is that it is the LA Act, 2013 that
shall be applied to acquisition proceedings under the BDA Act and KUDA Act, that have remained
without being completed in all respects as on 1.1.2014, and proceedings that have been initiated
thereafter".
f) Thus, learned Single Judge after referring to Section 24 of 2013 Act, held that it was applicable
even to acquisitions made under the provisions of the BDA Act as well as KUDA Act. Learned Single
Judge however noted that sub-
- : 55 :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 25
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
section (2) of Section 24 is a substantive provision of law which saves acquisition as
well as affords the prospect of land sought to be acquired reverting to the land owner
under certain conditions.
29. The said decision was rendered on 10.03.2016.
The said decision has been appealed against by the BDA and a Division Bench of this Court has
stayed the order passed in the said case. In the case of M/S. Evershine Monuments vs. State of
Karnataka reported in ILR 2018 Kar. 731, one of us (Nagarathna. J.,) considered the correctness of
the decision in Chikkathayamma and several other similar decisions were considered at length and
it was observed at paragraph Nos.37-39 as under:-
"37. In my humble opinion, the judgment in Chikkathayamma's case as well as
similar judgments in other cases, in the context of KUDA, 1987 and BDA Act have
been rendered without making an analysis of Section 24 of the 2013 Act, with regard
to its applicability to acquisitions initiated under those Acts as opposed to
acquisitions initiated under LA Act, 1894. Further, judgments of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in that
- : 56 :-
regard have not been considered and followed and without bearing in mind the
distinction in the object and scheme of the LA Act, 1894 and the BDA Act, as well as
the decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in that regard. Learned Single
Judge by his order has granted relief under sub-section (2) of Section 24 of 2013 Act.
While a reference has been made to the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Bondu Ramaswamy, Munithimmaiah, and Offshore Holdings Pvt. Ltd.,
the said reference is not in depth, as a detailed consideration of the aforesaid
judgments, which have been rendered on a detailed comparison of LA Act, 1894 with
BDA Act, would have thrown light on the object and scope of Section 24 of 2013 Act.
38. Reliance placed on the observations made by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
aforesaid decisions referred to above in detail would clearly indicate that the object
and scheme of the LA Act, 1894 and the BDA Act, being distinct and meant for
different purposes, it cannot be construed that acquisition initiated under the
provisions of the BDA Act, is an acquisition initiated under the provisions of the LA
Act, 1894. More significantly, the judgment in Chikkathayamma's case does not take
into consideration the dicta of the Hon'ble
- : 57 :-
Supreme Court in the case of Sukhbir Singh which is directly on the issue of
applicability of sub- section (2) of Section 24 of the 2013 Act to only acquisitions
initiated under LA Act, 1894.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 26
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
39. With respect, the judgment in the case of Chikkathayamma and other judgments
which are similar in nature cannot be considered to be binding precedent as they are
contrary to the dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to above as well as the
provision of Section 24 of the 2013 Act and hence cannot be applied to the present
cases which deal with acquisition under BDA Act. There are also additional reasons
for holding so."
We are in complete agreement with the aforesaid observations.
30. Further, from the words of Section 24 of the 2013 Act, what is significant to note is the fact that
the said Section expressly refers to land acquisition proceedings initiated under the LA Act, 1894.
The said Section does not incorporate the words "or proceedings initiated under any other
enactment". Therefore, the expression "land acquisition proceedings initiated under the LA Act,
1894" are
- : 58 :-
significant and must be given its natural and plain meaning and the said expression
cannot be given an expansive interpretation by adding words to the provision, in the
absence of the provision itself giving rise to any such implication. In this regard, the
rules of interpretation of a statute would become relevant and reliance could be
placed on guiding principles of interpretation of statute. One such principle is that
the Court is not entitled to read words into a provision of an Act or Rule for, the
meaning is to be found within the four corners of the provision of an act or rule, as in
the instant case. Therefore, while it is not permissible to add words or to fill in a gap
or lacuna, on the other hand, effort should be made to give meaning to each and
every word used by the legislature. Thus, the golden rule of construction is that the
words of a provision of a statute, or rule must be first understood in the natural,
ordinary or popular sense. Phrases and sentences must be construed according to
their grammatical meaning, unless that leads to some absurdity or unless there is
something in the context, or in the object of the statute to suggest the contrary. In
other words, the golden rule is that the words of a statute prima facie be given
- : 59 :-
an ordinary meaning. Natural and ordinary meaning of words should not be departed
from "unless it can be shown that the legal context in which the words are used
requires a different meaning". Such a meaning cannot be departed from by the judges
"in light of their own views as to policy" unless it is shown to adopt a purposive
interpretation of the statute, which does not arise in the instant case. [Source -
G.P.Singh Principles on Statutory Interpretation - Fourteenth Edition].
31. In this context, Harbhajan Singh vs. Press Council of India reported in AIR 2002 SC 1351 could
be relied upon wherein, Cross on "Statutory Interpretation"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 27
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
(Third Edition, 1995) has been relied upon as follows:-
"Thus, an 'ordinary meaning' or 'grammatical meaning' does not imply that the Judge
attributes a meaning to the words of a statute independently of their context or of the
purpose of the statute, but rather that he adopts a meaning which is appropriate in
relation to the immediately obvious and unresearched context and purpose in and for
which they are used."
32. The aforesaid principles being squarely applicable to Section 24 of the 2013 Act, the same must
be interpreted
- : 60 :-
having regard to the intention of the Parliament. In this regard, one cannot lose sight
of the fact that 2013 Act repeals only LA Act, 1894, and not any other Central or State
enactment dealing with acquisition. Therefore, what are sought to be saved under
Section 24 of the 2013 Act, are those acquisitions initiated only under LA Act, 1894
and not any acquisition initiated under any other Central or State enactment.
Therefore, the words "acquisition proceedings initiated under any other enactment"
cannot be added or supplemented by the Court after the expression "in any case of
land acquisition proceedings initiated under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894" under
both sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 24 of 2013 Act. Further, the short title of
Section 24 of 2013 Act reads as "Land acquisition process under Act No.1 of 1894
shall be deemed to have lapsed in certain cases." This is another indication that
Section 24 applies only to those acquisition "initiated" under the provisions of LA
Act, 1894.
33. Further, Section 24 creates a new right in favour of land owners in as much as they are entitled
to relief under
- : 61 :-
certain circumstances as stipulated in Section 24 of the Act. One such relief is under
sub-section(2) of Section 24 of the Act, dealing with lapse of acquisition by a fiction.
It is a deeming provision, provided the stipulations therein are complied with or the
conditions mentioned therein exist. One overbearing condition is that the acquisition
must have been initiated under the provisions of LA Act, 1894. Thus, if acquisition is
initiated under any other Central or State enactment, Section 24 does not apply.
34. The reasons as to why Parliament has incorporated Section 24 in the 2013 Act are evident and
not far to see. The said section creates a new right in favour of land owners whose lands have been
acquired under the provisions of LA Act, 1894, which has been repealed and substituted by 2013
Act. The 2013 Act is not a substitution for other Central enactments pertaining to acquisition of land
or for that matter any other State enactment. Therefore, Section 24 uses the expression that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 28
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
acquisition must have been initiated under the provisions of LA Act, 1894. But while creating a new
right in favour of land owners under Section 24,
- : 62 :-
Parliament at the same time has intended two further aspects: first, saving
acquisition under LA Act, 1894 and second, not encroaching upon other Central or
State enactments. As far as State enactments dealing with acquisitions are concerned,
Parliament intentionally has not touched upon any State enactment. The reason
being that several State enactments have been made drawing sustenance from Entry
5, List II or State List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, whereas LA Act, 1894
as well as 2013 Act could be traced to Entry 42 List III (Concurrent List of the
Seventh Schedule. Moreover, as has been explained above, the object and scope of the
BDA Act made under Entry 5 List II (State List) are distinct from LA Act, 1894
substituted by 2013 Act.
35. Further, the State enactments have their own provisions concerning lapse of acquisition such as
Section 27 of BDA Act or KUDA Act and Section 24 of 2013 Act cannot trammel upon those
provisions of the State Acts such as BDA Act or Karnataka Urban Development Authority Act, 1987
(KUDA Act). The State enactments may have referred to certain provisions of LA Act, 1894,
particularly with regard to
- : 63 :-
determination of compensation and such other matters. Reference to LA Act, 1894 in
the State enactments for certain purposes does not imply that the acquisition is
initiated under LA Act, 1894. What is of prime importance for Section 24 of 2013 Act
to apply is that acquisition proceedings must have been initiated under LA Act, 1894
and not any other law. Losing sight of this aspect would create confusion in the
applicability of Section 24 of 2013 Act. If the said provision is to apply to acquisitions
initiated under a State enactment, such as, BDA Act or KUDA Act, then Section 27 of
the said Acts which also deal with lapse of acquisition under certain circumstances
will be rendered nugatory, otiose or redundant on prevailing of circumstances
mentioned in Section 24 of the 2013 Act. In this regard, it is also observed that when
State Acts such as, BDA Act or KUDA Act, have specific provisions in the form of
Section 27 concerning lapse of acquisition, Section 24 of the Parliamentary
enactment i.e., 2013 Act, cannot be applied, when acquisitions are under State
enactments. This is because, the State or Central Laws concerning acquisition are
enacted under different entries and
- : 64 :-
in different Lists of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution and therefore, they
operate in different fields. This is so, although, the State enactments may refer to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 29
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
provisions of LA Act, 1894 for certain purposes.
36. At this stage itself, it may be observed that the issue as to whether LA Act, 1894 has been
incorporated into BDA Act by the device of legislation by incorporation or legislation by reference is
wholly foreign and outside the scope of controversy while considering the applicability of Section 24
to acquisition initiated under any law (whether State or Central), de hors LA Act, 1894. The dicta of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in this regard after comparing the scheme of LA Act, 1894 and BDA Act,
are binding and authoritative and the same cannot be brushed aside or ignored by not applying the
same in appropriate cases, such as the present one.
37. Thus, 2013 Act has not only repealed the LA Act, 1894, but has substituted the said Act. The
2013 Act is a totally distinct enactment and a complete code by itself. Hence, for the aforesaid
reasons, initiation of acquisition
- : 65 :-
under State enactments such as BDA Act is not the same as initiation of acquisition
under LA Act, 1894.
38. Further, it is noted that 2013 Act has, by virtue of Section 114 thereof, repealed LA Act, 1894.
Section 114 reads as under:
"114. Repeal and Saving: (1) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) is hereby
repealed.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the repeal under sub-section (1) shall not
be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeals."
Therefore, what is saved under Section 114 of 2013 Act are only those acts and actions initiated
under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894, which ought to be saved having regard to the provisions of
Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897. Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, reads as
under:
"6. Effect of repeal.- Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the
commencement of this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be
- : 66 :-
made, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not.-
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect;
or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 30
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done
or suffered thereunder; or
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired accrued or incurred
under any enactment so repealed; or
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence
committed against any enactment so repealed; or
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation
had not been passed."
However, Section 6 of the General Clauses Act would apply only when a saving clause as per
sub-section 2 of Section 14 is not expressly provided under 2013 Act. Section 24 of the 2013 Act,
which is in the nature of a saving clause
- : 67 :-
has created new rights in favour of land owners whose lands had been acquired under
LA Act, 1894. Sub-section (1), lays down the conditions when the land acquisition
proceedings initiated under the LA Act, 1894, would be amenable to the provisions of
2013 Act or, continued under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894, on certain
conditions or circumstances prevailing. Under sub-section (2) of Section 24, the
Parliament has, by a deeming provision, intended that if certain conditions are
satisfied, the acquisition proceedings initiated under the LA Act, 1894, shall be
deemed to have lapsed.
39. Sub-section (2) of Section 24, which has been invoked in the instant case was
interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Pune Municipal Corporation
vs. Harakchand Misirimal Solanki [(2014) 3 SCC 183].
The said judgment is no longer good law on the interpretation placed on Section 24(2) of the Act,
but we only notice the fact that in paragraph No.11 of the said judgment, it was observed that for
Section 24 to apply, the land must be a subject matter of acquisition under LA Act, 1984.
- : 68 :-
40. Subsequently, the law has been re-stated in the case of Indore Development
Authority vs. Manoharlal [AIR 2020 SC 1496] and the relevant portions of the said
judgment insofar as it is applicable to the present appeal are extracted as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 31
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
95. Section 24(1)(a) of the Act of 2013 read with the non-obstante clause provides
that in case of proceedings initiated under the Act of 1894 the award had not been
made under Section 11, then the provisions of the Act of 2013, relating to the
determination of compensation would apply. However; the proceedings held earlier
do not lapse. In terms of Section 24(1)(b), where award under Section 11 is made,
then such proceedings shall continue under the provisions of the Act of 1894. It
contemplates that such pending proceedings, as on the date on which the Act of 2013
came into force shall continue, and taken to their logical end. However, the exception
to Section 24(1)(b) is provided in Section 24(2) in case of pending proceedings; in
case where the award has been passed five years or more prior to the commencement
of the Act of 2013, the physical possession of the land has not been taken, or the
compensation has not been paid, the proceedings
- : 69 :-
shall be deemed to have lapsed, and such proceedings cannot continue as per the
provisions of Section 24(1)(b) of the Act of 2013.
96. Section 24(2) carves out an exception to Section 24(1)(b), where the award has
been passed, and the proceedings are pending, but in such proceedings, physical
possession of the land has not been taken, or compensation has not been paid,
proceedings shall lapse. There are twin requirements for the lapse; firstly, physical
possession has not been taken and, secondly, compensation has not been paid. In
case, possession has been taken but compensation has been paid, there is no lapse of
the proceedings.
The question which is to be decided is whether the conditions are cumulative, i.e., both are to be
fulfilled, for lapsing of acquisition proceedings, or the conditions are in the alternative ("either/or").
(underlining by us) XXX
127. Under Section 48 of the Act of 1894, withdrawal of the land acquisition proceedings was
permissible only if the possession has not been taken under Section 16 or 17(1). Section 48(1) is
extracted hereunder:
- : 70 :-
"48. Completion of acquisition not compulsory, but compensation to be awarded
when not completed.-
(1) Except in the case provided for in section 36, the Government shall be at liberty to
withdraw from the acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 32
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
(2) Whenever the Government withdraws from any such acquisition, the Collector
shall determine the amount of compensation due for the damage suffered by the
owner in consequence of the notice or of any proceedings thereunder, and shall pay
such amount to the person interested, together with all costs reasonably incurred by
him in the prosecution of the proceedings under this Act relating to the said land.
(3) The provisions of Part III of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to the
determination of the compensation payable under this section". In case possession
has been taken, there cannot be any withdrawal from the land acquisition
proceedings under the Act of 1894.
x x x
- : 71 :-
In re: Vested rights under Section 24 of the Act of
148. This Court is of opinion that Section 24 of the Act of 2013 does not intend to take
away vested rights. This is because there is no specific provision taking away or
divesting title to the land, which had originally vested with the State, or divesting the
title or interest of beneficiaries or third-party transferees of such land which they had
lawfully acquired, through sales or transfers. There is a (sic! 'no') specific provision
made for divesting, nor does the Act of 2013 by necessary intendment, imply such a
drastic consequence. Divesting cannot be said to have been intended.
x x x
151. The Section 24(2) of the Act of 2013 is to be interpreted consistent with the
legislative intent, particularly when it has provided for the lapse of the proceedings. It
has to be interpreted in the light of provisions made in Sections 24 and 114 of the Act
of 2013 and Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, what it protects and to what extent
it takes away the rights of the parties.
Undoubtedly, Section 24(2) has retroactive operation with respect to the acquisitions initiated
under the Act of 1894 and which are not
- : 72 :-
completed by taking possession nor compensation has been paid in spite of lapse of 5
years and proceedings are kept pending due to lethargy of the officials. The drastic
consequences follow by the provisions contained in Section 24(2) in such cases.
(underlining by us) X X X
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 33
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
172. A reading of section 24(2) shows that in case possession has been taken even if
the compensation has not been paid, the proceedings shall not lapse. In case payment
has not been made nor deposited with respect to the majority of the holdings in the
accounts of the beneficiaries, then all the beneficiaries specified in the notification
under Section 4 of the Act of 1894 shall get the enhanced compensation under the
provisions of the Act of 2013."
(underlining by us)
41. Therefore, for a declaration of lapse of acquisition, the pre-conditions or conditions precedent
mentioned under sub-section (2) of Section 24 of the 2013 Act must apply. Most importantly the
said conditions must prevail in an acquisition initiated under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894,
- : 73 :-
and not with regard to acquisition initiated under any other enactment be it Central
or State enactment. Hence, before land owners could seek relief under sub-section
(2) of Section 24 of 2013 Act, which is a right created in their favour, the basic
postulate that must be borne in mind is to ascertain, in the first instance, as to under
which law, acquisition has been initiated; whether under the provisions of the LA Act,
1894 or any other law. If it is under any other law, then in my view Section 24 would
not be applicable to such acquisitions. The dicta of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Munithimmaiah, Bondu Ramaswamy, Offshore Holdings Private Limited
clearly enunciate that an acquisition initiated under the provisions of the BDA Act
being distinct from an acquisition initiated under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894,
it cannot be held that acquisition process initiated under the provisions of the LA Act,
1894, would also encompass acquisition proceedings initiated under any other law
such as, the BDA Act. As already noted, the two enactments being distinct having a
different object and scope and acquisition of lands being only incidental to the main
object and scope under the BDA Act, the acquisition proceedings initiated
- : 74 :-
under the two Acts cannot be considered on par, so as to hold that land acquisition
proceedings initiated under the provisions of the BDA Act is "land acquisition
proceedings initiated under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894."
42. As already observed, Section 24 of the 2013 Act creates a new right in the land owners. For the
exercise of said right, certain conditions have to exist, the most significant of them being, the
initiation of proceedings for acquisition under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894. Therefore, the said
words must be given a natural interpretation and not an expansive or wide interpretation, so as to
extend the right under Section 24 even in respect of land owners whose lands are subjected to
acquisition under any State enactment, such as the BDA Act or KUDA Act. In fact, the Parliament
itself has been conscious of the fact that 2013 Act repeals and substitutes only LA Act, 1894, and not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 34
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
any other Central enactment or for that matter any other State enactment dealing with acquisition of
lands. This is evident from Section 105 of the 2013 Act, which reads as under:
- : 75 :-
"105. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases or to apply with certain
modifications: (1) Subject to sub-section (3), the provisions of this Act shall not apply
to the enactments relating to land acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule.
(2) Subject to sub-section (2) of Section 106, the Central Government may, by
notification, omit or add to any of the enactments specified in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The Central Government shall, by notification, within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act, direct that any of the provisions of this Act relating to the
determination of compensation in accordance with the First Schedule and
rehabilitation and resettlement specified in the Second and Third Schedules, being
beneficial to the affected families, shall apply to the cases of land acquisition under
the enactments specified in the Fourth Schedule or shall apply with such exceptions
or modifications that do not reduce the compensation or dilute the provisions of this
Act relating to compensation or rehabilitation and resettlement as may be specified
in the notification, as the case may be.
- : 76 :-
(4) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (3), shall be
laid in draft before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of the
notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, the
notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses of Parliament."
The enactments relating to land acquisition specified in the Fourth Schedule referred to in
sub-section (1) of Section 105 consists of the following thirteen Parliamentary enactments, namely:
"THE FOURTH SCHEDULE [See section 105] LIST OF ENACTMENTS
REGULATING LAND ACQUISITION AND REHABILITATION AND
RESETTLEMENT
1. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of
1958).
2. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 35
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
- : 77 :-
3. The Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948 (14 of 1948).
4. The Indian Tramways Act, 1886 (11 of 1886).
5. The Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885 (18 of 1885).
6. The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 (33 of 1978).
7. The National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956).
8. The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of Right of User in Land) Act,
1962 (50 of 1962).
9. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (30 of 1952).
10. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 (60 of 1948).
11. The Coal Bearing Areas Acquisition and Development Act, 1957 (20 of 1957).
12. The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003).
13. The Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989)."
43. Therefore, Parliament itself has listed the Central enactments to which 2013 Act does not apply.
This is because Parliament was conscious of the fact that LA Act, 1894 was substituted by the 2013
Act, which is distinct and different from the other Central enactments enumerated in the Fourth
Schedule to the 2013 Act or State enactments.
- : 78 :-
44. In the circumstances, it is concluded and held that Section 24 does not take within its scope nor
does it apply to acquisitions which have been initiated under the provisions of any other enactment
particularly, State enactment, such as, BDA Act. The said Section is restricted to only those
acquisitions which have been initiated under the provisions of the LA Act, 1894 only. Subject to
compliance of the conditions mentioned under sub-section (2) of Section 24, the land owner would
be entitled to the deeming provision regarding lapse of acquisition and not otherwise.
45. It is further held, with respect, that the order in Chikkathayamma and other orders which have
followed the said case, having regard to the dicta of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Munithimmaiah, Bondu Ramaswamy, Offshore Holdings Private Limited, are per incuriam and not
applicable as binding precedent in the present case. Further, most of the decisions referred to above
have granted relief on the basis of factual determination as per sub-section 2 of Section 24 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 36
Sri. L. Ramareddy vs The State Of Karnataka on 1 December, 2020
without considering the question of law which arises in these cases. Further, in some cases, the
petitioners
- : 79 :-
have themselves not pressed sub-section (2) of Section 24 of 2013 Act. Even then,
relief has been granted on a determination made on facts and by holding that there
has been abandonment of acquisition/lapse of acquisition.
46. Therefore, in our view, Section 24(2) of the Act, 2013 would also not apply in the instant case, in
view of the position of law discussed above. Also, the acquisition has attained the finality inasmuch
as the award was passed as earlier as 07.07.1987. The possession was taken on 15.07.1987. The
appellant in the year 2014 could not have assailed the Mahazar dated 15.07.1987 (Annexure-Z) in
the writ petition.
47. It is also pertinent to note that when the appellant filed W.P.No.18044/2000, neither he assailed
the acquisition notification nor he did take up the contention under section 27 read with Section 36
of the BDA Act. Therefore, the writ petition filed in the year 2014 was only an after thought
subsequent to the appellant being unsuccessful in the civil litigation right up to the Hon'ble
Supreme Court. Therefore,
- : 80 :-
the writ petition also has been dismissed on the ground of delay and laches and on
the principle of constructive res judicata.
48. We find that the learned Single Judge has considered all aspects of the matter
including the fact that the compensation of Rs.19,86,749.69/- awarded in respect of
the subject land was deposited before the City Civil Court on 31.08.1987, thereafter,
notice under Section 16(2) of the LA Act, has also been issued, has dismissed the writ
petition.
We find no merit in the appeal. Hence, the appeal is dismissed.
Parties to bear their respective costs. In view of the dismissal of the appeal, all pending applications
stand dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE KTY/*mvs
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63084622/ 37
