Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on
11 September, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 2512, 2021 (1) AKR 754
Author: Suraj Govindaraj
Bench: Suraj Govindaraj
CRL.P.NO.100964/2020
:1:
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 11TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE SURAJ GOVINDARAJ
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.100964/2020
Between:
Sri. B.S. Yediyurappa,
S/o. Late Siddalingappa,
Occ: Chief Minister, State of Karnataka,
Member of Legislative Assembly,
Aged about 77 years,
No.381, 6th Cross, 80 Ft. Road,
RMV 2nd Stage, Dollars Colony,
Bengaluru-560 094.
... Petitioner
(By Shri C.V. Nagesh, Sr. Counsel
for Shri Sandeep Patil, Advocate)
And:
1. State of Karnataka,
Through Gokak Town Police Station,
Gokak Circle, Belagavi District,
Belagavi-590 001,
Rep. by State Public Prosecutor,
High Court of Karnataka,
Dharwad-580 001.
2. Shri Laxman Allapur S/o.Tukkappa,
Occ: Executive Engineer,
Karnataka Niravari Nigam,
GRBC Division No.3, Gokak,
Aged about 58 years,
Gokak, Near Bamby Chal,
Gokak, Belagavi-590 001.
... Respondents
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 1
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
(By Shri V.M. Sheelvant, SPP for R1;
Notice to R2 is dispensed with v/o/dtd.27.08.2020)
CRL.P.NO.100964/2020
:2:
This criminal petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
praying to quash the complaint dated 26.11.2019 in
C.C.No.1065/2020 for offences under Section 123(3) of the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 and Section 171(F) of the
Indian Penal Code, pending on the file of the Prl. JMFC Court
Gokak and quash the order dated 26.11.2019, passed under
Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. registered as C.C.No.1065/2020 for
the offences under Sections 123(3) of the Representation of
Peoples Act, 1951 and Section 171(F) of the Indian Penal Code
by the Prl. JMFC Court Gokak and quash the order of taking
cognisance and issuance of summons dated 26.06.2020 in
C.C.No.1065/2020 for offences under Section 123(3) the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 and Section 171(F) of the
Indian Penal Code, passed by the Prl. JMFC Court Gokak and
consequently quash the entire and all further proceedings in
C.C.No.1065/2020 for the offences punishable under Section
123(3) of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 and Section
171(F) of the Indian Penal Code, pending on the file of the Prl.
JMFC Court Gokak.
This criminal petition coming on for orders and having
been heard and reserved for Orders on 27.08.2020, this day, the
Court pronounced the following:
ORDER
1. The Petitioner is before this Court seeking for 1.1. quashing the complaint dated 26.11.2019,
registered in C.C.No.1065/2020 for the alleged offences under Section 123(3) of the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 (for short "the R.P. Act") as also under Section 171F of the India Penal Code
(for short "the IPC"), pending on the file of the Prl. JMFC Court, Gokak (for short "the Magistrate").
1.2. quashing of the order dated 26.11.2019, passed under Section 155(2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for Short "the Cr.P.C.") in the above proceedings 1.3. quashing the order of taking
cognisance and issuance of summons dated 26.06.2020 in the above proceedings and 1.4.
consequently quash the entire and all further proceedings in the said matter.
2. The facts, in brief, are that:
2.1. One Laxman Allapur (informant), Executive Engineer, Karnataka Niravari
Nigama was deputed on election duty as a Flying Squad by the District Election
Officer, Belagavi for Gokak Constituency Bye-Elections. He had filed a complaint
before the respondent No.1-Police on 26.11.2019, alleging that on 23.11.2019 between
5:00 to 6:40 p.m., while he along with one M.G.Uppar were on election duty in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 2
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Valmiki Stadium, the Petitioner who was campaigning for the BJP Candidate had
appealed in his speech that the Veerashaiva Lingayat Community Members vote must
be consolidated, that they should not be divided and called upon the members to vote
in favour of the said candidate.
2.2. This is stated to be in violation of the Election Code of Conduct, and as such, he
requested respondent No.1-Police to take action against the Petitioner.
2.3. Respondent No.1-Police registered a non-
cognisable case in N.C.No.24/2019 under Section 123(3) of the R.P. Act, and Section 171F of the IPC
and forwarded the same to the Prl. JMFC, Gokak in pursuance of Section 155(1) of the Cr.P.C.
requesting for permission to investigate.
2.4. The Prl. JMFC, Gokak, vide his order dated 26.11.2020, on perusal of the requisition and
examination of the Informant found that there was a prima facie case made out requiring
permission to be granted. Hence, exercising his powers under Section 155(2) of the Cr.P.C. he
accorded permission to the Investigating Officer of Gokak Town P.S., Gokak to investigate the
non-cognisable offence and to file the final report.
2.5. The respondent-Police, after completion of the investigation, submitted a final B-report in
Crime No.147/2019 before the Prl. JMFC, Gokak on 25.06.2020 stating that after examination of all
witnesses as also conducting enquiry at the spot, it was found that there was no violation committed
by the Petitioner of the Election Code. 2.6. Along with the B-report, panchanama in regard to the
place of offence with a hand sketch, map of the place of occurrence of offence along with
photographs were produced. So also the entire video footage of entire election campaign held on
23.11.2019 was annexed in the form of a 'CD'. 2.7. The Investigating Officer had recorded the
statements of the first Informant, L.T.Allapur, M.G.Uppar, Junior Engineer, PWD, and
videographer, Kiran Ningappa Silanavar. 2.8. The first Informant in his statement stated that the
first information was given under a wrong assumption, due to pressure of work and that the
Petitioner has not violated the model Code of Conduct. The Petitioner had only stated in his speech
that the votes of workers should not be dispersed here and there. Similar statements were made by
M.G.Uppar and Kiran Ningappa Silanavar. It is on the basis of the above statements that the
B-report came to be filed. 2.9. While considering the said B-report, the Magistrate went into the
statement of witnesses as also watched the actual video footage. The Magistrate considering that
2.9.1. The first information was lodged by a Government Official, who was on deputation to the
Election Commission, that there was an election offence committed by the Petitioner had lodged a
complaint with the Gokak P.S. for the offences under Section 123(3) of the R.P. Act and Section 171F
of the IPC 2.9.2. The first informant had thereafter sought for permission for registering the case
and carrying out the investigation. 2.9.3. That there was an appeal made by the Petitioner in the
video recording of the speech to a specific community seeking their votes in favour of the candidate
of Gokak Constituency.
2.10. The Magistrate was of the opinion that the B-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 3
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
report could not be accepted, there was enough material in the form of video recording indicating,
prima facie, the commission of the offence as alleged, rejected the B-report. 2.11. The Magistrate
came to the conclusion that there was enough material in the B-report to proceed against the
Petitioner and subject the Petitioner to trial for the offences punishable under Section 123(3) of the
R.P. Act and Section 171F of the IPC proceeded the take cognisance of the offences, after rejecting
the B-report and directed the registration of the criminal case against the Petitioner. The Magistrate
also directed the issuance of summons against the Petitioner through the Commissioner of Police,
Bengaluru.
3. It is aggrieved by the above that the Petitioner has filed the above petition seeking for reliefs as
aforestated.
4. Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel, instructed by Shri Sandeep Patil, learned counsel
appearing for the Petitioner submitted as under:
Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., 4.1. Relying on Section 155(1) of the Cr.P.C., he submitted
that the Investigating Officer could not have by himself forwarded the complaint to
the Magistrate seeking for permission to investigate, he could only record the
information in the book kept for that purpose in the Police Station and refer the
Informant to the Magistrate so as to seek permission from the Magistrate for
investigation. He submitted that the forwardal of the requisition note sent by the
Police through P.C.No.2979, is contrary to the requirement under law, this indicates
as if the Police themselves are the Informants, that not being permissible under
Section 155(1) of the Cr.P.C., the Informant not having been referred to the
Magistrate, the initial permission granted for the investigation itself is bad in law and
is therefore required to be quashed. In this regard, he relies on the decisions of this
Court in Crl.P.No.3082/2007 in the case of Anand Singh vs. State of Karnataka,
disposed of on 22nd October 2008, more particularly, paragraph Nos.6 and 7 thereof,
which are reproduced hereunder for easy reference.
6. A plain reading of sub-
Section (1) of Section 155 Cr.P.C. makes it abundantly clear that the information over commission of
a non-cognisable offence to the jurisdictional Police Station, requires the officer to enter or cause to
be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer, in such form as the
State Government may prescribe, in that behalf, and refer the Informant to the Magistrate. In other
words, if the information did not disclose the commission of a cognisable offence, the Police Officer
having no power to investigate into the matter, is duty bound to refer the Informant to approach the
Magistrate, in the matter of permission to investigate into the non-cognisable offence. It is for the
Informant to seek the orders of the Magistrate. In any event, sub- Section (1) of Section 155 Cr.P.C.
does not empower the Police Officer to make a request to the Magistrate to permit investigation into
a non- cognisable offence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 4
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
7. If the Informant desires to seek a direction to the police officer to investigate into the
non-cognisable offence, at the hands of the Magistrate, has to lodge a complaint under Section 200
Cr.P.C., when the Magistrate would apply his mind to the averments in the complaint and on being
satisfied that there are reasons to believe that a non-
cognisable offence is committed may direct investigation by the jurisdictional Police. In any event,
such a power cannot be exercised either arbitrarily or capriciously and must result in a judicial
order. The judicial order does not mean extracting the entire text of the complaint and the evidence
adduced before the Magistrate. What is required by law is application of mind to the material on
record, satisfy himself that there is a need to investigate into the commission of the non-cognisable
offence. It is only thereafter that the Magistrate under sub-Section (2) of Section 155 Cr.P.C., 1973
directs the Police Officer to investigate into the non-cognisable as otherwise, the Police Officer has
no power to investigate into such an offence. Sub-Section (3) of Section 155 Cr.P.C., 1973 requires
the Police Officer who receives the order of Magistrate, to exercise the same power in respect of
investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as the officer may exercise in a cognisable
case."
4.2. He also relies on the decision of this Court in W.P.No.102248/2016 in the case of Praveen
Basavanneppa Shivalli vs. the State of Karnataka and others, disposed of on 11th July 2016, more
particularly, paragraph No.17 thereof, which is reproduced hereunder for easy reference:
"17. Statutory safeguard given under S.155(2) Cr.P.C. must be strictly followed, since
the same has been conceived in public interest and as a guarantee against frivolous
and vexatious investigation."
4.3. He further submitted that the order dated 26.11.2019 being illegal, this alone would be sufficient
to quash the entire proceedings. Section 123 of the R.P. Act 4.4. That Part-VII of the R.P. Act deals
with Corrupt Practices and Electoral Offences; Part-VII, consists of three chapters, Chapter-I relates
to Corrupt Practices; Chapter-II has been deleted; and Chapter-III relates to Electoral Offences. 4.5.
Section 123 of the R.P. Act comes under Chapter-I, therefore, the complaint is as regards a Corrupt
Practice in an election and not an Electoral Offences. Electoral Offences are separately dealt under
Chapter-III from Sections 125 to 136 of the R.P. Act.
4.6. Section 123(3) of the R.P. Act under which the complaint had been registered, relates to Corrupt
Practices. A proceeding for corrupt practice can be taken only as against the candidate and cannot
extend to initiating proceedings against a third party like the Petitioner.
4.7. That even though the words agent or any other person is used in Section 123(3), any action of
such agent or any other person would only result in action to be taken against the candidate. The
Petitioner, therefore, cannot be subjected to any action under Section 123(3). More so, when Section
123(3) can at the most be stated to be Corrupt Practice/s and not electoral offence/s, inviting penal
prosecution.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 5
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
4.8. On enquiry, Shri C.V. Nagesh learned Senior Counsel submitted that even if a mistake has been
committed by registering the case under Section 123(3), since the complaint by itself did not
mention any provision of the R.P Act, at the most, it could come under Section 125 of Chapter-III,
Part-VII relating to Electoral Offences and for this purpose, there must be an allegation of
promoting enmity between classes of people in connection with an election. He, therefore,
submitted that there being no such allegation of promoting enmity, a reading of the complaint in its
entirety indicates that even an offence under Section 125 of the R.P. Act has not been alleged to have
been committed. Therefore, there is no Electoral Offence which can be alleged to have been
committed by the Petitioner.
Section 171F of the IPC 4.9. That Section 171F of the IPC is also not attracted since the same relates
to punishment for undue influence or personation in an election, there is no personation committed
by the Petitioner. As regards undue influence, there is no undue influence exercised by the
Petitioner so as to warrant invocation of Section 171F of the IPC, since the requirement of undue
influence as mandated under Section 171C of the IPC are not satisfied. Hence, there is no offence,
which could be said to have been committed under Section 171F of the IPC. He submitted that the
proceedings are required to be quashed. Violation of Procedure to be followed on receipt of B Report
4.10. That the Magistrate has not followed the procedure to be followed upon receipt of B-report, the
Magistrate ought to have issued notice to the complainant-the first Informant seeking for his
acceptance or objection to the B- report. Only in the event of the first Informant challenging the
B-report, the Magistrate could have rejected the B-report. The Magistrate cannot by himself reject
the B report without the same being opposed by the Informant. Towards this end, notice has to be
issued to the first Informant; if the Informat agrees to the B report, the B report is to be accepted by
the Magistrate. If the B report is opposed by the Informant than the sworn statement of the first
Informant was to be recorded, the first Informant was to be heard and only thereafter orders could
be passed on accepting or rejecting the B-report.
4.11. In the present case, the Magistrate has suo moto rejected the B-report without there being any
objection to the B-report by anybody. More so, when no notice was issued to the first Informant.
Hence, the entire procedure being contrary to law, the rejection of B-report and taking cognisance is
violative of the applicable law, therefore, the same has to be quashed. Shri C V Nagesh Learned
Senior Advocate relied on the following decisions:
4.12. H.S.Bains, Director, Small Saving-Cum-
Deputy Secretary Finance, Punjab, Chandigarh Vs. State (Union Territory of Chandigarh) reported
in (1980)4 SCC 631, more particularly, paragraph No.6 thereof, which is reproduced herein under
for easy reference:
"6. It is seen from the provisions to which we have referred in the preceding
paragraphs that on receipt of a complaint a Magistrate has several courses open to
him. He may take cognisance of the offence and proceed to record the statements of
the complainant and the witnesses present under Sec. 200. Thereafter, if in his
opinion there is no sufficient ground for proceeding he may dismiss the complaint
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 6
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
under Sec. 203. If in his opinion there is sufficient ground for proceeding he may
issue process under Sec. 204. However, if he thinks fit, he may postpone the issue of
process and either enquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made
by a Police Officer or such other person as he thinks fit for the purpose of deciding
whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding. He may then issue process if
in his opinion there is sufficient ground for proceeding or dismiss the complaint if
there is no sufficient ground for proceeding. On the other hand, in the first instance,
on receipt of a complaint, the Magistrate may, instead of taking cognisance of the
offence, order an investigation under Sec. 156(3). The Police will then investigate and
submit a report under Sec. 173(1). On receiving the police report the Magistrate may
take cognisance of the offence under Sec. 190(1)(b) and straightaway issue process.
This he may do irrespective of the view expressed by the Police in their report
whether an offence has been made out or not. The Police report under Sec. 173 will
contain the facts discovered or unearthed by the Police and the conclusion drawn by
the Police therefrom. The Magistrate is not bound by the conclusions drawn by the
Police and he may decide to issue process even if the Police recommend that there is
no sufficient ground for proceeding further. The Magistrate after receiving the Police
report, may, without issuing process or dropping the proceeding decide to take
cognisance of the offence on the basis of the complaint originally submitted to him
and proceed to record the statements upon oath of the complainant and the witnesses
present under Sec. 200 Criminal Procedure Code and thereafter decide whether to
dismiss the complaint or issue process. The mere fact that he had earlier ordered an
investigation under Sec. 156(3) and received a report under Sec. 173 will not have the
effect of total effacement of the complaint and therefore the Magistrate will not be
barred from proceeding under Sections 200, 203 and 204. Thus, a Magistrate who on
receipt of a complaint, orders an investigation under Sec. 156(3) and receives a police
report under Sec. 173(1), may, thereafter, do one of three things: (1) he may decide
that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding further and drop action; (2) he may
take cognisance of the offence under Sec. 190(1)(b) on the basis of the police report
and issue process; this he may do without being bound in any manner by the
conclusion arrived at by the Police in their report: (3) he may take cognisance of the
offence under Sec.
190(1)(a) on the basis of the original complaint and proceed to examine upon oath the complainant
and his witnesses under Sec. 200 If he adopts the third alternative, he may hold or direct an inquiry
under Sec. 202 if he thinks fit. Thereafter he may dismiss the complaint or issue process, as the case
may be.
4.13. Vasanti Dubey Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in (2012) 2 SCC 731, more thereof, which
are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:
"27. It may be worthwhile to highlight at this stage that the enquiry under Section
200 Cr.P.C. cannot be given a go-bye if the Magistrate refuses to accept the closure
report submitted by the investigating agency as this enquiry is legally vital to protect
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 7
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
the affected party from a frivolous complaint and a vexatious prosecution in
complaint cases. The relevance, legal efficacy and vitality of the enquiry enumerated
under Section 200 Cr.P.C., therefore, cannot be undermined, ignored or underplayed
as non-compliance of enquiry under Section 200 Cr.P.C. is of vital importance and
necessity as it is at this stage of the enquiry that the conflict between the finding
arrived at by the investigating agency and enquiry by the Magistrate can prima facie
justify the filing of the complaint and also offer a plank and a stage where the
justification of the order of cognisance will come to the fore. This process of enquiry
under Section 200 Cr.P.C. is surely not a decorative piece of legislation but is of great
relevance and value to the complainant as well as the accused.
28. It is no doubt possible to contend that at the stage of taking cognisance or
refusing to take cognisance, only prima facie case has to be seen by the Court. But the
argument would be fit for rejection since it is nothing but mixing up two different and
distinct nature of cases as the principle and procedure applied in a case based on
Police report which is registered on the basis of First Information Report cannot be
allowed to follow the procedure in a complaint case. A case based on a complaint
cannot be allowed to be dealt with and proceeded as if it were a case based on Police
report.
29. While in a case based on Police report, the Court while taking cognisance will
straightaway examine whether a prima facie case is made out or not and will not
enter into the correctness of the allegation levelled in the F.I.R., a complaint case
requires an enquiry by the Magistrate under Section 200 Cr.P.C. if he takes
cognisance of the complaint. In case he refuses to take cognisance he may either
dismiss the complaint or direct the investigating agency to enter into further
investigation. In case, he does not exercise either of these two options, he will have to
proceed with the enquiry himself as envisaged and enumerated under Section 200
Cr.P.C. But, he cannot exercise the fourth option of directing the Police to submit a
charge-sheet as such a course is clearly not envisaged under the Cr.P.C. and more so
in a complaint case."
Reliance on a recording in a Compact Disk without a Section 65 B Certificate, is impermissible.
4.14. Shri C.V Nagesh learned Senior Counsel submitted that the Magistrate could not have relied on
the video recording in a compact disk without a certificate under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act,
being produced along with said compact disk, the same being an electronic record. The Magistrate
could not have looked into the compact disk and the entire order dated 26.06.2020 being on the
basis of the compact disk is bad in law. In this regard, he relies on the decision of the Apex Court in
the case of Arjun Panditrao Khotkar Vs. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal reported in 2020 SCC OnLine
SC 571, more particularly, paragraph Nos.66 and 67 thereof, which are reproduced hereunder for
easy reference:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 8
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
"66. We may reiterate, therefore, that the certificate required under Section 65B(4) is
a condition precedent to the admissibility of evidence by way of electronic record, as
correctly held in Anvar P.V. (supra), and incorrectly "clarified" in Shafhi Mohammed
(supra). Oral evidence in the place of such certificate cannot possibly suffice as
Section 65B(4) is a mandatory requirement of the law. Indeed, the hallowed principle
in Taylor v. Taylor (1876) 1 Ch.D 426, which has been followed in a number of the
judgments of this Court, can also be applied. Section 65B(4) of the Evidence Act
clearly states that secondary evidence is admissible only if lead in the manner stated
and not otherwise. To hold otherwise would render Section 65B(4) otiose.
67. In view of the above, the decision of the Madras High Court in K. Ramajyam
(supra), which states that evidence aliunde can be given through a person who was
in-charge of a computer device in the place of the requisite certificate under Section
65B(4) of the Evidence Act is also an incorrect statement of the law and is,
accordingly, overruled."
Issuance of Summons to a person residing outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate.
4.15. Shri C V Nagesh Learned Senior Advocate submitted that without an enquiry, no summons
could have been issued to the Petitioner who admittedly is not a resident within the territorial
jurisdiction of the Magistrate. 4.16. That the Magistrate has not followed the procedure as contained
under Section 202(2) of the Cr.P.C. for issuance of summons to the Petitioner, who admittedly is
residing, outside the jurisdiction of the Magistrate, which is clear from the fact that the Magistrate
has directed the Commissioner of Police, Bengaluru to serve the summons on the Petitioner. No
enquiry having been held by the Magistrate to arrive at a conclusion that sufficient cause is made
out to issue such notice. The issuance of summons being contrary to Section 202(2) of the Cr.P.C.,
the same is required to be quashed. 4.17. That before issuance of summons to the Petitioner, the
Magistrate ought to have come to a conclusion that there are sufficient grounds for issuance of such
summons and in that regard, necessary procedure thereto as laid down by the various decisions of
the Hon'ble Apex Court had to be followed. In this regard he relied on 4.18. Udai Shankar Awasthi
Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and another reported in (2013)2 SCC 435, more particularly, paragraph
No.40 thereof, which is reproduced hereunder for easy reference,:
"40. The Magistrate had issued summons without meeting the mandatory
requirement of Section 202 Cr.P.C., though the appellants were outside his territorial
jurisdiction. The provisions of Section 202 Cr.P.C. were amended vide the
Amendment Act 2005, making it mandatory to postpone the issue of process where
the accused resides in an area beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate
concerned. The same was found necessary in order to protect innocent persons from
being harassed by unscrupulous persons and making it obligatory upon the
Magistrate to enquire into the case himself, or to direct investigation to be made by a
police officer, or by such other person as he thinks fit for the purpose of finding out
whether or not, there was sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused before
issuing summons in such cases.. (See also: Shivjee Singh v. Nagendra Tiwary, SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 9
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
p.584, para 11 and National Bank of Oman v. Barakara Abdul Aziz,)."
4.19. Pepsi Foods Ltd. and another Vs. Special Judicial Magistrate and others reported in (1998)5
SCC 749, more particularly, paragraph No.28 thereof, which is reproduced hereunder for easy
reference:
"28. Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter. Criminal law
cannot be set into motion as a matter of course. it is not that the complainant has to
bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the complaint to have the
criminal law set into motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused
must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law
applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature of allegations made in the complaint
and the evidence both oral and documentary in support thereof and would that be
sufficient for the complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused. It is
not that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary
evidence before summoning of the accused.
Magistrate has to carefully scrutinise the evidence brought on record and may even
himself put questions to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers to find
out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any offence is
prima facie committed by all or any of the accused."
4.20. Sunil Bharti Mittal Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation reported in (2015)4 SCC 609, thereof,
which are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:
"51. On the other hand, Section 204 of the Code deals with the issue of process, if in
the opinion of the Magistrate taking cognisance of an offence, there is sufficient
ground for proceeding. This Section relates to commencement of a criminal
proceeding. If the Magistrate taking cognisance of a case (it may be the Magistrate
receiving the complaint or to whom it has been transferred under Section 192), upon
a consideration of the materials before him (i.e., the complaint, examination of the
complainant and his witnesses if present, or report of inquiry, if any), thinks that
there is a prima facie case for proceeding in respect of an offence, he shall issue
process against the accused.
52. A wide discretion has been given as to grant or refusal of process and it must be judicially
exercised. A person ought not to be dragged into Court merely because a complaint has been filed. If
a prima facie case has been made out, the Magistrate ought to issue process and it cannot be refused
merely because he thinks that it is unlikely to result in a conviction.
53 However, the words "sufficient grounds for proceeding"
appearing in the Section are of immense importance. It is these words which amply
suggest that an opinion is to be formed only after due application of mind that there
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 10
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
is sufficient basis for proceeding against the said accused and formation of such an
opinion is to be stated in the order itself. The order is liable to be set aside if no
reason is given therein while coming to the conclusion that there is prima facie case
against accused, though the order need not contain detailed reasons. A fortiori, the
order would be bad in law if the reason given turns out to be ex facie incorrect.
54. However, there has to be a proper satisfaction in this behalf which should be duly recorded by
the Special Judge on the basis of material on record. No such exercise is done. In this scenario,
having regard to the aforesaid aspects coupled with the legal position explained above, it is difficult
to sustain the impugned order dated 19.03.2013 in its present form insofar as it relates to
implicating the appellants and summoning them as accused persons. The appeals arising out of SLP
(Crl.) No. 2961 of 2013 and SLP (Crl.) No. 3161 of 2013 filed by Mr. Sunil Bharti Mittal and Ravi
Ruia respectively are, accordingly, allowed and order summoning these appellants is set aside. The
appeals arising out of SLP (Crl.) Nos. 3326- 3327 of 2013 filed by Telecom Watchdog are dismissed."
4.21. GHCL Employees Stock Option Trust Vs. India Infoline Limited reported in (2013)4 SCC 505,
more particularly, paragraph No.14 thereof, which is reproduced hereunder for easy reference:
"14. Be that as it may, as held by this Court, summoning of accused in a criminal case
is a serious matter. Hence, criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of
course. The order of Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has
applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. The
Magistrate has to record his satisfaction with regard to the existence of a prima facie
case on the basis of specific allegations made in the complaint supported by
satisfactory evidence and other material on record."
4.22. On the basis of the above submissions, Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel contends that
looked at from any angle, the entire proceedings are misconceived, it is politically motivated and all
procedures required to be followed have been violated.
4.23. Violation if at all of Section 123(3) of the R.P. Act does not amount to an offence. The
requirement of Section 171F of the IPC have not been made out.
4.24. On all these grounds, the petition is to be allowed and the reliefs as prayed for therein ought to
be granted.
5. Shri V.M. Sheelavant, learned Special Public Prosecutor for respondent No.1 submitted that 5.1.
The entire procedure as required has been followed and there are serious allegations made against
the Petitioner, it cannot at this stage be contended that there are no offences made out against the
Petitioner. The same requires a proper and complete trial to be conducted; 5.2. The Magistrate
having come to the conclusion that there is prima facie case, this Court therefore at this stage ought
not to quash the complaint pending trial in the matter, which would establish whether the offences
have been committed or not.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 11
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
5.3. Though the offences complained of against the Petitioner is under Section 123 of the R.P Act
1951, it does not debar the prosecution of the Petitioner.
5.4. The offence alleged relating to an election, it is, but required that the same is looked at in a
larger conspectus so as to preserve the dignity and veracity of an election.
5.5. He therefore submitted that the petition requires to be rejected.
6. On the basis of the submissions made by both the counsels, the points, which would arise for
consideration of this Court are as under:
(i) Whether when a complaint has been lodged and/or information furnished of an
offence to a Station House Officer, the Station House Officer can himself seek for
permission to investigate a non-cognisable offence or as a corollary to it, it is only the
informant/complainant, who is to seek permission for investigation from the
Magistrate?
(ii) Whether the complaint as regards violation of Section 123(3) of the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 is limited to the candidate or does it extend to
any third party?
(iii) Whether the violation of Section 123(3) of the Representation of Peoples Act,
1951 would amount to a penal offence making such person liable for criminal
prosecution?
(iv) Whether promotion of enmity or hatred is a sine qua non for invoking section 125
of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951?
(v) Whether in the present case on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint
can it be prima facie concluded that the Petitioner has committed an offence under
Section 171F of the IPC by exercising undue influence on the persons who had
gathered for election rally in terms of Section 171C of the IPC?
(vi) What is the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate when a B-report is filed?
Can a Magistrate suo moto reject the B-report without notice being ordered on the
complainant?
(vii) Whether the Magistrate can suo moto take cognisance of the offence without
issuance of notice to the complainant?
(viii)What is the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate before issuance of
summons to a accused, who is not residing within its jurisdiction?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 12
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
(ix) Whether the Magistrate could have at the stage of taking cognizance relied upon
the video recording in a compact disk, without it being accompanied by a certificate
under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act?
(x) Is this a fit and proper case for this Court to interfere in the orders passed by the
Magistrate under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.? and
(xi) What order?
ANSWER TO THE ABOVE POINTS ARE AS UNDER:
7. Point No.(i):
(i) Whether when a complaint has been lodged and/or information furnished of an
offence to a Station House Officer, the Station House Officer can himself seek for
permission to investigate a non-cognisable offences or as a corollary to it, it is only
the informant/complainant, who is to seek permission for investigation from the
Magistrate?
7.1. It would be profitable to refer to and extract Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., which reads as under:
"155. Information as to non-
cognisable cases and investigation of such cases.-
(1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the
commission within the limits of such station of a non- cognisable offence, he shall
enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by
such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and
refer the Informant to the Magistrate.
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non- cognisable case without the order of a
Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case for trial.
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of
the investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge
of a police station may exercise in a cognisable case.
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognisable,
the case shall be deemed to be a cognisable case, notwithstanding that the other
offences are non- cognisable.
7.2. A perusal of the said provision would indicate that when information is given to an officer
in-charge of a Police Station of the Commission of non-cognisable offence within the limits of such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 13
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Police Station, he shall enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book kept
for that purpose and refer the Informant to the Magistrate. Thus, in terms of the said provision, on
receipt of information from a third party informant, the Investigating Officer can only record the
said information and direct the Informant to approach the Magistrate seeking for permission to
investigate into a particular matter.
7.3. On this basis, Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the Investigating Officer
has sent requisition to the Magistrate, which is not permissible and it was for Informant to approach
the Magistrate and seek for permission to investigate into the matter. This not having been done, he
submitted that the sending of requisition note to the Magistrate and the Magistrate accepting the
requisition note and thereafter directing the Investigating Officer to investigate into the offence, is
contrary to the requirement of Section 155(1) of the Cr.P.C. and contrary to the mandate of this
Court laid down in its judgements in Crl.P.No.3082/2007 and W.P.No.102248/2016 (Supra) and as
such the same has to be quashed.
7.4. At first blush, the contention urged by the learned Senior Counsel Shri C.V. Nagesh appears to
be attractive, however, it is not in dispute that 7.4.1. information was given to an officer in charge of
a police station 7.4.2. the offence is alleged to have been committed within the limits of such station
7.4.3. the offence is a non- cognisable offence, 7.4.4. the Station house officer entered or caused to
be entered the substance of the information in a book kept for such purpose.
7.4.5. the station house officer referred the Informant to the Magistrate.
7.5. A magisterate can take cognisance of an office in terms of Secttion 190 of the Cr. P.C., the said
provision is hereunder reproduced for easy reference.
190. Cognisance of offences by Magistrates.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any Magistrate of
the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognisance of
any offence--
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence;
(b) upon a police report of such facts;
(c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own
knowledge, that such offence has been committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take
cognisance under sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try
7.6. In the present case, the complaint has been filed by "any other person relating to a non-
cognisable offence", hence the same would have to be treated as a private complaint, in terms of
Section 200 of the Cr. P.C and procedure thereunder required to be followed. Section 200 of Cr. P.C
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 14
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
is reproduced hereunder for easy reference.
200. Examination of complainant.--A Magistrate taking cognisance of an offence on complaint shall
examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such
examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses,
and also by the Magistrate:
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not
examine the complainant and the witnesses--
(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties
or a Court has made the complaint; or
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate
under section 192: Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to
another Magistrate under section 192 after examining the complainant and the
witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re-examine them.
7.7. On perusal of the records, it is found that though requisition has been sent by the Investigating
Officer, the requisition was accompanied by the Informant, which is clear from the endorsement
made by the Magistrate on 26.11.2019, which reads as under:
"Read Requisition Through PC 2979 in open Court on 26.11.2019 at about 1:00 p.m
and Informant by named Mr.L.T. Appapur is present before Court. Perused the
information and acknowledgement.
Heard Informant. Office to put up along with Order Sheet.
Sd/-
26.11.2019"
7.8. Thus, when the matter was before the Magistrate, the Informant was also present and heard. It
is only after hearing the Informant that the Magistrate directed for an Order Sheet to be put up in
the matter, it is not as if that the entire process was conducted by the Investigating Officer, the
Informant was available and heard by the Magistrate when he took up the matter. 7.9. After putting
up of the Order Sheet while passing the order permitting the Investigating officer to investigate into
the non-cognisable offence, it is seen that the Magistrate had examined the Informant and the
information submitted, which is clear from the order dated 26.11.2019, which is reproduced
hereunder for easy reference:
"26/11/2019 The P.S.I. of Gokak Town P.S. has filed a requisition for permission of
investigation and filing F.I.R.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 15
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Submitted for orders.
A requisition by I.O. of Gokak Town P.S. is submitted and also referred the Informant
by name Mr. L. T. Allapur, who is public servant and Flying squad of by-election to
Gokak Constituency and he is present before Court. On enquiry of the said Informant
and on perusal of the requisition acknowledgement and information it is found that,
the prima facie case is made and which requires permission from this Court for
registration of offence and for further investigation. I am satisfied to grant
permission to I.O., for investigation of the above said non-cognisable offence.
Hence, in view of the same, proceed to pass the following;
ORDER
• In exercise of Sec.155(2) of
Cr.P.C. the Investigating Officer of Gokak Town P.S. Gokak is accorded with
permission for investigation of the said non-cognisable offence and to file report.
• Intimate this order to said I.O., along with the copy of this order forthwith."
7.10. The Magistrate enquired with the Informant, perused the requisition and found that there is a
prima facie case made out, requiring permission to be granted for investigation. 7.11. Even
otherwise, since the Informant herein is a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge
of his official duties as belonging to the flying squad deputed by the Election Commission, there was
no need for sworn statement of the Informant to be recorded, since the Provisio to section 200
exempts the same.
7.12. In the above circumstances, it cannot be said that the order permitting the investigation has
been passed only on the basis of the requisition sent by the Investigating Officer. The same has been
passed after the Investigating Officer having referred the Informant to the Magistrate, who having
enquired with the Informant passed the order. As such the contention of Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned
Senior Counsel in this regard is liable to be rejected, the decisions relied upon by Shri C.V. Nagesh
learned Senior Counsel in Crl.P.No.3082/2007 and W.P.No102248/2016 would be of no avail.
7.13. I answer the above point by holding that 7.13.1. When a complaint has been lodged and/or
information is furnished of an offence to a Station House Officer, the Station House Officer cannot
himself seek for permission to investigate a non-cognisable offence, unless he is the first Informant.
7.13.2. It is only the informant/complainant, who is to seek permission for investigation from the
Magistrate.
7.13.3. The Informant being present before the Magistrate when an order directing investigation is
passed and having been examined the requirement under Section 155 (1) are satisfied.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 16
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
7.13.4. There would be no need for recording of the sworn statement of the Informant if the
Informant were to be a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duties.
8. Point Nos.(ii), (iii) and (iv):
(ii) Whether the complaint as regards violation of Section 123(3) of the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 is limited to the candidate or does it extend to
any third party?
(iii) Whether a violation of Section 123(3) of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951
would amount to a penal offence making such person liable for prosecution? and
(iv) Whether promotion of enmity or hatred is a sine qua non for invoking section 125
of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951?
8.1. The above points being related to each other are taken up together for consideration. For easy
reference, Sections 123 and 125 of the R.P. Act are extracted below:
Section 123 "123. Corrupt practices.--The following shall be deemed to be corrupt
practices for the purposes of this Act:--
(1) "Bribery", that is to say--
(A) any gift, offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with
the consent of a candidate or his election agent of any gratification, to any person
whomsoever, with the object, directly or indirectly of inducing--
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not to withdraw from being
a candidate at an election, or
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a reward to--
(i) a person for having
so stood or not stood,
or for [having
withdrawn or not
having withdrawn]
his candidature; or
(ii) an elector for having
voted or refrained
from voting;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 17
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
(B) the receipt of, or agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a motive or a
reward--
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for [withdrawing or not
withdrawing] from being, a candidate; or
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for voting or
refraining from voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any elector to vote or
refrain from voting, or any candidate [to withdraw or not to withdraw] his
candidature.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this clause the term "gratification"
is not restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and it includes all
forms of entertainment and all forms of employment for reward but it does not include the payment
of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of, any election and duly entered in the
account of election expenses referred to in section 78.] (2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct
or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any
other person 7[with the consent of the candidate or his election agent], with the free exercise of any
electoral right:
Provided that--
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such person
as is referred to therein who--
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an
elector is interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and ex-
communication or expulsion from any caste or community; or
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any
person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an object of divine
displeasure or spiritual censure, shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of
the electoral right of such candidate or elector within the meaning of this clause;
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or the mere exercise
of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed
to be interference within the meaning of this clause.
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of
a candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the
ground of his religion, race, caste, community or language or the use of, or appeal to
religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such as the national
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 18
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
flag or the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of
that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate:
Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall be deemed to be
a religious symbol or a national symbol for the purposes of this clause.
(3A) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between
different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste,
community, or language, by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the
consent of a candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the
election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.]
(3B) The propagation of the practice or the commission of sati or its glorification by a
candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or his
election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or
for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this clause, "sati" and "glorification" in relation to sati shall have
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (3 of
1988).] (4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a
candidate or his election agent], of any statement of fact which is false, and which he either believes
to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any
candidate, or in relation to the candidature, or withdrawal, 3* * * of any candidate, being a
statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate's election.
(5) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel by a
candidate or his agent or by any other person 4[with the consent of a candidate or his election
agent], 6[or the use of such vehicle or vessel for the free conveyance] of any elector (other than the
candidate himself, the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling station provided
under section 25 or a place fixed under sub-section (1) of section 29 for the poll:
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at
their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to and from any such
polling station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice
under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by
mechanical power:
Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tramcar
or railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or
coming from any such polling station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed
to be a corrupt practice under this clause.
Explanation.--In this clause, the expression "vehicle" means any vehicle used or
capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by
mechanical power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 19
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
otherwise.
(6) The incurring or authorising of expenditure in contravention of section 77.
(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure by a
candidate or his agent or, by any other person 1[with the consent of a candidate or his
election agent], any assistance (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of
the prospects of that candidate's election, 2[from any person whether or not in the
service of the Government] and belonging to any of the following classes, namely:--
(a) gazetted officers;
(b) stipendiary judges and
magistrates;
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;
(d) members of the police forces;
(e) excise officers;
(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as lambardars,
malguzars, patels, deshmukhs or by any other name, whose duty is to collect land
revenue and who are remunerated by a share of, or commission on, the amount of
land revenue collected by them but who do not discharge any police functions; and
(g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government as may be prescribed:
(h) class of persons in the service of a local authority, university, government
company or institution or concern or undertaking appointed or deputed by the
Election Commission in connection with the conduct of elections.
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the
classes aforesaid, in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty, makes any
arrangements or provides any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any
candidate or his agent or any other person acting with the consent of /the candidate or his election
agent (whether by reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason), such
arrangements, facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of
the prospects of that candidate's election;
8) booth capturing by a candidate or his agent or other person.] Explanation.--(1) In this section, the
expression "agent" includes an election agent, a polling agent and any person who is held to have
acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the candidate.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 20
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Explanation.--(2) For the purposes of clause (7), a person shall be deemed to assist in the
furtherance of the prospects of a candidate's election if he acts as an election agent 1* * * of that
candidate.] Explanation.--(3) For the purposes of clause (7), notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law, the publication in the Official Gazette of the appointment, resignation, termination of
service, dismissal or removal from service of a person in the service of the Central Government
(including a person serving in connection with the administration of a Union territory) or of a State
Government shall be conclusive proof--
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal from service, as
the case may be, and
(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment, resignation, termination of service,
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, is stated in such publication, also of the fact
that such person was appointed with effect from the said date, or in the case of resignation,
termination of service, dismissal or removal from service, such person ceased to be in such service
with effect from the said date.
Explanation.--(4) For the purposes of clause (8), "booth capturing" shall have the same meaning as
in section 135A." Section 125 "125. Promoting enmity between classes in connection with election.--
Any person who in connection with an election under this Act promotes or attempts to promote on
grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language, feelings of enmity or hatred, between
different classes of the citizens of India shall be punishable, with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 8.2. Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel
contended that Section 123 comes under Chapter-I of Part-VII, which relates to Corrupt Practices
and not Electoral Offences. Thus, the corrupt practices cannot be said to be an offence requiring
registration of the complaint hence, the registration of non-cognisable complaint under the said
provision is bad in law. 8.3. With the advent of democracy and the election process there have been
several aspects relating to the elections, which have resulted in litigations. With the passage of time,
laws have been evolved to regulate the electoral system. These electoral laws are aimed at
maintaining a level playing field, so no one gets an undue advantage over the same.
8.4. Various laws over a period of time have restrained or regulated various actions on the part of
the candidate or his agent or representatives. Generally speaking, any violation of these electoral
laws was regarded to be corrupt practices. Essentially any corrupt practices used by the candidate to
get an unfair advantage would result in disqualification of the candidate.
8.5. The Government of India Act, 1919, for the first time introduced the concept of corrupt
practices, which was in essence based on the British Act of 1883, with slight modification, next came
the Indian Election Offences and Enquiries Act, 1920, by virtue of which certain amendments, more
particularly to Section 171 of the IPC, were brought about. Thus, starting the prosecution for corrupt
practices; finally the above culminated in the Representation of People Act, 1951, which is the
pre-eminent law applicable to and regulates all the aspects of an election.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 21
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
8.6. The R.P. Act has distinguished any violation of the R.P. Act into corrupt practices and/or
electoral offences. The difference being that for corrupt practices, any person claiming a candidate
to be involved in such corrupt practices has to approach appropriate Election Commission seeking
for disqualification of the candidate if such a candidate has resorted to using of corrupt practices
during his/her election. 8.7. The electoral offences however, on the other hand being more than
mere corrupt practices, would though result in disqualification, but would also entail criminal
prosecution. Thus the degree of proof and/or the requirement in respect of the corrupt practices
and/or electoral offences are different.
8.8. The corrupt practices are basically of eight types in terms of Section 123 of the R.P. Act, namely
8.8.1. bribery, 8.8.2. undue influence, 8.8.3. appeal on the ground of religion, race, caste,
community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to,
national symbols, 8.8.4. the promotion of enmity, or attempt to promote feelings of enmity or
hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of basis of religion, race, caste,
community or language.
8.8.5. The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person, with the consent of a
candidate, any defamatory statement as regards the opposing candidate, 8.8.6. illegal hiring or
procuring of vehicle or vessel by the candidate or his agent 8.8.7. incurring of expenses beyond the
permissible limits;
8.8.8. the obtaining or procuring the services of a Government Officials during the course of election
process etc. 8.9. The Electoral offences on the other hand are of higher category, namely:
8.9.1. Promoting or attempting to promote on the ground of religion, race, caste,
community or language, feelings of enmity or hatred;
8.9.2. Filing of false affidavit;
8.9.3. Prohibition of meetings as per the electoral schedule 8.9.4. Violation of
Restriction on publication and determination of exit polls;
8.9.5. Disturbances at election meetings;
8.9.6. Wrongly printing pamphlets, posters etc., 8.9.7. Violating secrecy of voting;
8.9.8. Canvassing, disorderly conduct or misconduct at the polling station;
8.9.9. Removal of ballot papers, booth capturing; selling of liquor during election etc.
8.10. There is an overlap as regards some of the aspects between electoral offences
and corrupt practices. This being so for the reason that even an electoral offence if
proved would result in disqualification of the candidate in terms of corrupt practices
under Sections 123 of the R.P. Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 22
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
8.11. Section 123(2) of the R.P. Act deals with the undue influence, which requires
direct or indirect interference or an attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate
or his agent, with the consent of the candidate or his election agent with the free
exercise of any electoral right.
Provided that a threat has been held out to any candidate or an elector or any other person in whom
a candidate or an elector is interested, with an injury of any kind including social ostracism and
ex-communication or expulsion from any caste or community or induces such a candidate or an
elector to believe that he, or any person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an
object of divine displeasure. Thus, Section 123(2) of the R.P. Act, there is a restrictive interpretation
of undue influence, without the requirement of the provisio being fulfilled it cannot be said that
there is undue influence.
8.12. Section 123(3) of the R.P. Act deals with any appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other
person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any
person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, community or language or the use of, or appeal to
religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such as the national flag or the
national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for
prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate:
8.13. Section 123(3A) of the R.P. Act deals with the promotion of, or attempt to
promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of
India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community, or language, by a candidate or
his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent for
the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially
affecting the election of any candidate.
8.14. Thus, even if a corrupt practice which is alleged against the Petitioner coming
within the parameters of Sections 123(2) or 123(3) or 123 (3A) of the R.P. Act, is
proved, then if the Petitioner were to be said to be an agent of the candidate or a
person who is acting with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, then
action for violation of Sections 123(2) or 123(3) or 123 (3A) of the R.P. Act would
have to be taken against the candidate for his disqualification by filing a petition
before the Election Commissioner in terms of Section 81 of thereof, which are
reproduced hereunder for easy reference.
"81. Presentation of petitions.--
(1) An election petition calling in question any election may be presented on one or
more of the grounds specified in 3 sub-section (1) of section 100 and section 101 to
the 4 [High Court] by any candidate at such election or any elector 5 [within
forty-five days from, but not earlier than the date of election of the returned
candidate, or if there are more than one returned candidate at the election and the
dates of their election are different, the later of those two dates.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 23
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Explanation: In this sub-section, "elector" means a person who was entitled to vote at the election to
which the election petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not.
[(2) Omitted by Act 47 of 1966, w.e.f. 14-12-1966] (3) Every election petition shall be accompanied
by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition, and every such copy
shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition."
"83. Contents of petition.--
(1) An election petition--
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner
relies;
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges,
including as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have
committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of each
such practice; and
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in that Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings:
Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also
be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of
such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.
(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and
verified in the same manner as the petition."
"84. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.--
A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a declaration that the election of all or any
of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration that he himself or any
other candidate has been duly elected."
"100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.--
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2) if the High Court is of opinion--
(a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified, to be
chosen to fill the seat under the Constitution or this Act 9 [or the Government of Union Territories
Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)]; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 24
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or by
any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent; or
(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially
affected--
(i) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate 1 [by an agent other
than his election agent], or
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is
void, or
(iv) by any non--compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or
orders made under this Act, the High Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be
void.
(2) If in the opinion of 2 [the High Court], a returned candidate has been guilty by an agent, other
than his election agent, of any corrupt practice 4 *** but 2 [the High Court] is satisfied--
(a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate or his election
agent, and every such corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders, and [without the
consent], of the candidate or his election agent;
(b) [Omitted]
(c) that the candidate and his
election agent took all
reasonable means for
preventing the commission of
corrupt practices at the election; and
(d) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the
candidate or any of his agents, Then the High Court may decide that the election of the returned
candidate is not void."
"101. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may be
declared to have been elected.--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 25
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
If any person who has lodged a petition has, in addition to calling in question the
election of the returned candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other
candidate has been duly elected and the High Court is of opinion--
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received a majority of the valid
votes; or
(b) that but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate by corrupt practices the
petitioner or such other candidate would have obtained a majority of the valid votes,
the High Court shall after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void
declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly
elected."
8.15. The R.P Act does not contemplate any action against the agent or any other person, who is
acting with the consent of the candidate. As stated above, any action for violation of Section 123 of
the R.P. Act leads back only to the candidate, if proved resulting in disqualification of the candidate
or voiding the result of the election.
8.16. Similar provisions as under Section 123(2) and (3) of the R.P. Act are not available under
Chapter III Part VII relating to Electoral Offenses. There is no provision which makes a corrupt
practice under Section 123(2) or (3) of the R.P. Act as an offence under the said Chapter. Thus, no
criminal prosecution can be laid on account of the violation of Section 123 of the R.P. Act against
any person. Of course, if there is any violation of a penal statute or special statute, separate
prosecution could always be laid.
8.17. A perusal of Section 100 read with Section 123 of the R.P Act, would indicate that the only
remedy provided, as of now, is for the election to be voided, thus though the corrupt practice may be
committed by an agent or a person authorised by the candidate, the action in regard thereto can
only be taken as against the candidate for having indulged in corrupt practices; the same cannot
extend to the Petitioner, who at the most can be stated to be the agent or a person, who is acting
with the consent of the candidate.
8.18. As can be seen from the above, Section 123 coming under the heading Corrupt Practices and
there being a separate chapter for Electoral Offences, it cannot be said that violation of Section 123
would amount to a penal offence. 8.19. The legislature in its wisdom has categorised the Corrupt
Practices and Offences differently and it is only offences under Chapter-III, Part VII, which can be
said to be penal offences. 8.20. From the extracted Section 125 above, promotion of enmity between
classes of people in connection with an election would amount to an offence under Section 125.
Section 125 is not restricted to the candidate but extends to any person not necessarily an agent or a
person acting under the instruction of the candidate. Proceedings under Section 125 is taken against
that person irrespective of and dehors the connection of that person with the candidate. Thus, the
action under Section 125 can be taken even against a third party, like the Petitioner, if requirements
under Section 125 are satisfied namely such person has promoted or attempted to promote on the
ground of religious, caste, community or language, feeling of enmity hatred between class of citizens
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 26
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
of India, sine qua non being the promotion of enmity.
8.21. Having carefully perused and gone through the first information placed before the
Investigating Officer and in turn before the Magistrate, I find that there is no allegation as regards
the promotion of enmity found in the said complaint. Even if there is a mistake in registering the
complaint under Section 123(3) instead of Section 125 and the ingredients of Section 125 are taken
into consideration, I do not find any allegation as regards an offence as required under Section 125
having been committed. 8.22. It is trite law that if there is a violation of Section 123 or if there is a
corrupt practice, the same would only result in a proceedings under the R.P. Act for disqualification
of the candidate or for voiding the result of the election in the event of such candidate having
returned successful and not for the prosecution of the candidate or his agent or a person authorised
by him for any penal offence.
8.23. Hence I answer the above points by holding that:
8.24. An action on a complaint as regards violation of Section 123 of the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 , i.e., on account of a corrupt practice being
committed is limited to the candidate, resulting in his disqualification or voiding of
his/her result in the event of such candidate having returned successfully.
8.25. An action for violation of Section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951,
can only be initiated against the candidate seeking for his/her disqualification and
voiding of his/her result in the event of such candidate having returned successfully,
hence no action can be taken against the agent or a person authorised by him for such
corrupt practice in terms of section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951.
8.26. Violation of Section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 in the
present scheme of the legislation would amount to corrupt practice, providing a cause
of action for filing of an election petition under Section 81 read with Section 100 and
101 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951; there can be penal action initiated by
way of criminal prosecution.
8.27. For initiation of Criminal prosecution, the violation complained of should come
within the ambit of Chapter III part VII of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, in
the present case at the most the allegations can be said to come under section 125
thereof, which require the establishment of promotion of enmity or hatred as a sine
qua non, which has not been so done.
9. Point Nos.(v)
(v) Whether in the present case on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint
can it be prima facie concluded that the Petitioner has committed an offence under
Section 171F of the IPC by exercising undue influence on the person/s, who had
gathered for election rally in terms of Section 171C of the IPC?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 27
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
9.1. Sections 171F and 171C of the IPC come under Chapter-IXA, which was inserted pursuant to
Amendment of IPC by Act 39 of 1920 as a consequence of the Indian Election Offences and
Enquiries Act, 1920.
9.2. Sections 171C, 171D and 171F are reproduced hereunder for easy reference:
Sections 171C "171C. Undue influence at elections.-- (1) Whoever voluntarily
interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of any electoral right
commits the offence of undue influence at an election.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), whoever--
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested, with
injury of any kind, or
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any person in whom he is
interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or voter,
within the meaning of sub-section (1).
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, or the mere exercise of a legal right
without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within the
meaning of this section.] Sections 171D 171D. Personation at elections.--Whoever at an election
applies for a voting paper or votes in the name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a
fictitious name, or who having voted once at such election applies at the same election for a voting
paper in his own name, and whoever abets, procures or attempts to procure the voting by any
person in any such way, commits the offence or personation at an election:
[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been
authorised to vote as proxy for an elector under any law for the time being in force in
so far as he votes as a proxy for such elector.
Sections 171F 171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an
election.--Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or personation at an
election shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to one year or with fine, or with both.
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCE Para I" Punishment-
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both-Non-Cognisable-Bailable- Triable by
Magistrate of the first class-Non-compoundable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 28
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Para II: Punishment-
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both-Cognisable-Bailable-Triable by Magistrate
of the first class-Non- compoundable."
9.3. Chapter IXA deals with offences relating to elections. Section 171F relates to
punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.
The same would require that the ingredients of an offence coming within the definition and meaning
of undue influence in terms of Section 171C and personation in terms of Section 171D to be satisfied.
9.4. In respect of personation a person voting in the name of any other person or votes in a fictitious
name then it is said to be personation. The offence of personation ex-facie is not involved in the
present matter.
9.5. Undue influence as defined under Section 171C of the IPC is a truncated definition, much more
restricted then the definition of undue influence under Section 16 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Thus, contrary to the normal understanding of undue influence, the restricted understanding of
undue influence under Section 171C would have to be taken into consideration to verify and identify
if an offence has been committed.
9.6. The exercise of undue influence in terms of Section 171C would only arise in the event of a
person threatening any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested,
with injury of any kind or induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or
any person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered an object of divine displeasure
or spiritual censure. 9.7. That means to say that there have to be statements made or threat given to
a voter that if he were to vote in any particular manner, he may incur displeasure of the divine or
censure by spiritual censure. Unless these two ingredients are satisfied, there cannot be undue
influence said to be used and therefore an offence under Section 171F could not be said to be
committed; 9.8. As regards undue influence, if it is to be contended that the speech of the Petitioner
amounted undue influence it has to satisfy the dual requirement under Section 171C of the IPC. An
ex-facie reading of the complaint does not make any allegation to satisfy the requirement of Section
171C of the IPC. Thus, when the basic requirement is not fulfilled, the criminal law cannot be set in
motion, as regards an action, which does not amount to a penal offence. 9.9. Hence I answer this
point by holding that in the present case on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint it
cannot be prima facie concluded that the Petitioner has committed an offence under Section 171F of
the IPC by exercising undue influence on the persons who had gathered for an election rally in terms
of Section 171C of the IPC.
10. Point Nos. (vi) and (vii):
(vi) What is the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate when a B-report is filed?
Can a Magistrate suo moto reject the B-report without notice being ordered on the
complainant?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 29
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
(vii) Whether the Magistrate can suo moto take cognisance of the offence without the
issuance of notice to the complainant?
10.1. Both the points being related to each other are taken up for consideration together. 10.2. As
held by the Apex Court in the cases reported in H.S.Bains, Director, Small Saving-Cum- Deputy
Secretary Finance, Punjab, Chandigarh (supra) and Vasanti Dubey (supra), relevant paragraphs
having been extracted hereinabove; the Magistrate had the following three options, after completion
of the investigation and the Police having submitted a B-report namely:
i. If he agrees with police report, and finds that there is no sufficient ground for
proceeding further, he may drop the proceeding and dismiss the complaint.
ii. He may not agree with the police report and may take cognisance of the offence on
the basis of the original complaint, under Section 190(1)(a) and proceed to examine
the complainant under Section 200.
iii. Even if he disagrees with the police report, he may either take cognisance at once
upon the complaint, direct an enquiry under Section 202 and after such enquiry take
action under Section 203. However, when the Police submits a final report or closure
report in regard to a case which has been lodged by the Informant or complainant,
the Magistrate cannot direct the Police to straightway submit the charge- sheet."
10.3. In the present circumstances, it is seen that firstly the Magistrate has not issued
a notice to the complainant, let alone the examination of the complainant under
Section 200 of the Cr.P.C.
by recording sworn statement of the complainant, post the submission of the B report inviting the
comment or statement of the Informant as regards the B report submitted. 10.4. This procedure has
been enshrined in order to protect a citizen of the Country from unnecessary harassment after
submission of the B-report, when a B-report has been submitted, it is generally accepted. It is only
in exceptional cases, where the B-report has been filed and the complainant is not agreeable to the
B-report that the enquiry is conducted under Section 200 of Cr.P.C.; in a proceedings pertaining to
non- cognisable offences, the station house officer is not entitled to take cognisance of the non-
cognisable offence, it is only on being directed by the jurisdictional Magistrate that he conducts an
investigation to enquire as to whether there is prima facie offence made out; once the investigation
leads an adverse report in terms of no offence having been made out, it is only the complainant, who
can find fault with such investigation or B-report and requests the Magistrate to continue with the
matter on the basis of the complaint filed by finding out defects in the investigation and/or by
establishing otherwise that there is a prima facie case made out for the prosecution of the accused.
In the present case, no notice was issued to the complainant, the Magistrate has rejected B-
report without anyone objecting to the B-report and has taken cognisance of the alleged offence suo
moto, such a procedure is neither contemplated nor sanctioned under the provisions of Criminal
Procedure Code. 10.5. The Hon'ble Apex Court has in the aforesaid decisions clearly stated about the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 30
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
procedure to be followed in order to safeguard the interest of parties; these safeguards not having
been followed by the Magistrate, the rejection of the B-report and taking cognisance of the offences
without service of notice on the complainant and/or objection on the part of the complainant is not
sustainable.
10.6. Be that as it may. Even if the complainant filed objections or questioned the B report, for the
Magistrate to take cognisance of offences, there should be an offence prima facie made out under
Section 125 of the R.P. Act or Section 171F of IPC.
10.7. As held above, no criminal prosection can be laid for violation of Section 123 of the R.P. Act. As
answered to the points above, I am of the considered opinion that the complaint as such does not
make out any case under Section 125 of the R.P. Act or Section 171F of IPC. Thus the question of
setting the criminal law into motion on the basis of the complaint which does not prima facie make
out an offence, is not sustainable.
10.8. I answer the above points by holding that 10.9. On the filing of the B report, the Magistrate is
required to notify the Informant/Complainant about the same. It is only if the Informant opposes or
objects to the B report that the Magistrate can record the sworn statement of the Informant. If the
sworn statement were to establish defects in the investigation, the Magistrate may set aside the B
report and proceed with the case after taking cognisance.
10.10. A Magistrate cannot suo moto reject the B-report without notice being ordered on the
complainant.
10.11. A magistrate can reject the B-report only if the sworn statement of the Informant were to
prima-facie make out on offence having been committed by the Accused. 10.12. A Magistrate cannot
suo moto take cognisance of the offence without the issuance of notice to the complainant.
11. Point No.(viii):
(viii) What is the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate before issuance of
summons to an accused who is not residing within its jurisdiction?
11.1. Sri.C.V.Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel submitted that insofar as the accused residing outside
the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court, the Magistrate ought not to have ordered for issuance of the
summons without holding an enquiry in terms of Section 202(1), more particularly in view of the
Cr.P.C Amendment Act, 2005.
11.2. In the event of issuance of process against an accused residing beyond the area in which the
Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, the Magistrate is to postpone the issuance of such process
against the said accused and enquire into the case himself and/or direct the investigation to be made
by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit for the purpose of deciding whether or not
there is sufficient ground for proceeding. 11.3. No such summons could be issued without first
examining the complainant and his witness if any on oath in terms of Section 200 of the Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 31
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Since in the present case, the Petitioner is not resident within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Magistrate, the above procedure ought to have been complied with.
11.4. The registration of complaint and issuance of summons to the accused is violative of Section
202(1) and 202(1) proviso (b) of the Cr.P.C. 11.5. The question that would arise in regard to the
above contention is what is the enquiry that the Magistrate would have to conduct. There would
have to be an order passed under Section 202(1) of the Cr.P.C. to indicate as to why process is being
issued by the Magistrate to an accused who is not residing within the jurisdiction of that Court and
for this purpose, sworn statement of the complainant as also the affidavit evidence if any of the
complainant's witnesses could be recorded leading to an order by the Magistrate based on his
satisfaction that there are sufficient grounds for issuing summons to such accused residing outside
its jurisdiction. Such order not having been passed by the magisterate, the summons could not have
been so issued. Point No.(viii) is answered accordingly.
12. Point No.(ix):
(ix) Whether the Magistrate could have at the stage of taking congnizance relied upon
the video recording in a compact disk, without it being accompanied by a certificate
under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act?
12.1. Shri C.V. Nagesh, learned Senior Counsel submitted that the compact disk could not have been
referred to by the Magistrate in the absence of a certificate under Section 65-B of the Indian
Evidence Act, relying upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Arjun Panditrao Khotkar
(Supra), relevant paragraphs having been extracted hereinabove. 12.2. A reading of the entire
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the above matter would indicate that the electronic document
cannot be considered to be evidence during trial without a certificate under Section 65-B of the
Indian Evidence Act, being accompanied with it. In the present case, admittedly there is no trial,
which has commenced. Thus, there would be no requirement of Section 65-B certificate at the stage
of examination by the Magistrate whether to take cognisance or not, a Magistrate can always look
into any electronic evidence, even if unaccompanied by a certificate under Section 65-B of the
Indian Evidence Act for the purpose of taking cognisance or not of an offence. Hence, the
submission made by Shri C.V. Nagesh in this regard is rejected.
13. Point No.(x):
(x) Is this is a fit and proper case for this Court to interfere in the order passed by the
Magistrate under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.?
13.1. In the light of the above, it cannot be said that violation of Section 123 of the R.P. Act would
require the initiation of criminal prosecution, no allegation or offence in terms of Section 125 within
Chapter-III of Part-VII of the R.P. Act, 1951 is made out. The ingredients of the offences under
Section 171C and 171F of the IPC have also not been made out. Hence, prima facie there is no
offence, which can be said to have been committed by the Petitioner requiring prosecution. Of
course, this does not prevent any action to be taken against the candidate for violation of Sections
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 32
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
123 of the R.P. Act.
14. Hence, I summarise the findings as follows:
14.1. When a complaint has been lodged and/or information furnished of an offence
to a Station House Officer, the Station House Officer cannot himself seek for
permission to investigate a non-cognisable offence, unless he is the first Informant.
14.2. It is only the informant/complainant, who is to seek permission for
investigation from the Magistrate.
14.3. The Informant being present before the Magistrate when an order directing
investigation is passed and having been examined the requirement under Section 155
(1) are satisfied.
14.4. There would be no need for recording of a sworn statement of the Informant if
the Informant were to be a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge
of his official duties.
14.5. An action on a complaint as regards violation of Section 123 of the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, i.e., on account of a corrupt practice being
committed is limited to the candidate, resulting in his disqualification or voiding of
his/her result in the event of such candidate having returned successfully.
14.6. An action for violation of Section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951,
can only be initiated against the candidate seeking for his/her disqualification and
voiding of his/her result in the event of such candidate having returned successfully,
hence no action can be taken against the agent or a person authorised by him for such
corrupt practice in terms of section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951.
14.7. Violation of Section 123 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 in the
present scheme of the legislation would amount to corrupt practice, providing a cause
of action for filing of an election petition under Section 81 read with Section 100 and
101 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951; there can be no penal action initiated
by way of criminal prosecution.
14.8. For initiation of Criminal prosecut/-ion the violation complained of should
come within the ambit of Chapter III part VII of the Representation of Peoples Act,
1951, in the present case at the most the allegations can be said to come under section
125 thereof, which require the establishment of promotion of enmity or hatred as a
sine qua non, which has not been so done.
14.9. In the present case on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint it
cannot be prima facie concluded that the Petitioner has committed an offence under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 33
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
Section 171F of the IPC by exercising undue influence on the person/s who had
gathered for an election rally in terms of Section 171C of the IPC.
14.10. On the filing of the B report, the Magistrate is required to notify the
Informant/Complainant about the same. It is only if the Informant opposes or
objects to the B report that the Magistrate can record the sworn statement of the
Informant. If the sworn statement were to establish defects in the investigation, the
Magistrate may set aside the B report and proceed with the case after taking
cognisance.
14.11. A Magistrate cannot suo moto reject the B-report without notice being ordered
on the complainant.
14.12. A magistrate can reject the B-report only if the sworn statement of the
Informant were to prima-facie make out on offence having been committed by the
Accused.
14.13. A Magistrate cannot suo moto take cognisance of the offence without the
issuance of notice to the complainant.
14.14. A Magisterate would have to pass an order under Section 202(1) of the Cr.P.C.
to indicate as to why process is being issued by the Magistrate to an accused who is
not residing within the jurisdiction of that Court and for this purpose, sworn
statement of the complainant as also the affidavit evidence if any of the complainant's
witnesses could be recorded leading to an order by the Magistrate based on his
satisfaction that there are sufficient grounds for issuing summons to such accused
residing outside its jurisdiction.
14.15. There would be no requirement of Section 65-B certificate at the stage of
examination by the Magistrate whether to take cognisance or not, a Magistrate can
always look into any electronic evidence, even if unaccompanied by a certificate
under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act for the purpose of taking cognisance
or not of an offence.
15. In the result I pass the following order
15.1. The complaint dated 26.11.2019, registered in C.C.No.1065/2020 for the alleged offences under
Section 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (for short "the R.P. Act") as also under
Section 171F of the India Penal Code (for short "the IPC"), pending on the file of the Prl. JMFC
Court, Gokak is hereby Quashed. 15.2. The order of taking cognisance and issuance of summons by
order dated 26.06.2020 Prl. JMFC Court, Gokak is hereby Quashed 15.3. The entire and all further
proceedings in C.C.No.1065/2020 pending on the file of the Prl. JMFC Court, Gokak is hereby
Quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 34
Sri.B.S. Yediyurappa S/O Late ... vs The State Of Karnataka on 11 September, 2020
SD/-
JUDGE Vnp*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5172195/ 35
