Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
Author: V. Srishananda
Bench: V. Srishananda
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF DECEMBER, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V. SRISHANANDA
R.F.A.NO.1293/2010(DEC/PAR)
BETWEEN
1. SRI ATUL M GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 51 YEARS
S/O LATE M.W.GURJAR
2. MISS CHITRA A GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 23 YEARS
D/O ATUL M.GURJAR
3. SRI RAHUL A GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 20 YEARS
S/O LATE M.GURJAR
ALL ARE RESIDING AT
NO.5, GURJAR HOUSE, I FLOOR,
10TH MAIN,
JAYANAGAR 3RD BLOCK
BANGALORE -560 011
...APPELLANTS
(BY SRI YESHU MISHRA, ADVOCATE FOR A1 TO A3)
2
AND
1. SRI MOHAN M GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
S/O LATE M W GURJAR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 1
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
2. SRI ADITYA M GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 12 YEARS
3. SRI SIDDARTH M GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 10 YEARS
NO.2 AND 3 ARE SONS OF
SRI MOHAN M. GURJAR
BOTH BEING MINORS ARE REPRESENTED
BY THEIR FATHER AND
NATURAL GUARDIAN
SRI MOHAN M.GURJAR
4. MISS SHYLA M GURJAR
D/O LATE M W GURJAR
R4 IS PASSED AWAY ON 13.07.2019
AS A SPINSTER AND
INTESTATE APPELLANT NO.1
AND RESPONDENT NO.1
BEING HER BROTHER
ARE HER LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES WHO ARE
ALREADY ON RECORD.
5. SMT NANDITA GURJAR
AGED ABOUT 35 YEARS
W/O MOHAN M.GURJAR
3
ALL ARE RESIDING AT NO.5,
GURJAR HOUSE, 10TH MAIN,
3RD BLOCK, JAYANAGAR,
BANGALORE - 11
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI SHANKARALINGAPPA NAGARAJ, ADVOCATE FOR
R1;
SRI SUPREETH P, ADVOCATE FOR R2, R3 AND R5;
VIDE ORDER DATED 17.08.2023 R4 DECEASED;
R1 AND A1 ARE THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES OF
DECEASED R4)
THIS REGULAR FIRST APPEAL IS FILED UNDER
SECTION 96 R/W, O-XLI, R-1 OF CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 2
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
AGAINST THE JUDGMENT AND DECREE DATED 13.04.2010
PASSED IN O.S.5545/1996 ON THE FILE OF THE I-ADDL.
CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE, BANGALORE,
DISMISSING THE SUIT FOR DECLARATION AND
PARTITION
THIS APPEAL HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR JUDGMENT, COMING ON FOR 'PRONOUNCEMENT OF
JUDGMENT' THIS DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE
FOLLOWING:-
4
JUDGMENT
Present appeal is filed by the unsuccessful plaintiff challenging the validity of judgment and decree
passed in O.S.No.5545/1996 dated 13.04.2010, on the file of Addl.
City Civil and Sessions Judge, Bengaluru (CCH-2).
2. Parties are referred to as plaintiffs and defendants for the sake of convenience as per their original
ranking in the trial Court.
3. A suit came to be filed by the plaintiff against the defendant with following prayer in respect of the
following properties:
"a) for partition and separate possession of the properties left behind my M.W.Gurjar
which are more particularly described in the schedule-A, B, and C hereunder and to
hold that the plaintiffs are entitled to 1/3rd share out of the same.
b) to declare that the alleged will dated 28.03.1992 and 25.02.1993 in the name of
M.W.Gurjar are void and unenforceable in law.
c) to grant such other decree, order or relief to which the plaintiffs may be found
entitled to under the circumstance of the case including the award of costs in the
interest of justice. "
Schedule A All that piece and parcel of the residential property bearing No.5, Gurjar House, 10th
Main, Jayanagar 3rd Block, Bangalore -11, together with construction thereon including the
residential portion in the first floor in the occupation of the first Plaintiff and Lessee constructed on
the site measuring East to West 120 feet and North to South 82 feet bounded on the:
East by : 10th Main Road;
West by : Private Property,
North by : Dr. Subbaramaiah's property, and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 3
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
South by : Property seized by the Government.
Schedule B
• Fixed Deposits receipt No.696762 for Rs.2,66,888/- dated 22.12.1995 with Bank of Baroda,
Jayanagar Branch now in the name of Defendant No. 1 and 5. • TDR/110/85-999569 in the Joint
names of M.W. Gurjar and first defendant with SBI, Jayanagar II Block.
• STDR 20/3091232 due on 04.04.1998 for Rs.95,000/- at SBI.
• SB Account No.01190030208 with balance Rs.
18,985/-
• All furniture, fittings, gadgets, almirahs, etc. Available in the custody of the first defendant.
Schedule C Details of Share Certificates in the name of M.W. Gurjar.
Name of the Company No. of Shares
1. Kirloskar Electric 2370
2. Kirloskar Brothers 1262
3. Kirloskar Pneumatic 2916
4. Kirloskar Consultants 1140
Total 8700
(The above mentioned properties are hereinafter referred to as 'suit properties' for the sake of
convenience.)
4. Plaint averments reveal that first plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 to 4 are the children of one Mahav
Whaman Gurjar, who died intestate 21.02.1996 leaving behind plaintiffs and defendant Nos.1 to 4 as
legal heirs.
Defendant No.5 is the wife of defendant No.1 and she has been arraigned as party to the proceedings
as some of the bank deposits of late M.W.Gurjar are in her name.
5. It is further contended that Sri M.W. Gurjar was the absolute owner of property bearing No.5,
situated at 10th Main, Jayanagar, 3rd Block, which is more fully described in schedule - A to the
plaint. It was the self acquisition of Sri.M.W.Gurjar. During his life time, he worked in Kirloskar
Group of companies and retired from the service in the year 1973 and was getting honorarium in a
sum of Rs.2,500/- per month, till June 1995.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 4
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
6. It is further contended that Sri. M.W.Gurjar has invested money in stocks and shares as is
described in schedule - B. Defendant No.4 being mentally challenged and slow learner lady, she
could not get married.
Therefore, Sri. M.W.Gurjar has constituted a private trust for her benefit. Plaintiff No.1 and
defendant No.1 have been made as trustees to the said private trust.
Defendant No.4 is working in Bethany's School at Koramangala on nominal salary. Sri. M.W. Gurjar
had acquired shares and stocks during his life time and they are in the custody of defendant No.1,
which are more fully described in schedule - B and C to the plaint as referred to supra.
7. It is further contended in the plaint that defendant No.1 was not accepting any responsibility since
beginning of his life and Sri. M.W.Gurjar was worried about his waywardness and defendant No.1
never shown any care or love towards Sri. M.W.Gurjar. Defendant No.1 was also not interested in
employment since the beginning and therefore, he was put into business line by investing the
amount by Sri. M.W.Gurjar.
8. It is further contended that site in Kothrud extension in Puna out was purchased by Sri.
M.W.Gurjar from his funds in the name of defendant No.1 which was sold and out of the sale
proceeds, an apartment was purchased in Mysore City by defendant No.1. Sri. M.W.Gurjar was not
happy with the behaviour of defendant No.1.
9. It is also alleged that defendant No.1 was in the bad habit of ill-treating defendant No.4 and he
was reluctant and did not accept the responsibility to get himself married. Sri. M.W.Gurjar,
prevailed on defendant No.1 and ultimately defendant No.1 married in the year 1982 when he was
aged 31 years.
10. Plaint averments further reveal that after the marriage, wife of the defendant No.1 followed the
footsteps of defendant No.1 in ill treating M.W.Gurjar and defendant No.4, resulting in physical
assault being made by defendant No.1 and his wife to defendant No.4.
11. Plaintiff No.1 and M.W.Gurjar, some how put up with the misdeeds of defendant No.1, thinking
that first defendant will improve himself as his age advances. Sri. M.W.Gurjar was suffering from
old age ailments like Diabetes and Hypertension and tolerated the misdeeds of defendant No.1. Sri.
M.W.Gurjar had eye sight problem after the death of his wife in the year 1975. Sri. M.W.Gurjar,
became mentally week and he was feeling insecure and he was not acting like a normal person.
Efforts made by the plaintiffs to boost his morale did not yield any positive result. It is also
contended that at the fag end of life of M.W.Gurjar, he was suffering from mental depression
resulting in Senile Dementia. The behaviour of defendant No.1 and his wife largely contributed for
the health problem of M.W.Gurjar and the humiliation was aggravated on the part of defendant No.1
and his wife to M.W.Gurjar. The intension of defendant No.1 and his wife was to knock off all the
assets of M.W.Gurjar by indulging in manipulative practice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 5
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
12. It is contended in the plaint that Sri. M.W.Gurjar suspected foul play by defendant No.1, he
lodged a complaint with Canara Bank and got the locker opened and thereafter on 17.01.1994 the
jewels kept in locker were divided among the defendant No.1, defendant No.4 and plaintiff No.1.
Defendant No.1 having been annoyed with the same, picked up quarrel with plaintiff No.1 and
manhandled him and the said action on the part of defendant No.1 was somehow tolerated by the
first plaintiff.
13. It is further contended in the plaint that the health condition of M.W.Gurjar further deteriorated
in the year 1991 and he was regularly attended by Doctor M.Maiya, Physician and Cardiologist of
Maiya Nursing Home, Jayanagar 1st Block. Eye sight of M.W.Gurjar also became week due to
Diabetes and therefore he was advised to undergo cataract surgery in the year 1991. As such,
cataract surgery was conducted on 02.04.1992 at Prabha Eye hospital and during the Eye surgery,
defendant No.1 and his wife did not take any interest and attended M.W.Gurjar. After discharge
from the hospital, M.W.Gurjar was compelled to stay in the ground floor with the defendant No.1
and at that time, plaintiff No.1 and his wife were prevented from taking care of M.W.Gurjar.
Dr.Maiya and Ramachandra Murthy opined that M.W. Gurjar is suffering Senile Dementia after the
Eye surgery.
14. Taking advantage of fragile health condition of M.W.Gurjar, defendant No.1 picked up the
quarrel with M.W. Gurjar and all the immovable and movable assets held by M.W.Gurjar was
sought to be settled in favour of defendant No.1. Unable to bare with the harassment imparted to
M.W.Gurjar, he has signed on some papers which has been concocted by defendant No.1 as a Will
dated 25.02.1993.
15. It is specifically contended in the plaint that M.W.Gurjar had no testamentary capacity to execute
the alleged Will and defendant No.1 somehow managed to get executed the Will in his favour. It is
also contended that M.W.Gurjar died on 21.02.1996 and immediately after the death, plaintiff No.1
sent common relatives to defendant No.1, seeking partition of the property which was refused by
furnishing the copy of the Will. The plaintiffs therefore, had to file the suit with the aforesaid prayer
against the defendant.
16. In pursuance of the suit summons, defendant Nos.1 and 5 appeared before the Court and filed
detailed written statement accepting the relationship among the parties and date of death of
M.W.Gurjar and his wife. Other allegations in the plaint were denied as false. These defendants
maintained that M.W.Gurjar had a joint locker in Canara Bank, wherein family jewels were kept by
M.W.Gurjar.
17. During the time of Eye surgery, plaintiff No.1 somehow prevailed upon Sri. M.W.Gurjar and his
locker key was stolen away by the plaintiffs. When defendant No.1 and his family went to Mysore,
plaintiff No.1 got the locker forcibly opened and took away the Jewellery. The said incident resulted
in strained relationship between M.W.Gurjar and plaintiff No.1. When the plaintiff No.2 was also to
be operated, plaintiff No.1 and his wife insisted breaking upon of the locker in Canara Bank since the
key had been lost. After breaking open the locker, they took the jewels from the locker.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 6
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
18. It is further contended that after recovery from eye surgery, M.W.Gurjar expressed his
willingness to execute the Will and he contacted his family advocate by name John D'Souza and
executed a Will dated 06.11.1992 bequeathing the entire Gurjar's house in favour of defendant No.1.
19. However, Sri. M.W.Gurjar did not want to take any chance and wanted slightly modify the Will
dated 06.11.1992 and therefore, he executed another Will on 23.02.1993, bequeathing Gurjar's
house in favour of defendant No.1 and defendant No.4 was provided to stay in the house till her life
time. Plaintiff No.1 was permitted to remain in the 1st floor of M.W.Gurjar's house as a tenant for 10
years, subject to paying the rents. The said Will was also registered in the office of Sub Registrar.
20. It is also further contended that these defendants during the life time of M.W.Gurjar, he was
very considerate towards plaintiff No.1 and despite the fact that first plaintiff owned a house in RMV
extension, Bangalore, plaintiff No.1 allowed to occupy a portion of 1st floor in schedule - A property
on a monthly rent.
21. A registered lease deed was also executed in favour of plaintiff No.1 in the year 1982 which was
renewed from time to time. Wife of plaintiff No.1 being doctor, has attested the said lease deed as a
witness.
22. Being not satisfied with the house being given in RMV extension, plaintiff No.1 with an intention
to further grab the assets of Sri. M.W.Gurjar, went to the extent of physically assaulting defendant
No.1 with a tennis racquet.
A criminal case was also registered in this regard. But, it was withdrawn subsequently.
23. They further contended that Sri. M.W.Gurjar led a normal happy life to full extent and the wills
that were executed by him were of free volition and therefore, the suit is to be dismissed.
24. The details of the contents of the Will were also extracted in the written statement. Based on the
rival contentions, learned Trial Judge raised the following issues.
1. Whether the plaintiffs prove that the parties to the suit are in joint possession of the suit 'A'
schedule property and is the joint family property of the parties to the suit?
2. Whether the plaintiffs prove that the Will dated 28.03.1992 and 25.02.1993 executed by Late
M.W.Gurjar are void and unenforceable?
3. Whether the plaintiffs prove that the Defendants 1 and 5 obtained the signatures of Late
M.W.Gurjar without disclosing the reason and transferred S.B.Account of Bank of Baroda,
Jayanagar Branch and also the F.D Amount in the said bank in their joint name?
4. Whether the plaintiffs prove that Late M.W.Gurjar was suffering from 'Senile Dementia' and no
Disposable state of mind and was not mentally sound ?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 7
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
5. Whether the plaintiffs prove that he was paying a monthly rent of Rs.400-00 only towards the
leased out construction site to Late M.W.Gurjar?
6. Whether Defendants 1 and 5 prove that Late M.W.Gurjar has made a Will dated 06.11.1992 and
23.02.1993 bequeathing his property to the first defendant and as alleged in para-13 of the written
statement?
7. Whether Defendants 1 and 5 prove that Late M.W.Gurjar executed the Wills out of the free and
disposal state of mind?
8. Whether Defendants 1 and 5 prove that plaintiff No.1 and his wife put Late M.W.Gurjar in fear
and made to execute a will dated 28.02.1992?
9. Whether Defendants 1 and 5 prove that the court fees paid is insufficient?
10.Whether the plaintiffs prove that they are entitled for 1/3rd share in the suit schedule properties
and for separate possession of 1/3rd share in the 'A' schedule property by metes and bounds?
11.To what order or decree?"
25. In order to prove the plaint averments, plaintiff No.1 Atul M Gurjar got examined
himself as PW-1 and three Doctors by name; Ramachandra Murthy, M. Mayya and
Ajit V Bhide have been examined as PWs-2 to 4 on behalf of the plaintiffs.
26. Plaintiffs relied on eleven documents in support of their case which were
exhibited and marked as Exs.P-1 to Ex.P-11, comprising of Will dated 25.02.1993 as
Ex.P.1, Will dated 28.03.1992 as Ex.P.2, Medical records of Late M.W.Gurjar as
Ex.P.3 to Ex.P.6, Pass Books as Ex.P.7, Assessment order as Ex.P.8, Letter dated
29.06.1984 as Ex.P.9, Personal Diary as Ex.P.10 and Pass Books as Ex.P.11.
27. As against the oral and documentary evidence placed on record on behalf of the
plaintiffs, defendant No.1 Mohan M Gurjar got examined himself as DW-1 and one of
the attesting witnesses to the last Will executed by Sri. M.W. Gurjar, by name Sri.
S.V. Amrute, has been examined as DW-2.
28. In all thirty nine documents were relied on by the defendants which were
exhibited and marked as Exs.D-1 to Ex.D-39 comprising of Letters as Exs.D.1 to 10,
Voucher as Ex.D.11, Bank Challans as Ex.D.12 to 15, Certified copy of the lease Deed
as Ex.D.16, Will as Ex.D.17 to 18, Receipt as Ex.D.19, Acknowledgment as Ex.D.20,
Will as Ex.D.21, Draft of Will as Ex.D.22, Signature of Late M.W.Gurjar as
Ex.D.22(a), Income Tax returns as Ex.D.23, Receipt issued by Bangalore Club as
Ex.D.24, Letter issued by Precision Tooling Systems Ltd. As Ex.D.25, Letter Written
by Late M.W. Gurjar as Ex.D.26, Receipt issued by Late M.W.Gurjar as Ex.D.27,
Letter regarding shares as Ex.D.28-30, Statement of Account as Ex.D.31-32, Credit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 8
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
Advice as Ex.D.33, Interest Warrants as Ex.D.34-35, Bank Challans as Ex.D.36 to 38
and Photograph as Ex.D.39.
29. On conclusion of recording of evidence, learned Trial Judge heard the parties in
detail and on cumulative consideration of 'the oral and documentary evidence placed
on record by the parties, dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs by holding that the
plaintiffs have failed to prove that the suit properties are available for partition and
upheld the last Will executed by Sri. M.W.Gurjar, vide Ex.D-21.
30. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and decree, the plaintiffs have preferred the
present appeal on the following grounds:
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge committed grave error of law and facts in dismissing
the suit filed by the appellants for partition and separate possession of their 1/3rd
share in the plaint schedule properties.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge committed grave error of law and facts in holding that
'it is clear that the Will dated 25.02.1993 Exh.D- 21 executed by late M.W.Gurjar in
favour of Defendant No.1 in respect of suit schedule property is not at all disputed by
plaintiffs herein. This observation is totally perverse because the entire dispute
revolved around the alleged Will at Exh.D-21 in the name of Late M.W.Gurjar.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge misdirected himself on the facts of the case while assuming that the
Will dated 25.02.1993 is not in dispute. Since M.W.Gurjar had no testamentary capacity to create
any Will at that time, the same was disputed by the appellants and medical evidence of the experts
who had treated M.W.Gurjar, during his life time had been placed on record to prove that
M.W.Gurjar was suffering of senile dementia and thus he had no testamentary capacity.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge committed grave error of law and facts in referring to the decision of
the Apex Court in case of Ramabai Padmakar Patil V/s Rukmini Bai Vishnu Ekhande & others,
Reported in ILR 2004 KAR 440 which had no relevance to the facts of the present case. Admittedly
the first respondent had no explanation or answer to give as to why that testator had excluded his
under privileged daughter and the first son from inheriting the huge property belonging to him.
Under these circumstances the observation of Court below to the effect that the first respondent has
removed the suspicion and therefore no importance need be given to that aspect of the matter is
contrary to law.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge failed to deal with the main issue of the suit, which is the
testamentary capacity of M.W.Gurjar. There was strong evidence let in through three medical
experts, who had known the patient for long time before the alleged date of execution of the alleged
Will at Ex.D-21. The fact that the respondent No.1 did not even prove that his father had
testamentary capacity at the time of execution of Ex.D-21 was ignored by the Court. His evidence
before the Trial Court had clearly shows that he was no way associated in getting the medical
attention provided to his father and all such care had been taken by the first appellant. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 9
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
documents produced by the first appellant before the Court below and the medical evidence of the
experts was not dealt properly before dismissing the suit.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge committed grave error of law and facts in assuming that admitting of
signatures of the deceased person is not admission of his testamentary capacity. Merely because the
patient suffering from senile dementia could put his signatures it did not mean that he knew or he
had understood the contents of the papers on which his signature was obtained. Inspite of clear
evidence being placed on record to prove that M.W.Gurjar was not having testamentary capacity,
the learned Judge of the Court below thinks that signatures found on records is enough to assume
due execution of a Will. This erroneous thinking of the Court has resulted in grave injuries.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge erred in referring to the attendance of M.W.Gurjar to a marriage of
the relative as the basis of thinking that the testator had the testamentary capacity. The medical
evidence of the Psychiatrist Dr.Ajit V.Bhide, PW-4 to the effect that the patient had retained only
40% mental capacity and that he had also spoken about degeneration of the brain which had
occurred in case of M.W.Gurjar shows the mental condition of the person. That assessment was
based on examination conducted by him on 24-6-1992 and the Will in the name of M.W.Gurjar had
been created/got up by the first respondent on 25-02-1993. The fact that the senile dementia is a
progressive - degenerative disease ought to have been considered by the Court below to hold that the
first respondent has misused the deficiency in the brain of his father to create the Will as per
Exh.D-21.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge failed to consider the conduct of DW-2, alleged attestor to the Will,
who had suppressed the true facts as could be seen from his depositions and the undisputed medical
records. He had gone to the extent of denying that M.W.Gurjar was suffering of chronic diabetics
from 1966 and falsely deposed to the effect that the relationship between the first appellant and his
father was not good. Reading of his depositions, in the cross examination, makes clear that he is
most undependable witness and his evidence is not trust worthy.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge committed grave error of law and facts in directing the appellants to
value the suit for partition and separate possession under Section 35 (1) of the Karnataka Court Fees
& Suits Valuation Act, 1958 and to pay the Court Fee on the market value. The undisputed fact that
the appellants are living in a portion of the plaint schedule property and they are in possession of
the property sought for partition is not considered in the proper perspective. Hence that part of the
judgment requires to be set aside.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge erred in observing that an eye specialist, PW-2, cannot give his
opinion with regard to mental condition of M.W.Gurjar and similar observations were made against
PW-3. Unfortunately, the most dependable medical evidence let in through experts and senior
Specialists in each field is belittled by the Court below. The evidence of three experts (PW-2, PW-3 &
PW-4) let in to prove that Late M.W.Gurjar had no testamentary capacity either to cancel the Will
dated 28- 03-1992 or to execute the Will dated 25-02-1993 as per Exh.D-21 has not been considered
by the Court as required in law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 10
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
(cid:129) The Court below has failed to consider the false plea and contradictory evidence of DW-1 to find
out the veracity and credibility of his evidence. Even though the first defendant did not establish the
testamentary capacity of Late M.W.Gurjar for executing the Will at Exh.D-21. Under these
circumstances the Court below ought to have negatived Issue No.6.
(cid:129) The Court below failed to consider the circumstances which had proved that the first defendant
had got prepared the Will at Exh.D-21 & D-22 to suit his convenience, in the name of his father,
through his Advocate Sri Jawaji Srinivasulu who had appeared for him in the Court below. The fact
that the deceased M.W.Gurjar had his own legal advisor i.e., Mr.John D'Souza and that there was no
reason for him to have changed the Advocate only for the purpose of executing the Will in favour of
the first respondent to the exclusion of his under privileged daughter and his first son. The alleged
attestor to the Will who had colluded with one of his cousin to create the Will had tendered evidence
which per se snows that he was not dependable witness to prove the mental capacity and due
execution of the Will of Late M.W.Gurjar.
(cid:129) The learned Judge failed to consider the contents of Exh.D-21 which was in the form of abuse to
the first plaintiff. The first respondent had shown his greediness to knock off the property of the
father by getting drafted a Will by making false accusations against the first appellant. When the
appellants were looking after M.W.Gurjar during his life time by providing much required medical
assistance and nourishment there was no circumstances or reason for the beloved father of the first
appellant to have used such nasty language. This also proves that the Will is manipulated by the first
respondent.
(cid:129) The learned City Civil Judge erred in not finding out the truth from the material evidence placed
on record before the Court to prove that each rupee invested to acquire the site at RMV Extension,
Bangalore by the first appellant and for making construction without any financial aid from his
father. On the contrary the Will got manipulated by the first respondent had mentioned that late
M.W.Gurjar had acquired that property in the name of first appellant. This material contradiction
was not given due weightage while deciding the suit.
(cid:129) Looking from any angle, the judgment of the Court below is contrary to law and material placed on
record. Hence the same requires to be set aside.
31. Reiterating the grounds urged in the appeal memorandum, counsel for the appellant - Sri Yeshu
Mishra, vehemently contended that the learned trial Judge has not properly appreciated the
material evidence on record and wrongly dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs resulting in miscarriage
of justice and sought for allowing the appeal.
32. He further contended that the alleged Will marked at Ex.D.21 is not properly proved by the first
defendant, who is the propounder and number of suspicious circumstances that has surrounded the
execution of the Will, though established before the Court, learned trial Judge failed to appreciate
the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 11
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
33. Sri Mishra also contended that oral evidence of P.Ws.2 to 4 who are the doctors who treated
deceased M.W. Gurjar during his life time is totally ignored by the learned trial Judge by accepting
the case of the first defendant in upholding Ex.D.21, resulted in miscarriage of justice.
34. It is further argued by Sri Mishra that the health condition of Sri M.W. Gurjar was very fragile
and material evidence on record amply establish that executant of the Will was under the influence
and clutches of first defendant and therefore, Ex.D.21 is to be held invalid as the first defendant has
taken active role in execution of the alleged Will marked at Ex.D.21.
35. He further pointed that the factual circumstances in this regard is established in the
cross-examination of the defendant witnesses and the same is ignored by the learned trial Judge by
considering the case of the parties.
36. In support of his arguments, he has filed written synopsis and written arguments along with the
following judgments. The same are culled out hereunder:
GENEALOGICAL TREE Sri M.W. Gurjar Wife - Smt. Kamalesh M. Gurjar 1 Sri Atul
Gurjar 2. Sri Mohan 3 Ms. Shyla Gurjar (Son)-P1 Gurjar(Son)-D1 (Daughter) D4
Chitra G-P2 Nandita-Wife - D5 Rahul G-P3 Adithya G (Son) - D2 Siddarth G(Son) -
D3 The Trial Court has given a finding on the issues based on surmises and
conjectures without sifting the evidence on record resulting in an erroneous
judgment.
The essentials to be proved by the propounder of a Will are -
A) The proof of execution and attestation of the Will in terms of Section 68 of the Indian Evidence
Act and Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act.
B) The proof that the Testator had mental capacity to execute a testamentary document/Will.
C) If the Will is attacked tainting it to be executed under suspicious circumstances, then the
propounder of the Will has to dispel the suspicion.
In the present case, the Defendant No.1 has failed to address the above three factors by adducing
proper evidence and the execution of the Will, the mental capacity of the Testator to execute the Will
and the suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will are not satisfactorily explained by adducing
evidence by the Defendant no.1. Therefore, the Will at Ex.D21 has not been proven in accordance
with law. Following is the submission on the same -
A) The proof of execution and attestation of the Will in terms of Section 68 of the Indian Evidence
Act and Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act.
i) It is the mandate of Section 68 of Evidence Act that, if an attesting witness is available then, the
Will has to be proven in a Court of Law by examining the attesting witness, who must prove two
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 12
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
factors i.e. the execution of the Will by the Testator and attestation by both the attesting witnesses.
ii) In the present case one Sri S.V. Amrute (DW2) has been examined as the attesting witness to the
Will dated 25.02.1993 (Ex.D21). On reading of the Affidavit filed as evidence of DW2 it is clear that,
he mentions signatures by Sri M.W. Gurjar on the Will, but fails to prove or even mention
attestation by the other attesting witness Sri S.S. Deshpande who has not been examined. It is the
mandate of Section 63(c) of the Indian Succession Act that two or more attesting witnesses must put
their signatures to the Will on seeing the Testator sign the Will. The signature of the Testator and
the signature of the attesting witnesses has to be proven by the attesting witness as required under
Section 68 of the Evidence Act. If the witness has signed or attested the Will in the absence of each
other then, they must both be examined to prove attestation.
iii) In the case of Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam reported in 2003 (2) SCC 91, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down as follows -
"7. We think it appropriate to look at the relevant provisions, namely, Section 63 of
the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and Sections 68 and 71 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 which read:
Section 63 of the Succession Act *63. Execution of unprivileged wills-Every testator,
not being a soldier employed in an expedition nor engaged in actual warfare, or an
airman so employed or engaged, or a mariner at sea, shall execute his will according
to the following rules-
(a)-(b)***
(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the
testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some other person sign the will,
in the presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received from the testator
a personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or of the signature of such
other person; and each of the witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the
testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the
same time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary."
Section 68 of the Evidence Act "68. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested-If
a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting
witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting
witness alive, and subject to the process of the court and capable of giving evidence:
Provided.....
Section 71 of the Evidence Act
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 13
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
8. To say a will has been duly executed the requirements mentioned in clauses (a), (b)
and (c) of Section 63 of the Succession Act are to be complied with ie. (a) the testator
has to sign or affix his mark to the will, or it has got to be signed by some other
person in his presence and by his direction; (b) that the signature or mark of the
testator, or the signature of the person signing at his direction, has to appear at a
place from which it could appear that by that mark or signature the document is
intended to have effect as a will; (c) the most important point with which we are
presently concerned in this appeal, is that the will has to be attested by two or more
witnesses and each of these witnesses must have seen the testator sign or affix his
mark to the will, or must have seen some other person sign the will in the presence
and by the direction of the testator, or must have received from the testator a
personal acknowledgement of signature or mark, or of the signature of such other
person, and each of the witnesses has to sign the will in the presence of the testator.
9. It is thus clear that one of the requirements of due execution of a will is its
attestation by two or more witnesses, which is mandatory.
10...................It is true that Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not say that both or
all the attesting witnesses must be examined. But at least one attesting witness has to
be called for proving due execution of the will as envisaged in Section 63. Although
Section 63 of the Succession Act requires that a will has to be attested at least by two
witnesses, Section 68 of the Evidence Act provides that a document, which is
required by law to be attested, shall not be used as evidence until one attesting
witness at least has been examined for the purpose of proving its due execution if
such witness is alive and capable of giving evidence and subject to the process of the
court. In a way, Section 68 gives a concession to those who want to prove and
establish a will in a court of law by examining at least one attesting witness even
though the will has to be attested at least by two witnesses mandatorily under Section
63 of the Succession Act. But what is significant and to be noted is that one attesting
witness examined should be in a position to prove the execution of a will. To put in
other words, if one attesting witness can prove execution of the will in terms of clause
(c) of Section 63 viz.
attestation by two attesting witnesses in the manner contemplated therein, the examination of the
other attesting witness can be dispensed with. The one attesting witness examined, in his evidence
has to satisfy the attestation of a will by him and the other attesting witness in order to prove there
was due execution of the will. If the attesting witness examined besides his attestation does not, in
his evidence, satisfy the requirements of attestation of the will by the other witness also it falls short
of attestation of will at least by two witnesses for the simple reason that the execution of the will
does not merely mean the signing of it by the testator but it means fulfilling and proof of all the
formalities required under Section 63 of the Succession Act. Where one attesting witness examined
to prove the will under Section 68 of the Evidence Act fails to prove the due execution of the will
then the other available attesting witness has to be called to supplement his evidence to make it
complete in all respects. Where one attesting witness is examined and he fails to prove the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 14
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
attestation of the will by the other witness there will be deficiency in meeting the mandatory
requirements of Section 68 of the Evidence Act.
Similar view has been expressed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the Judgments reported in 2008
(15) SCC 365, 2003 (2) SCC 91,2007 (9) SCC 728, 2009 (4) SCC 780.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the matter of Yumnam ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi v. Yumnam Joykumar
Singh & others reported in 2009 (4) SCC 780 has held as follows:
Para 11. As per provisions of Section 63 of the Succession Act, for the due execution of
a will (1) the testator should sign or affix his mark to the will;
(2) the signature or the mark of the testator should be so placed that it should appear
that it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a will;
(3) the will should be attested by two or more witnesses, and (4) each of the said
witnesses must have seen the testator signing or affixing his mark to the will and each
of them should sign the will in the presence of the testator Para 12. The attestation of
the will in the manner stated above is not an empty formality. It means signing a
document for the purpose of testifying of the signatures of the executant. The attested
(sic attesting) witness should put his signature on the will animo attestandi. It is not
necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time and no particular
form of attestation is necessary Since a will is required by law to be attested, its
execution has to be proved in the manner laid down in the section and the Evidence
Act which requires that at least one attesting witness has to be examined for the
purpose of proving the execution of such a document Para 13. Therefore, having
regard to the provisions of Section 68 of the Evidence Act and Section 63 of the
Succession Act, a will to be valid should be attested by two or more witnesses in the
manner provided therein and the propounder thereof should examine one attesting
witness to prove the will. The attesting witness should speak not only about the
testator's signature or affixing his mark to the will but also that each of the witnesses
had signed the will in the presence of the testator.
In the latest Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court on the question of execution and attestation of
the Will, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that proving execution of the Will as required under
Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act and Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act are mandatory.
In the case of V. Kalyanaswamy v. L. Bakthavatsalam (2020 SCC OnLine SC 584), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held as follows:-
Para 83. We are of the view that Section 69 of the Evidence Act manifests a departure
from the requirement embodied in Section 68 of the Evidence Act. In the case of a
Will, which is required to be executed in the mode provided in Section 63 of the
Indian Succession Act, when there is an attesting witness available, the Will is to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 15
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
proved by examining him. He must not only prove that the attestation was done by
him but he must also prove the attestation by the other attesting witness. This is, no
doubt, subject to the situation which is contemplated in Section 71 of the Evidence
Act which allows other evidence to be adduced in proof of the Will among other
documents where the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of
the Will or the other document. In other words, the fate of the transferee or a legatee
under a document, which is required by law to be attested, is not placed at the mercy
of the attesting witness and the law enables proof to be effected of the document
despite denial of the execution of the document by the attesting witness.
In the case of Venkatachala Iyengar v. Thimmajamma & Ors a Full Bench of the
Hon'ble Suprme Court has held that as follows:-
Para 18. What is the true legal position in the matter of proof of wills? It is well-
known that the proof of wills presents a recurring topic for decision in courts and
there are a large number of judicial pronouncements on the subject. The party
propounding a will or otherwise making a claim under a will is no doubt seeking to
prove a document and, in deciding how it is to be proved, we must inevitably refer to
the statutory provisions which govern the proof of documents. Sections 67 and 68 of
the Evidence Act are relevant for this purpose. Under Section 67, if a document is
alleged to be signed by any person, the signature of the said person must be proved to
be in his handwriting, and for proving such a handwriting under Sections 45 and 47
of the Act the opinions of experts and of persons acquainted with the handwriting of
the person concerned are made relevant. Section 68 deals with the proof of the
execution of the document required by law to be attested, and it provides that such a
document shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been
called for the purpose of proving its execution. These provisions prescribe the
requirements and the nature of proof which must be satisfied by the party who relies
on a document in a court of law. Similarly, Sections 59 and 63 of the Indian
Succession Act are also relevant. Section 59 provides that every person of sound
mind, not being a minor, may dispose of his property by will and the three
illustrations to this section indicate what is meant by the expression "a person of
sound mind" in the context. Section 63 requires that the testator shall sign or affix his
mark to the will or it shall be signed by some other person in his presence and by his
direction and that the signature or mark shall be so made that it shall appear that it
was intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a will. This section also requires
that the will shall be attested by two or more witnesses as prescribed. Thus the
question as to whether the will set up by the propounder is proved to be the last will
of the testator has to be decided in the light of these provisions. Has the testator
signed the will? Did he understand the nature and effect of the dispositions in the
will? Did he put his signature to the will knowing what it contained? Stated broadly it
is the decision of these questions which determines the nature of the finding on the
question of the proof of wills. It would prima facie be true to say that the will has to
be proved like any other document except as to the special requirements of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 16
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
attestation prescribed by Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act. As in the case of
proof of other documents so in the case of proof of wills it would be idle to expect
proof with mathematical certainty. The test to be applied would be the usual test of
the satisfaction of the prudent mind in such matters.
The above proposition has been followed in various Supreme Court's Judgments
including Judgments reported in 2010 (5) SCC 770 and Judgment of this Hon'ble
Court in the case of S. Krishnarao v.M.J. Vittal & Ors.
In view of the above requirement which is absolutely mandatory for proof of the Will,
the witness DW2 Sri S.V. Amrute has failed to prove the attestation by the other
attesting witness. In such circumstances, the execution and attestation of the alleged
Will dated 25.02.1993 Ex.D21 has not been proven as per the requirements of law
laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Janki Narayan Bhoir's case.
The reading of the entire Affidavit filed as evidence for DW2 and his
cross-examination do not prove to any extent whatsoever the attestation of the Will
by the other attesting witness and at the same time, the other attesting witness has
not been examined to prove attestation. In view of the same, the alleged Will dated
25.02.1993 Ex.D21 has not been proved and the Will should not have been upheld by
the Trial Court on this count alone for the fundamental and mandatory requirement
not being complied.
B) The proof whether the Testator had mental capacity to execute a testamentary
document/Will.
i) It is the duty of the propounder of the Will to satisfy the Court that the Testator or
the Executor of the Will had sound state of mind to comprehend and understand the
effect of execution of the Will or in other words, he had sound mental capacity to
execute a testamentary document.
In the case of Balathandayutham and another v. Ezhilarasan reported in 2010 (5) SCC 770, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:-
Para 15. Going by this test, as we must, we find that both the wills, Ext. B-19 and Ext
B-20 are surrounded by suspicious circumstances. The ratio in H. Venkatachala [AIR
1959 SC 443] is that in such a situation the Court "would naturally expect that all
legitimate suspicions should be completely removed before the document is accepted
as the last will of the testator. The presence of such suspicious circumstances
naturally tends to make the initial onus very heavy, and, unless it is satisfactorily
discharged, courts will be reluctant to treat the document as the last will of the
testator." (See AIR p. 452, para 20.) Following the aforesaid principle, this Court is
constrained to hold that the appellants did not succeed in discharging its onus of
removing the suspicious circumstances surrounding Exts. B-19 and B-20. As such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 17
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
there is no reason for us to find any error in the judgment of the High Court.
Similar view has been taken in the Judgment reported in 2009 (3) SCC 687.
Mere registration of Will is not sufficient to remove suspicion reported in 2010 (5)
SCC 274.
ii) The burden of proof of sound mental capacity of Testator at the time of execution
of the Will is on the propounder. A feeble and uncertain mind affected by mental
conditions which could render the Testator incapacitated to execute a testamentary
document would lead to a conclusion that the Testator had no soundness of mind to
make a Will.
iii) The Defendants have not produced any evidence to show that Sri M.W. Gurjar
had a sound state of mind at the time of executing the alleged Will dated 25.02.1993
Ex.D21. However, if the evidence of DW2 has to be considered he says that Sri M.W.
Gurjar was not a diabetic patient. The said statement is contrary to the fact that Sri
M.W. Gurjar was diabetic since 1967 and there is documentary evidence produced at
Ex.P6 in a letter dated 24.10.1967 by Dr. M. Shivaram for the same. He further says
that, he is not aware that Sri M.W. Gurjar was admitted to Maiya Nursing Home on
several occasions and he does not know the doctors who treated Sri M.W. Gurjar.
iv) DW2 also states that, he is not aware that due to old age Sri M.W. Gurjar was suffering from
Senility.
v) DW2 has not stated anything about the health of Sri M.W. Gurjar in detail and all his statements
are contrary to the medical records produced at Ex.P3 to Ex. P6.
vi) Three witnesses have been examined as PW2 to PW4 who are doctors and who have spoken
about the mental health of Sri M.W. Gurjar being affected by Senile Dementia. The medical record
produced at Ex.P3 is from Maiya Nursing Home on 02.06.1992 there is a statement diagnosing and
mentioning the state of mind of Sri M.W. Gurjar which reads " Has episodes of confusion and
hallucination".
vii) Similarly, at Ex. P5 there is a mention by doctor Ajith V. Bhide (Ex.P5). "Patient seems to have
been hallucinating on and off following cataract surgery about two months ago. Also, frequently
seems disoriented, irritable. Further it is stated at Ex. P5 on 25.06.1992 as "answers many questions
relevantly but tersely. However, gives inappropriate answers to some questions. Perplexity →→ mild
emotional liability + Orient Poor to time & place. Better oriented person. Judgment impaired." Such
documentary evidence has not been impeached in any manner whatsoever.
viii) The Trial Court has failed to appreciate the medical records and the evidence of PW2 to PW4
and brushed it aside for no reasons whatsoever. Merely, alleging that the 1st Plaintiff's wife was
doctor and she has played a role with the doctors to show that Sri M.W. Gurjar did not have sound
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 18
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
state of mind. Merely, making such allegation without any proof especially in the light of the fact
that the 1st Defendant has admitted that the Plaintiff and his wife were attending to Sri M.W. Gurjar
for all his medical needs reflects that the Trial Court has not given due credence to the evidence of
the doctors PW2 to PW4 who are reputed medical practitioners in Bengaluru for several decades.
C) If the Will is attacked tainting it to be executed under suspicious circumstances, then the
propounder of the Will has to dispel the suspicion.
The suspicious circumstances shrouding the execution of the Will are as follows:-
i) The Plaintiff No.1 Sri Atul Gurjar is named as an Executor along with Defendant
No.1 in the Will dated 25.02.1993 (Ex.D21) An Executor is named by a Testator only
if he has good relationship and faith in him. The allegation that the 1st Plaintiff did
not have good relationship with Sri M.W. Gurjar is therefore false. Therefore,
disinheritance of the 1st Plaintiff in the Will gives raise to suspicious circumstances.
ii) Sri Javaji Srinivasalu, Advocate is the lawyer who has drafted the Will (Ex.D21). The same Sri
Javaji Srinivasalu has represented the 1st Defendant and filed the written statement. The 1st
Defendant refused to initially admit that Sri Javaji Srinivasalu was his advocate in the suit during
his cross- examination. The same gives raise to suspicious circumstances that the 1st Defendant has
taken active role in preparation of the Will along with his Advocate Sri Javaji Srinivasalu.
iii) Sri. Javaji Srinivasalu has not been examined and the Draft Will Ex D22 has been produced from
the custody of the Defendant No.1 which raises serious suspicion about the draft Will as well as the
Will dated 25.2.1993 Ex D21. Adverse inference should have been drawn against the Defendant no.1
fro not examining Sri. Javaji Srinivasulu who could have thrown light on the mental capacity as well
as the draft Will.
iv) There are two signatures of Sri M.W. Gurjar on each page of the Will which has not been
explained, which also gives raise to suspicion.
v) 4th Defendant Ms. Shyla Gurjar who is a slow leaner and not very worldly wise has also been
disinherited. A father would not disinherit a daughter who could not take care of herself generally.
vi) The Fixed Deposits of Sri M.W. Gurjar have been appropriated by the 1st Defendant and no
accounts and details have been provided although the said proceeds from the Fixed Deposits were
provided to be equally distributed among the two sons, but the same were appropriated by the 1st
Defendant alone. On the contrary, the 1st Defendant admits that the share in the jewellery was given
to him and his sister's share in the jewellery was also given to the 1st Defendant. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held in the case of V. Kalyanaswamy V. Bakhtavatsalam that if an incorrect
statement is made in the Will then, it gives right to suspicion.
vii) The 1st Defendant has not produced any evidence to show that he has taken care of his father
except for his oral testimony. He has not even produced a medical record or any other kind of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 19
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
evidence to prove that he has taken care of his father or Sri M.W. Gurjar had a sound and disposing
state of mind.
viii) A suspicion arises in view of the fact that Sri M.W. Gurjar executed a Will dated 28.03.1992
which is a registered document (Ex.P2) and further he has executed another Will dated 06.11.1992
(Ex.D18) which is attested by a Notary Sri John D'Souza and yet another Will dated 25.02.1993
(Ex.D21) within a span of 11 months gives raise to suspicious circumstances that he had uncertain
and feeble state of mind or the said Wills were being made under some external forces and not on
his own volition and free consent. All the three Wills are found in the custody of the 1st Defendant,
but the 1st Defendant does not produce the original of the Will dated 28.03.1992 which is a
registered Will and the property was distributed among the grandchildren by Sri M.W. Gurjar. The
non-production of the said Will by Defendant No.1 creates suspicious circumstance.
ix) There is a factual mistake in the Will where it is said that a Plot was purchased by Sri M.W.
Gurjar at RMV Extension, Bengaluru for the 1st Plaintiff. There is no evidence for the same
whatsoever. On the contrary, Ex.D1 goes to show that Sri M.W. Gurjar is questioning as to how the
1st Plaintiff got money to pay for the RMV Extension Plot. The accounts for having put up
construction by the 1st Plaintiff in the RMV Extension Plot have been produced at Ex.P10.
On the contrary, the 1st Defendant admits that Sri M.W. Gurjar has purchased a Plot for him at an
upmarket locality at Kothrud in Pune. The said fact has been suppressed and only in
cross-examination the 1st Defendant admits to the same. Therefore, there was no reason for Sri
M.W. Gurjar to disinherit the 1st Plaintiff.
x) In the Will dated 06.11.1992 (Ex.D18) Sri M.W. Gurjar is stated to have mentioned that a sum of
Rs.1,70,000/- was to be paid to the 1st Plaintiff as he has put up construction, but in the Will dated
25.02.1993 the said statement is not made, which is a serious suspicious circumstance.
xi) DW2 the attesting witness goes to state that Rs.2,50,000/- was paid by Sri M.W. Gurjar for
construction of building in RMV Extension by 1st Plaintiff. The same is not the case of the 1st
Defendant or statements in any of the Wills of Sri M.W. Gurjar. On the contrary, it has been stated
that the construction was put up by the 1st Plaintiff at his expense. DW2 is therefore deposing to
please 1st Defendant.
In the matter of Shivakumar and others V. Sharanabasappa reported in 2021 (11) SCC 277 and in
H.Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N.Thimmajamma reported in AIR 1959 SC 443, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that the disposing state of mind has to be proved at the time of execution of the Will
by the propounder of the Will to satisfy the conscience of the Court, failing which the Will has to be
disbelieved.
The Defendant has failed to prove the Issues No.6 to 8.
1. No independent witness has been examined to prove the sound state of mind of Sri M.W. Gurjar
although Issue No.7 is very clear in resting the burden of proving sound and disposing state of mind
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 20
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
on 1st Defendant. Except for the self-serving statement that Sri M.W. Gurjar was having sound state
of mind, no evidence has been produced for the same.
2. On the other hand, PW2 to PW4 have been examined to show that Sri M.W. Gurjar was having
serious issues of comprehension and he had hallucination, lack of judgment and fear of death, etc.
as evidenced from medical records at Ex.P3 to Ex. P6. The 1st Defendant and DW2 go to an extent of
denying that Sri M.W. Gurjar was diabetic since 1967 itself which is contrary to the medical records.
3. There is absolutely no evidence to prove that Plaintiff No.1 and his wife put fear in the mind of Sri
M.W. Gurjar to execute Will dated 28.02.1992. In fact, the said Will is in the custody of the 1st
Defendant and he has not produced the original although he admits that he had read the same from
the papers found from Sri M.W. Gurjar's room after his demise. The same calls for drawing adverse
inference against the 1st Defendant for suppressing material documents from the Court."
Citations Referred By Advocate for
Appellant
1. Lalitaben Jayantilal Popat v.
Pragnaben Jamnadas Kataria, (2008) 15 SCC
19. Mr Priyadarshi has drawn our attention to a decision of this Court in Joyce Primrose Prestor v.
Vera Marie Vas [(1996) 9 SCC 324] . In that case, the will was a "holograph will". The writing of the
testatrix was proved. The question which arose for consideration therein before this Court was as to
whether the will was surrounded by suspicious circumstances. This Court noticed a passage from
the Laws of Will in India and Pakistan, by Mantha Ramamurthi, at pp. 81-82, which reads as under:
(SCC pp. 330-31, para 13) "If a will appears on the face of it to have been duly executed and attested
in accordance with the requirements of the Act, the maxim omnia presumuntur rite esse acta,
applies, unless it is clearly proved by the attesting witnesses that the will is not in fact duly executed.
The court of probate has long been accustomed to give great weight to the presumption of due
execution arising from the regularity ex facie of the testamentary paper produced where no
suspicion of fraud has occurred.
The maxim omnia presumuntur rite esse acta is an expression in a short form, of a reasonable
probability, and of the propriety in point of law on acting on such probability. The maxim expresses
an inference which may reasonably be drawn when an intention to do some formal act is
established. In Blake v. Knight [(1843) 3 Curt 547 : 1 LT OS 208] Sir Herbert Jenner Fust observed:
'is it absolutely necessary to have positive affirmative testimony by the subscribed
witnesses that the will was actually signed in their presence, or actually
acknowledged in their presence? Is it absolutely necessary, under all circumstances
that the witnesses should concur in stating that these acts took place? Or is it
absolutely necessary, where the witnesses will not swear positively, that the court
should pronounce against the validity of the will? I think these are not absolute
requisites to the validity of the will.' Consequently, 'where the evidence of attesting
witnesses is vague or doubtful or even conflicting the court may take into
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 21
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
consideration the circumstances of the case and judge from them collectively whether
the requirements of the statute were complied with; in other words the court may, on
consideration of other evidence or of the whole circumstances of the case, come to
the conclusion that their recollection is at fault, that their evidence is of a suspicious
character, or that they were wilfully misleading the court, and accordingly disregard
their testimony and pronounce in favour of the will."
(emphasis supplied) This Court held that a greater degree of presumption arises in
the case of "holograph wills". The said finding was arrived at as the writing of the will
and signature of the testator were admitted; there was also due and proper
attestation in accordance with the relevant statutory provisions.
This Court held that no suspicious circumstances appeared on the face of the
instrument and it was found to be moderate and rational.
21. Reliance has also been placed by Mr Priyadarshi on a decision of this Court in
Ramabai Padmakar Patil v. Rukminibai Vishnu Vekhande [(2003) 8 SCC 537] . In
that case itself this Court held: (SCC pp. 541-42, para 5) "5. Before we advert to the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be useful to briefly
notice the legal position regarding acceptance and proof of a will. Section 63 of the
Succession Act, 1925 deals with execution of unprivileged wills. It lays down that the
testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the will or it shall be signed by some other
person in his presence and by his direction. It further lays down that the will shall be
attested by two or more witnesses, each of whom has seen the testator signing or
affixing his mark to the will or has seen some other person sign the will, in the
presence and on the direction of the testator and each of the witnesses shall sign the
will in the presence of the testator. Section 68 of the Evidence Act mandates
examination of one attesting witness in proof of a will, whether registered or not."
It was furthermore held: (Ramabai case [(2003) 8 SCC 537] , SCC p. 544, para 8) "8.
... In P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar [1995 Supp (2) SCC
664] it has been held that it is the duty of the propounder of the will to remove all the
suspected features, but there must be real, germane and valid suspicious features and
not fantasy of the doubting mind."
The said decision, therefore, is of no assistance to us.
23. In Janki Narayan Bhoir [(2003) 2 SCC 91] while dealing with the question elaborately, this
Court held: (SCC pp. 97-99, paras 8-10) "8. To say a will has been duly executed the requirements
mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 63 of the Succession Act are to be complied with i.e.
(a) the testator has to sign or affix his mark to the will, or it has got to be signed by some other
person in his presence and by his direction; (b) that the signature or mark of the testator, or the
signature of the person signing at his direction, has to appear at a place from which it could appear
that by that mark or signature the document is intended to have effect as a will; (c) the most
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 22
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
important point with which we are presently concerned in this appeal, is that the will has to be
attested by two or more witnesses and each of these witnesses must have seen the testator sign or
affix his mark to the will, or must have seen some other person sign the will in the presence and by
the direction of the testator, or must have received from the testator a personal acknowledgement of
signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person, and each of the witnesses has to sign the
will in the presence of the testator.
9. It is thus clear that one of the requirements of due execution of a will is its attestation by two or
more witnesses, which is mandatory.
10. Section 68 of the Evidence Act speaks of as to how a document required by law to be attested can
be proved. According to the said section, a document required by law to be attested shall not be used
as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its
execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the court and capable
of giving evidence. It flows from this section that if there be an attesting witness alive capable of
giving evidence and subject to the process of the court, has to be necessarily examined before the
document required by law to be attested can be used in an evidence. On a combined reading of
Section 63 of the Succession Act with Section 68 of the Evidence Act, it appears that a person
propounding the will has got to prove that the will was duly and validly executed. That cannot be
done by simply proving that the signature on the will was that of the testator but must also prove
that attestations were also made properly as required by clause (c) of Section 63 of the Succession
Act. It is true that Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not say that both or all the attesting witnesses
must be examined. But at least one attesting witness has to be called for proving due execution of
the will as envisaged in Section
63. Although Section 63 of the Succession Act requires that a will has to be attested at least by two
witnesses, Section 68 of the Evidence Act provides that a document, which is required by law to be
attested, shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been examined for the
purpose of proving its due execution if such witness is alive and capable of giving evidence and
subject to the process of the court. In a way, Section 68 gives a concession to those who want to
prove and establish a will in a court of law by examining at least one attesting witness even though
the will has to be attested at least by two witnesses mandatorily under Section 63 of the Succession
Act. But what is significant and to be noted is that one attesting witness examined should be in a
position to prove the execution of a will. To put in other words, if one attesting witness can prove
execution of the will in terms of clause
(c) of Section 63 viz. attestation by two attesting witnesses in the manner contemplated therein, the
examination of the other attesting witness can be dispensed with. The one attesting witness
examined, in his evidence has to satisfy the attestation of a will by him and the other attesting
witness in order to prove there was due execution of the will. If the attesting witness examined
besides his attestation does not, in his evidence, satisfy the requirements of attention of the will by
the other witness also it falls short of attestation of will at least by two witnesses for the simple
reason that the execution of the will [Ed.: Emphasis in original.] does not merely mean the signing
of it by the testator but it means fulfilling and proof of all the formalities required under Section 63
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 23
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
of the Succession Act. Where one attesting witness examined to prove the will under Section 68 of
the Evidence Act fails to prove the due execution of the will then the other available attesting witness
has to be called to supplement his evidence to make it complete in all respects. Where one attesting
witness is examined and he fails to prove the attestation of the will by the other witness there will be
deficiency in meeting the mandatory requirements of Section 68 of the Evidence Act."
(emphasis supplied) Following the said decision, as also the other decisions in Benga Behera
[(2007) 9 SCC 728 :
(2007) 7 Scale 228] , this Court held: (SCC p. 735, para 21) "21. It was also not
necessary for the appellants to confront him with his signature in the xerox copy of
the will, inasmuch as the same had not appeared in the certified copy. Execution of a
will must conform to the requirement of Section 63 of the Succession Act, in terms
whereof a will must be attested by two or more witnesses. Execution of a will,
however, can only be proved in terms of Section 68 of the Evidence Act. In terms of
the said provision, at least one attesting witness has to be examined to prove
execution of a will."
2. Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam, (2003) 2 SCC 91
10. Section 68 of the Evidence Act speaks of as to how a document required by law to be attested can
be proved. According to the said section, a document required by law to be attested shall not be used
as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its
execution, if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the court and capable
of giving evidence. It flows from this section that if there be an attesting witness alive capable of
giving evidence and subject to the process of the court, has to be necessarily examined before the
document required by law to be attested can be used in an evidence. On a combined reading of
Section 63 of the Succession Act with Section 68 of the Evidence Act, it appears that a person
propounding the will has got to prove that the will was duly and validly executed. That cannot be
done by simply proving that the signature on the will was that of the testator but must also prove
that attestations were also made properly as required by clause (c) of Section 63 of the Succession
Act. It is true that Section 68 of the Evidence Act does not say that both or all the attesting witnesses
must be examined. But at least one attesting witness has to be called for proving due execution of
the will as envisaged in Section
63. Although Section 63 of the Succession Act requires that a will has to be attested at least by two
witnesses, Section 68 of the Evidence Act provides that a document, which is required by law to be
attested, shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been examined for the
purpose of proving its due execution if such witness is alive and capable of giving evidence and
subject to the process of the court. In a way, Section 68 gives a concession to those who want to
prove and establish a will in a court of law by examining at least one attesting witness even though
the will has to be attested at least by two witnesses mandatorily under Section 63 of the Succession
Act. But what is significant and to be noted is that one attesting witness examined should be in a
position to prove the execution of a will. To put in other words, if one attesting witness can prove
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 24
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
execution of the will in terms of clause
(c) of Section 63 viz. attestation by two attesting witnesses in the manner contemplated therein, the
examination of the other attesting witness can be dispensed with. The one attesting witness
examined, in his evidence has to satisfy the attestation of a will by him and the other attesting
witness in order to prove there was due execution of the will. If the attesting witness examined
besides his attestation does not, in his evidence, satisfy the requirements of attestation of the will by
the other witness also it falls short of attestation of will at least by two witnesses for the simple
reason that the execution of the will does not merely mean the signing of it by the testator but it
means fulfilling and proof of all the formalities required under Section 63 of the Succession Act.
Where one attesting witness examined to prove the will under Section 68 of the Evidence Act fails to
prove the due execution of the will then the other available attesting witness has to be called to
supplement his evidence to make it complete in all respects. Where one attesting witness is
examined and he fails to prove the attestation of the will by the other witness there will be deficiency
in meeting the mandatory requirements of Section 68 of the Evidence Act.
11. Section 71 of the Evidence Act is in the nature of a safeguard to the mandatory provisions of
Section 68 of the Evidence Act, to meet a situation where it is not possible to prove the execution of
the will by calling the attesting witnesses, though alive. This section provides that if an attesting
witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the will, its execution may be proved by other
evidence. Aid of Section 71 can be taken only when the attesting witnesses, who have been called,
deny or fail to recollect the execution of the document to prove it by other evidence. Section 71 has
no application to a case where one attesting witness, who alone had been summoned, has failed to
prove the execution of the will and other attesting witnesses though are available to prove the
execution of the same, for reasons best known, have not been summoned before the court. It is clear
from the language of Section 71 that if an attesting witness denies or does not recollect execution of
the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence. However, in a case where an attesting
witness examined fails to prove the due execution of will as required under clause
(c) of Section 63 of the Succession Act, it cannot be said that the will is proved as per Section 68 of
the Evidence Act. It cannot be said that if one attesting witness denies or does not recollect the
execution of the document, the execution of will can be proved by other evidence dispensing with
the evidence of other attesting witnesses though available to be examined to prove the execution of
the will. Yet another reason as to why other available attesting witnesses should be called when the
one attesting witness examined fails to prove due execution of the will is to avert the claim of
drawing adverse inference under Section 114 Illustration (g) of the Evidence Act. Placing the best
possible evidence, in the given circumstances, before the Court for consideration, is one of the
cardinal principles of the Indian Evidence Act. Section 71 is permissive and an enabling section
permitting a party to lead other evidence in certain circumstances. But Section 68 is not merely an
enabling section. It lays down the necessary requirements, which the court has to observe before
holding that a document is proved. Section 71 is meant to lend assistance and come to the rescue of
a party who had done his best, but driven to a state of helplessness and impossibility, cannot be let
down without any other means of proving due execution by "other evidence" as well. At the same
time Section 71 cannot be read so as to absolve a party of his obligation under Section 68 read with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 25
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
Section 63 of the Act and liberally allow him, at his will or choice to make available or not a
necessary witness otherwise available and amenable to the jurisdiction of the court concerned and
confer a premium upon his omission or lapse, to enable him to give a go-by to the mandate of law
relating to the proof of execution of a will.
12. Turning to the facts of the case on hand, it is evident that only one attesting witness Prabhakar
Sinkar, examined in the case, did not prove the execution of the will inasmuch as he did not prove
the attestation of the will by the other attesting witness Wagle who though available was not
examined. The scribe examined in the case was not an attesting witness, which is clear from the
evidence on record and as rightly conceded so by the learned counsel for the respondent before us.
Hence, it is unnecessary to go into the question whether the scribe in this case could or could not be
an attesting witness. The evidence of Sinkar, the only attesting witness, does not satisfy the
mandatory requirements of Section 68 of the Evidence Act. We are not in a position to accept the
contention urged on behalf of the respondent that the evidence of other witnesses, namely, that of
the respondent and the scribe could be considered under Section 71 of the Evidence Act. Section 71
has no application when the one attesting witness, who alone has been summoned, has failed to
prove the execution of the will and the other attesting witness though available has not been
examined. When the document is not proved as mandatorily required under Section 68 of the
Evidence Act, the provision of Section 71 of the Evidence Act, which is permissive, and enabling in
certain circumstances as discussed above does not help the respondent. In Vishnu Ramkrishna v.
Nathu Vithal [AIR 1949 Bom 266 : 51 Bom LR 245] Chagla, C.J., speaking for the Division Bench in
similar circumstances has stated that although Section 63 of the Succession Act requires that a will
has to be attested by two witnesses, Section 68 of the Evidence Act permits the execution of the will
to be proved by only one attesting witness being called. Where the attesting witness, who is called to
prove the execution, is not in a position to prove the attestation of the will by the second witness, the
evidence of the witness called falls short of the mandatory requirements of Section 68. Section 71 of
the Evidence Act can only be requisitioned when the attesting witnesses who have been called failed
to prove the execution of the will by reason of either denying their own signatures or denying the
signature of the testator or having no recollection as to the execution of the document. This section
has no application when one attesting witness has failed to prove the execution of the will and the
other attesting witnesses were available who could prove the execution if they were called.
3. Benga Behera v. Braja Kishore Nanda, (2007) 9 SCC 728
40. It is now well settled that requirement of the proof of execution of a will is the same as in case of
certain other documents, for example gift or mortgage. The law requires that the proof of execution
of a will has to be attested at least by two witnesses. At least one attesting witness has to be
examined to prove execution and attestation of the will. Further, it is to be proved that the executant
had signed and/or given his thumb impression in presence of at least two attesting witnesses and
the attesting witnesses had put their signatures in presence of the executant. (See Madhukar D.
Shende v. Tarabai Aba Shedage [(2002) 2 SCC 85] ; Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo
Kadam [(2003) 2 SCC 91] and Bhagat Ram v. Suresh [(2003) 12 SCC 35].)
4. S.R. Srinivasa v. S. Padmavathamma, (2010) 5 SCC 274
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 26
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
57. Since there were suspicious circumstances, it was necessary for the defendants to explain the
same. The registration of the will by itself was not sufficient to remove the suspicion. The first
appellate court also notices that even in cases where the execution of the will is admitted, at least
one attesting witness of the will has to be examined to receive the will in evidence. DW 2, who has
been examined as the scribe of the will, has given no plausible reasons as to why the will was
presented twice before the Sub-Registrar for registration. Nor is it stated by this witness as to why
the will was not registered on the first occasion.
5. N. Kamalam v. Ayyasamy, (2001) 7 SCC 503
27. It was next contended that in the event of there being an intent to attest, that itself should be
sufficient compliance with the requirement of law. While the introduction of the concept of animus
to attest cannot be doubted in any way whatsoever and we also do feel it relevant in the matter of
proof of a document requiring attestation by relevant statutes but the same is dependent on the fact
situation. The learned Judge as noticed above has himself recorded that there are two significant
requirements of the term "attest" viz. that the attestor should witness the execution thereby thus
implying his presence on the occasion and secondly that he should certify for execution by
subscribing his name as a witness which implies consciousness and intention to attest.
Unfortunately, however, the factual score presently available does not but depict otherwise. The
scribe's presence cannot be doubted but the issue is not what it is being said to be in support of the
appeal that the scribe having subscribed his signature, question of further attestation would not
arise -- this issue unfortunately, we are not in a position to lend concurrence with. The will as
produced, records the following at p. 4 thereof: (p. 106 of the paper- book) "WitnessesLTI of
Masanae Gowder sd/-
1. T. Subbiya, S/o Veerai Gowder, 25/298, Thomas Street, Coimbatore.
sd/-
2. B. Govindaraju, S/o S. Balagurumurthy Chettiar, 25/250, Rangai Gowder Street, Coimbatore.
sd/-
Arunachalam"
The animus to attest, thus, is not available, so far as the scribe is concerned: he is not
a witness to the will but a mere writer of the will. The statutory requirement as
noticed above cannot thus be transposed in favour of the writer, rather goes against
the propounder since both the witnesses are named therein with detailed address and
no attempt has been made to bring them or to produce them before the court so as to
satisfy the judicial conscience. Presence of scribe and his signature appearing on the
document does not by itself be taken to be the proof of due attestation unless the
situation is so expressed in the document itself -- this is again, however, not the
situation existing presently in the matter under consideration. Some grievance was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 27
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
made before this Court that sufficient opportunity was not being made available, we
are however, unable to record our concurrence therewith. No attempt whatsoever has
been made to bring the attesting witnesses who are obviously available.
6. Kalyanaswamy v. Bakthavatsalam, (2021) 16 SCC 543
93. There is one aspect which is pressed before us also, in regard to the same, by the
respondents. It is contended that the fact that there is no oral partition between the
brothers in 1932, makes it out to be a case where the testator has made a rank
incorrect statement in the will which shrouds the will itself as one which is not
genuine.
94. In regard to the aspect about incorrect statement in the will, it is to be noticed
that making a totally incorrect statement in a will arouses suspicion. This is on the
principle that the testator would not make an incorrect statement when he makes a
will. If he makes a rank incorrect statement the inference is that he would not have
made that will. This principle will not be applicable in the facts of this case. Making
the statement that there was a partition in 1932 and that the properties were allotted
to him, is apparently the understanding of the testator. This issue generated debate in
the courts. The view expressed by the testator did not find favour with the courts but
that is a far cry from describing it as an outright false statement. As long as it is a part
of the will which is made by the testator and he believed in it the finding given by the
court in this regard will not advance the case of the respondent.
7. Karnataka High Court has held as under in R.F.A. No. 488/2008 C/w R.F.A. No. 489/2009, Sr..
Krishna Rao vs. M. J. Vittal,
100. An attesting witness is a person who puts his sign or mark on a deed or Will at the request of its
creator, immediately after its execution, for the purpose of proving and identifying that it is executed
by the maker of it. In case of a Will, an attesting witness is the one who witnesses the testator
executing the Will by signing it. Thus, the execution and attestation of a Will are clearly distinct
formalities. The former is the act of the parties; and latter is that of the witnesses.
8. J.T. Surappa v. Satchidhanandendra Saraswathi Swamiji Public Charitable Trust, ILR 2008 Kar
2115
27. The THIRD STEP would be to find out whether the testator was in a sound state of mind at the
time of executing the Will. The question of a sound mind is a dominant question in a court of
probate. The test to judge a sound disposing mind is not an absurd test. Nor is it the test of a
perfectly healthy and perfect mind. The test of a sound disposing mind is in law a workable test. It is
not a hypothetical nor an impracticable test. It is not the test of a psychologist or a psychoanalyst or
a psychiatrist who in the modem age, prone to consider all human mind to be inherently unsound by
nature and abnormal. Nor, is it the scientific test, which would satisfy the highest technical medical
examination. The mental soundness and the physical fitness of the testator is an important
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 28
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
circumstance when the testatorial capacity is being scrutinized. In case of weakness of mind arising
from near approach of death, strong proof is required that the contents of the will were known to the
testator and that it was his spontaneous act. It is settled law that, the propounder has to show by
satisfactory evidence that the Will was signed by the testator and at the relevant point of time he
understood the nature and effect of the dispositions and put his signature to the document of his
own free will. The real test in all cases of this kind is, whether the testator had a proper appreciation
or comprehension of his act.
9. Yumnam Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi v.
Yumnam Joykumar Singh, (2009) 4 SCC 780
11. As per provisions of Section 63 of the Succession Act, for the due execution of a will:
(1) the testator should sign or affix his mark to the will;
(2) the signature or the mark of the testator should be so placed that it should appear
that it was intended thereby to give effect to the writing as a will;
(3) the will should be attested by two or more witnesses, and (4) each of the said
witnesses must have seen the testator signing or affixing his mark to the will and each
of them should sign the will in the presence of the testator.
10. Balathandayutham v. Ezhilarasan, (2010) 5 SCC 770
15. Going by this test, as we must, we find that both the wills, Ext. B-19 and Ext. B-20
are surrounded by suspicious circumstances. The ratio in H. Venkatachala [AIR 1959
SC 443] is that in such a situation the Court "would naturally expect that all
legitimate suspicions should be completely removed before the document is accepted
as the last will of the testator. The presence of such suspicious circumstances
naturally tends to make the initial onus very heavy; and, unless it is satisfactorily
discharged, courts will be reluctant to treat the document as the last will of the
testator." (See AIR p. 452, para 20.) Following the aforesaid principle, this Court is
constrained to hold that the appellants did not succeed in discharging its onus of
removing the suspicious circumstances surrounding Exts. B-19 and B-20. As such
there is no reason for us to find any error in the judgment of the High Court.
11. Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa, (2021) 11 SCC 277 11.3. Elaborate provisions have
been made in Chapter VI of the Succession Act, in Sections 74 to 111, for construction
of wills which, in their sum and substance, make the intention of legislature clear that
any irrelevant misdescription or error is not to operate against the will; and approach
has to be to give effect to a will once it is found to have been executed in the sound
state of mind by the testator while exercising his own free will.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 29
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
However, when the will is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, the Court would expect that the
legitimate suspicion should be removed before the document in question is accepted as the last will
of the testator.
12. H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma, AIR 1959 SC 443
22. It is obvious that for deciding material questions of fact which arise in applications for probate
or in actions on wills, no hard and fast or inflexible rules can be laid down for the appreciation of the
evidence. It may, however, be stated generally that a propounder of the will has to prove the due and
valid execution of the will and that if there are any suspicious circumstances surrounding the
execution of the will the propounder must remove the said suspicions from the mind of the court by
cogent and satisfactory evidence. It is hardly necessary to add that the result of the application of
these two general and broad principles would always depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case and on the nature and quality of the evidence adduced by the parties. It is quite true that,
as observed by Lord Du Parcq in Harmes v. Hinkson [(1946) 50 CWN 895] "where a will is charged
with suspicion, the rules enjoin a reasonable scepticism, not an obdurate persistence in disbelief.
They do not demand from the Judge, even in circumstances of grave suspicion, a resolute and
impenetrable incredulity. He is never required to close his mind to the truth". It would sound
platitudinous to say so, but it is nevertheless true that in discovering truth even in such cases the
judicial mind must always be open though vigilant, cautious and circumspect.
37. Per contra, Sri Shankaralingappa Nagaraj, learned counsel for the contesting respondent No.1
supported the impugned judgment by contending that the learned trial Judge has rightly
appreciated the material on record and has rightly dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs.
38. Sri Nagaraj has further argued that the Will has passed through the relevant tests with regard to
its validity as is enunciated in the several judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and therefore the
grounds urged in the appeal memorandum are hardly sufficient to accept the findings recorded by
the learned trial Judge in the impugned judgment and sought for dismissal of the appeal.
39. He also emphasizes that all the documents which were confronted to P.W.1 during his
cross-examination and having admitted those documents, they were marked at Ex.D.1 to Ex.D.10.
40. In support of his arguments, he has also filed written arguments and some of the judgments of
the Hon'ble Apex Court. The same are culled out hereunder for ready reference.
1. PROOF OF EXECUTION OF EX. D-21 WILL DATED 25/02/1993:-
2. At the outset the Will Ex. D-21 is executed by a highly qualified person who had held high
positions in the corporate sectors. Sri. M.W.Gurjar was working in Kirloskar group of companies in
a high position and even after his retirement, he was being paid a honorarium till his death by the
said company.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 30
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
3. It is submitted that the whole of the case rests on the proof of the Will dated 25/02/1993 (Ex.
D-21). It is pertinent to mention here that the Will Ex. D- 21 is admitted by the plaintiff in para.9 of
his cross examination dated 22/10/2005, he states as, "Now I see another original registered Will
dated 25/02/1993 executed by my father which is marked as Ex.D- 21. Ex. D-21 bears the signature
of my father on each page twice. Dr. S.G. Deshpande, who was a close relative of us and he is one of
the witnesses to Ex. D-21. Sri. S.V. Amrute is also a close relative of us who has signed Ex. D-21 as
another witness. It is true that Sri. S.V. Amrute was a close confidents of my father and he knew the
family affairs of my father. Dr. S.G.Deshpande was a good friend of my father. My relationship with
Dr. S.G. Deshpande and Sri. S.V. Amrute were cordial". Thus the plaintiff admits the contents of the
Will as well as the signatures of Sri. M.W.Gurjar on all pages of it and also the signatures of the
attesting witnesses.
4. This Ex. D-21 was preceded by a draft Will, which is also admitted by Pw-l as Ex. D-22, in which it
is written as, "Draft approved" and is signed by Sri. M.W. Gurjar, which writings are made by Sri.
M.W. Gurjar, as per the admission of plaintiff/Pw-1 at paragraphs 9 & 10 of the cross examination
dated 22/10/2005. At para. 10 of his evidence Pw-1 states "The words 'DRAFT APPROVED'
signature of my father and the date bearing 17/02/1993 are marked as Ex. D-22(a)".
5. Even at para. 20 of the cross examination of Pw-1 dated 28/01/2006 he states as, "It is true that
after execution of Ex. D18 by my father the next Will executed by him is Ex. D-21 dated 25/02/1993.
To the best of my knowledge Ex. D-21 i.e. Will dated 25/02/1993 is the last Will of my father. It is
true that after Ex. D-21 my father has not executed any other Will which is to the best of my
knowledge". Pw-1 in his cross examination dated 28/01/2006 at page 13 para.23 (11th line from the
top) states as "It is true that as per the Will Ex. D-21 the entire GURJAR HOUSE should go to my
brother i.e. the first defendant".
6. These aspects goes to show that the plaintiff-Pw-1 knew the fact of execution of the Will Ex. D-21
and in view of such a knowledge he has admitted the said will as the last Will of his father and also
identified the signatures of M.W.Gurjar on all the pages, which are marked as Ex. D21(a) to (o) and
Ex. D-21 (p) & (q).
a) 2006 AIR SCW 2404=2007(1) SCC 546: The court does not sit in appeal over the right or wrong
of the testators decision. The court's role is limited to examining whether the instrument
propounded as the last will of the deceased is or is not that by the testator and whether it is the
product of the free and sound disposing mind.
The contents of the Will have to be
appreciated in the context of his
circumstances, and not vis-à-vis the rules of intestate succession (para.77,78 & 79).
"Gurdev Kaur v. Kaki, 2006 AIR SCW 2404=(2007) 1 SCC 546
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 31
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
76. The High Court has clearly deviated from the settled principle of interpretation of
the will. The court does not sit in appeal over the right or wrong of the testator's
decision. The court's role is limited to examining whether the instrument
propounded as the last will of the deceased is or is not that by the testator and
whether it is the product of the free and sound disposing mind. It is only for the
purpose of examining the authenticity or otherwise of the instrument propounded as
the last will, that the court looks into the nature of the bequest.
77. The learned Single Judge of the High Court has not even properly appreciated the
context of the circumstances. The contents of the will have to be appreciated in the
context of his circumstances, and not vis-à-vis the rules for intestate succession. It is
only for this limited purpose that the court examines the nature of bequest. The court
does not substitute its own opinion for what was the testator's will or intention as
manifested from a reading of the written instrument. After all, a will is meant to be an
expression of his desire and therefore, may result in disinheritance of some and grant
to another. In the instant case, wife of the testator Bhagwan Kaur alone had lived
with the deceased and only she had looked after him throughout his life. The other
daughters were all happily married a long time ago and in their weddings the testator
had spent huge amount of money. In his own words, he had spent more than what
they would have got in their respective shares out of testator's property.
78. If a will appears on the face of it to have been duly executed and attested in
accordance with the requirements of the statute, a presumption of due execution and
attestation applies."
b) 2010(14) SCC 266:- Mathematical certainty cannot be found in proof of execution of Wills. For
proof of execution of Will satisfaction of prudent mind is necessary. (paras.17 to 23) "Gopal Swaroop
v. Krishna Murari Mangal, (2010) 14 SCC 266
17. A careful analysis of the provisions of Section 63 would show that the proof of execution of a will
would require the following aspects to be proved:
(1) That the testator has signed or affixed his mark to the will or the will has been
signed by some other person in the presence and under the direction of the testator.
(2) The signature or mark of the testator or the signature of the persons signing for
him is so placed has to appear that the same was intended thereby to give effect to the
writing as a will. (3) That the will has been attested by two or more witnesses each
one of whom has signed or affixed his mark to the will or has been seen by some
other person signing the will in the presence and by the direction of the testator or
has received from the testator a personal acknowledgment of the signature or mark
or the signature of each other person.
(4) That each of the witnesses has signed the will in the presence of the testator.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 32
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
18. The decisions of this Court in Bhagwan Kaur v. Kartar Kaur [(1994) 5 SCC 135] , Seth Beni
Chand v. Kamla Kunwar [(1976) 4 SCC 554] , Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam
[(2003) 2 SCC 91] , Gurdev Kaur v. Kaki [(2007) 1 SCC 546] , Yumnam Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi
v. Yumnam Joykumar Singh [(2009) 4 SCC 780 : (2009) 2 SCC (Civ) 348] , Rur Singh v. Bachan
Kaur [(2009) 11 SCC 1 : (2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 387] and Anil Kak v. Sharada Raje [(2008) 7 SCC 695]
recognise and reiterate the requirements enumerated above to be essential for the proof of execution
of an unprivileged will like the one at hand. It is, therefore, not necessary to burden this judgment
by a detailed reference of the facts relevant to each one of these pronouncements and the precise
contention that was urged and determined in those cases. All that needs to be examined is whether
the requirements stipulated in Section 63 and distinctively enumerated above have been satisfied in
the instant case by the appellant propounder of the will.
19. Our answer to that question is in the affirmative. The deposition of Shri Vilas Tikhe clearly
proves that Panna Lal had executed a will in favour of the appellant, Gopal Swaroop and had signed
and affixed his signature in his presence. The trial court and the High Court have concurrently held
that the will had been signed by the testator in the presence of the attesting witnesses. First and the
foremost requirement prescribed under Section 63 of the Succession Act, 1925 is, therefore, clearly
satisfied.
20. Coming then to the second requirement, namely, the placement of the signature of the testator
on the will, we find that the signature of the testator appear at the right hand bottom part of the will.
The placement of the signature on the document is, therefore, appropriate and clearly suggestive of
the fact that the document was intended to be given effect to as a will. We must also mention that no
argument was advanced by the learned counsel for the respondent on the requirement of an
appropriate placement of the signature of the testator on the document.
21. That brings us to the third requirement, namely, that the will must be attested by two or more
witnesses each of whom has seen the testator signing and affixing his mark to the will or has seen
some other person signing in the presence and by the direction of the testator. The deposition of
Shri Vilas Tikhe in our opinion satisfies this requirement also inasmuch as the witness has in clear
and unambiguous terms stated that not only he but Shri Manoj, the other attesting witness to the
will, was also present at the time the testator affixed his signature on the will. It is noteworthy that,
the above statement has not been questioned in cross-examination nor any suggestion made to the
effect that while Shri Vilas Tikhe, the witness may have been present, Manoj was not so present at
the time the will was signed by the testator. As a matter of fact, the witness has made a categorical
statement that Manoj met the testator in the Court and was taken along and that not only at the time
of signing of the will by the testator, but even before the Registrar, Manoj Kumar was present in
person. The witness has while answering a question in cross-examination specifically stated that
Manoj was present even at the time the witness signed the will in question.
22. On a careful and proper reading of the deposition of Shri Vilas Tikhe, DW 2, we are satisfied that
the requirement of attestation of the will by two witnesses each of whom has seen the testator
signing or affixing his mark has been satisfied in the present case. So also the fourth requirement
that the attesting witnesses sign the will in the presence of the testator stands firmly established. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 33
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
that view of the matter, the Division Bench of the High Court fell in error in holding that the
requirement of Section 63 of the Succession Act had not been satisfied in the instant case.
23. As was observed by this Court in H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma [AIR 1959 SC
443] , in the matter of proof of documents as in the case of the proof of wills, it is idle to expect proof
with mathematical certainty. The test to be applied always is the test of satisfaction of a prudent
mind in such matters. Applying that test to the case at hand we have no manner of doubt that the
will executed by Shri Panna Lal, which is a duly registered document, is not surrounded by any
suspicious circumstances of any kind and is proved to have been duly and properly executed."
c) 2010(4) KLJ 548- para 22- in case of a testator, who is literate, worldly wise capable of taking
decision, knowing reading and writing and when he was in sound state of mind there would be
hardly any doubt as to the execution; in addition to this the said document is also registered before
Sub- Registrar where the testator has signed and has marked his thumb impression.
"P.N. Balakrishna v. H.B. Bhavani Shankar, (2010) 4 Kant LJ 548
22. Insofar as the decisions relied by the learned Counsel for the appellants as regard
to the examination of one of the attesting witnesses, no doubt, this Court in the case
of Virupakshappa Malleshappa has observed that, evidence of the only attesting
witness is unworthy of acceptance and also on the ground that when at more than
one place there are misstatement of facts. This Court in a case where the attesting
witness has denied himself being present at the time of execution of the Will, doubted
his evidence and observed that, relying on the evidence of only attesting witness was
not justified by the Trial Court, but this is not a case where attesting witness denied
his presence at the time of execution of the Will, he has categorically stated that, not
only he was present at the time of execution of the Will, but he has seen the testator
putting signature and has also stated that he put his signature thereafter and another
attesting witness also put his signature after the testator put his signature on the Will.
The signatures appearing on the Will also reveal that the document was properly
executed. As far as non-examination of another attesting witness or the scribe is
concerned, law does not require that another witness should be examined unless it is
pointed out that the evidence of attesting witness, who has been examined, is
doubtful and not reliable. From the evidence of P.W. 2, no doubt, there are some
minor discrepancies, but that will not take away the effect of the evidence as regard to
the proof of the execution of the Will. Further, the attesting witness not known to
Janardhan and non-examination of Janardhan do not prove any doubt as regard to
the execution of the Will, when other circumstances are strong and trustworthy. In
case of a testator, who is literate, worldly wise capable of taking decision, knowing
reading and writing and when he was in sound state of mind, there would be hardly
any doubt as to the execution. In addition to this, the said document is also registered
before the Sub-Registrar where the testator has signed and has marked his thumb
impression. These circumstances and evidence on record not only clearly prove the
execution of the Will according to law, but the same is free Will executed by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 34
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
testator while he was in sound state of mind. "
7. Hence, the fact of execution of the Will (Ex. D-21) by Sri. M.W. Gurjar is proved.
8. PROOF OF ATTESTATION:- The Will Ex. D-21 is attested by two witnesses viz., Sri. S.G.
Deshpande and Sri. S.V. Amrute. Even this aspect of attestation is admitted by Plaintiff/Pw-1 in his
cross examination dated 22/10/2005 at para.9 as "Dr. S.G. Deshpande, who was a close relative of
us and he is one of the witnesses to Ex. D-21. Sri. S.V.Amrute is also a close relative of us who has
signed Ex. D-21 as another witness. It is true that Sri. S.V. Amrute was a close confidents of my
father and he knew the family affairs of my father. Dr. S..G.Deshpande was a good friend of my
father. My relationship with Dr. S.G. Deshpande and Sri. S.V. Amrute were cordial". This admission
of Pw-1 goes to show that Will Ex. D-21 is attested by two witnesses i.e. Dr. S.G. Deshpande and Sri.
S.V. Amrute in presence of the executor.
9. Further, Sri. S.V. Amrute, the attesting witness to the Will Ex. D-21, has been examined as Dw-2
who has spoken about the fact of execution of Will Ex. D-21 by Sri, M.W. Gurjar, and his signing the
same, in presence of himself, Dr. S.G. Deshpande and an advocate on 25/02/1993. In the
examination in chief of Dw-2 at page -2 says as "Sri. M.W. Gurjar has signed the said will on all the
pages in my presence and in the presence of Dr. S.G. Deshpande and an advocate on 25/02/1993. I
submit that I am one of the attesting witness to the said Will dated 25/02/1993 being present at the
time of execution of the same". Since the attesting witness has spoken regarding the signing of the
Will by M.W. Gurjar in presence of the witnesses and advocate, Dw-2 being one of the attesting
witness has signed the said Will as an attesting witness, he being present at the time of execution of
the same; proves the fact of fulfilling the requirements of law as to due attestation of the Will. He
has also spoken about the mental and physical health of Sri. M.W. Gurjar as normal at that time. On
a perusal of Ex. D-21, in the last page it is stated as "Signed by the said Madhav Waman Gurjar as
his last Will and testament in our presence, all being present at the same time. Thereafter at his
request and in his presence we subscribed our respective name and signatures as attesting witnesses
all being also present at the same time". It is to be seen that there is no cross examination of Dw-2
by the plaintiffs on the above aspects. In view of the above, it is proved that the Will Ex. D-21 is
executed and attested in accordance with law.
(a) AIR 2013 SC 2088 - Attestor examined not specific as to other attestor signing in presence of
testator and testator executing Will in his presence - attestor examined however specific that other
attesting witness was present at the time of writing of Will -Will proved.
"M.B. Ramesh v. K.M. Veeraje Urs, AIR 2013SCC 2088 = (2013) 7 SCC 490
21. The issue of validity of the will in the present case will have to be considered in the
context of these facts. It is true that in the case at hand, there is no specific statement
by PW 2 that he had seen the other attesting witness sign the will in the presence of
the testatrix, but he has stated that the other witness had also signed the document.
He has proved his signature, and on the top of it he has also stated in the cross-
examination that the other witness (Mr Mallaraje Urs), Smt Nagammani, himself and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 35
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
one Sampat Iyanger and the writer of the will were all present while writing the will
on 24-10-1943 which was registered on the very next day. This statement by
implication and inference will have to be held as proving the required attestation by
the other witness. This statement along with the attendant circumstances placed on
record would certainly constitute proving of the will by other evidence as permitted
by Section 71 of the Evidence Act.
22. While drawing the appropriate inference in a matter like this, a court cannot
disregard the evidence on the attendant circumstances brought on record. In this
context, we may profitably refer to the observations of a Division Bench of the Assam
High Court in Mahaluxmi Bank Ltd. v. Kamakhyalal Goenka [AIR 1958 Ass 56] ,
which was a case concerning the claim of the appellant Bank for certain amounts
based on the execution of a mortgage deed. The execution thereof was being disputed
by the respondents, amongst other pleas, by contending that the same was by a
purdahnashin lady, and the same was not done in the presence of witnesses. Though
the evidence of the plaintiff was not so categorical, looking to the totality of the
evidence on record, the Court held that the execution of the mortgage had been duly
proved. While arriving at that inference, the Division Bench observed : (AIR p.
62, para 11) "11. ... It was, therefore, incumbent on the plaintiff to prove its execution and attestation
according to law. It must be conceded that the witnesses required to prove attestation has (sic) not
categorically stated that he and the other attesting witnesses put their signatures (after having seen
the execution of the document) in the presence of the executants. Nevertheless, the fact that they
actually did so can be easily gathered from the circumstances disclosed in the evidence. It appears
that the execution and registration of the document all took place at about the same time in the
house of the defendants. The witnesses not only saw the executants put their signatures on the
document, but that they also saw the document being explained to the lady by the husband as also
by the registering officer.
They also saw the executants admit receipt of the consideration, which was paid in their presence.
As all this happened at the same time, it can be legitimately inferred that the witnesses also put their
signatures in the presence of the executants after having seen them signing the instrument. ...
... There is no suggestion here that the execution and attestation was not done at the same sitting. In
fact, the definite evidence here is that the execution and registration took place at the same time. It
is, therefore, almost certain that the witnesses must have signed the document in the presence of the
executants."
25. In view of the above factual and legal position, we do hold that the respondent-plaintiffs had
proved that Smt Nagammanni had duly executed a will on 24-10-1943 in favour of the plaintiffs, and
bequeathed the suit properties to them. She got the will registered on the very next day. The findings
of the trial court as well as the first appellate court on Issue 2 were clearly erroneous. The learned
Judge of the High Court was right in holding that the findings of the trial and appellate court,
though concurrent, were bad in law and perverse and contrary to the evidence on record. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 36
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
second appeal was, therefore, rightly allowed by him. Accordingly, we dismiss the present civil
appeal. Suit No. 32 of 1975 filed by the respondents in the Court of the Principal Civil Judge at
Mandya in Karnataka will stand decreed. They are hereby granted a declaration of their title to the
suit property, and for a permanent injunction restraining the defendants from interfering with their
possession thereof. In case their possession has been in any way disturbed, they will be entitled to
recover the possession of the property concerned, with future mesne profits. In the facts of the
present case, however, we do not order any costs."
(b) 2012 AIR SCW 2347- Both attesting witness need not sign Will siimulatenously - fact that one of
the attesting witness stated that he did not know when other attesting witness came-not ground to
hold that Will was not duly attested.
"Mahesh Kumar v. Vinod Kumar, 2012 AIR SCW 2347 = (2012) 4 SCC 387
27. The issue which remains to be examined is whether the High Court was justified
in coming to the conclusion that the execution of the will dated 10-2-1992 was
shrouded with suspicion and the appellant failed to dispel the suspicion? At the
outset, we deem it necessary to observe that the learned Single Judge misread the
statement of Sobhag Chand (DW 3) and recorded something which does not appear
in his statement. While Sobhag Chand categorically stated that he had signed as the
witness after Shri Harishankar had signed the will, the portion of his statement
extracted in the impugned judgment gives an impression that the witnesses had
signed even before the executant had signed the will. Another patent error committed
by the learned Single Judge is that he decided the issue relating to validity of the will
by assuming that both the attesting witnesses were required to append their
signatures simultaneously. Section 63(c) of the 1925 Act does not contain any such
requirement and it is settled law that examination of one of the attesting witnesses is
sufficient. Not only this, while recording an adverse finding on this issue, the learned
Single Judge omitted to consider the categorical statements made by DW 3 and DW 4
that the testator had read out and signed the will in their presence and thereafter they
had appended their signatures."
10.REGARDING DISINHERITANCE OF THE PLAINTIFF IN THE WILL Ex. D-21:- It is submitted
that the very conduct of the plaintiff towards his father is the reason for M.W. Gurjar to exclude the
plaintiff from inheriting the GURJAR HOUSE, though he was given a share in the jewelries. This
has been explained by Sri. M.W. Gurjar in his Will Ex. D- 21 and also in the draft Will Ex. D-22; and
further it is evident from the evidence of Pw-1 and Dw-2. At page 2 of Ex. D-
21 (16th line from the top) the following recitals need consideration, "I am living happily with the
family of my son Mohan Madhav Gurjar since 1982. The entire family of my son Mohan Madhav
Gurjar consisting of my son Mohan Madhav Gurjar, his wife Smt. Nanditha M. Gurjar and their sons
Master Adithya and Master Siddarth are very obedient and serve me to my satisfaction. My
unmarried daughter Shylaja Madhav Gurjar is also happily living with my son Mohan Madhav
Gurjar and his family". At page 3 of Ex. D-21 (13th line from the top) the following recitals are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 37
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
forthcoming, "My son Atul Madhav Gurjar with my help and financial assistance acquired an
independent property a vacant site situated at Rajmahal Vilas Extension, Bangalore, wherein he has
constructed a house and let out for rent. Atul Madhav Gurjar has an independent income and he is
possessed of immovable property of his own. I cannot live comfortably and happily with my son Atul
Madhav Gurjar. My daughter Shylaja Madhav Gurjar and I am being looked after well by my son
Mohan Madhav Gurjar and his family. Mohan Madhav Gurjar and his family have always looked
after me and my daughter with utmost care and affection. My son Mohan Madhav Gurjar has also
spent lot of money on improvement and maintenance of the main building and construction of
servant quarters, out of his own funds. I am of the desire that my son Mohan Madhav Gurjar alone
deserves to receive from me the immovable property namely the 'Gurjar House', bearing No.5, 10th
Main, 3rd Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore". At page 4 of Ex. D-21 the last line and at page 5 it is stated
as, "It is my wish and desire that after my death all the movables, furniture, carpets, utensils and
other articles found in GURJAR HOUSE shall entirely belong to my son Mohan Madhav Gurjar". At
page 5 of Ex. D-21 (9th line from the bottom) the recitals are, "My son Atul Madhav Gurjar shall not
be entitled for any portion of my house GURJAR HOUSE bearing No.5, 10th Main, 3rd Block,
Jayanagar, Bangalore, either on the ground floor or on the first floor. My son Atul Madhav Gurjar's
right shall be restricted to his continuing as a tenant in the first floor in an area of 1006 sq.ft".
17. Even Dw-2 the attesting witness in his cross examination dated 22/08/2009 at page No.3 (10th
line from the bottom), has stated as, "The relationship between M.W. Gurjar and plaintiff No.1 was
not good since 1977 because it was told by M.W. Gurjar to me. M.W. Gurjar was not at all visiting
the family of plaintiff No.1. When Atul Gurjar, plaintiff NO.1 came back from Malaysia from then
onwards the relationship between himself and M.W. Gurjar was not good". Again at page 5 (2nd line
from the bottom) he says as "M.W. Gurjar used to discuss with me with regard to the execution of
the Will in favour of defendant No.1 Mohan Gurjar. The Atul Gurjar already had site at R.M.V.
Extension, and for that M.W. Gurjar has given money of Rs.35,000/- and therefore, the M.W.
Gurjar had also paid Rs.2,50,000/- to the plaintiff No.1, Atul Gurjar, for the construction of building
in the RMV Extension, and therefore Gurjar decided to execute the Will in favour of defendant
No.1". This fact was not even denied by the plaintiff during his cross examination.
18.The plaintiff also admits the fact of he not visiting the ground floor of the Gurjar House from
1984-85. In his cross examination dated 11/11/2000 para. 14 (6th line from the top) he states as,
"when I shifted to the first floor of the Gurjar House in the year 1982, my father, my brother Sri.
Mohan M. Gurjar, his wife, my sister Smt Shyla Gurjar continued to live in the ground floor and a
part of the first floor which was an old construction". Again at page. 7 Para. 15 (5th line from the
top) of his cross examination he states as "It is true to suggest I was not visiting the ground floor of
Gurjar House after the years 1984-85. Again at page. 9 of his cross examination dated 16/12/2005 at
para. 18 (7th line from the top) he states as, "It is true after 1981 my brother, sister, my father and
later my brother's family were living together in the ground floor and a portion of the first floor of
GURJAR HOUSE till the death of my father". Further at page. 10, para.19 (7th lien from the top) of
his cross examination he says, "It is true that even now my disabled sister continues her residence
with my younger brother, the first defendant. Even now I do not visit the house of my younger
brother". In continuance of the above evidence, Pw-1 at page 25 of his cross examination dated
20/02/2010 (3rd line from the top) has stated as, "It is true that my father and my brother-first
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 38
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
defendant lived together throughout the life of my father. It is true that from the year 1972 I am
living separately from my father".
19. It is submitted that the above aspects goes to show that the plaintiff has not taken care of his
father and the father has also expressed in Ex. D-
21 that he cannot live comfortably and happily with the plaintiff. Further, the plaintiff has been
financially assisted by the father in acquiring a site in his name at R.M.V. Extension by paying
Rs.35,000/- then, and Dw-2 has further stated that the plaintiff was paid to the tune of
Rs.2,50,000/- for construction of a house at RM.V. Extension (these fact are not disputed by
plaintiff). In view of these, it is submitted that Sri. M.W. Gurjar has justifiably excluded the plaintiff
from inheriting the suit schedule property.
20. As regarding the exclusion of the daughter Smt. Shylaja M. Gurjar, since she was a slow learner,
remained as a spinster and was living continuously with the defendant No.1 under his care, Sri.
M.W. Gurjar, has given a right of residence to her in Gurjar House and also had formed a Trust for
providing maintenance to her. As such the daughter Smt. Shylaja M.Gurjar was partly excluded in
the Will Ex. D-21.
21.It is evident from the evidence of plaintiff No.1 that he has not taken care of his father and has
been living away from him throughout, after his marriage in the year 1972. Inspite of all these, the
father has financially assisted him to acquire a property at RM.V. Extension, Bangalore. These
factors were also the reasons for Sri. M.W. Gurjar to exclude plaintiff in the Will Ex. D-21. Since, the
first defendant has done all the duties which a son is expected of towards his father, Sri. M.W.
Gurjar has executed the Will Ex. D-21 excluding the plaintiffs and in favour of 1st defendant.
22. ILR 2004 KAR 440 = 2003(8) SCC 537- para.8 a Will is executed to alter the mode of succession
and by the very nature of things it is bound to result in either reducing or depriving the share of a
natural heir. If a person intends his property to pass to his natural heirs, there is no necessity at all
of executing a Will.
"Ramabai Padmakar Patil v. Rukminibai Vishnu Vekhande, ILR 2004 Kar 440 =
(2003) 8 SCC 537
8. A Will is executed to alter the mode of succession and by the very nature of things
it is bound to result in either reducing or depriving the share of a natural heir. If a
person intends his property to pass to his natural heirs, there is no necessity at all of
executing a Will. It is true that a propounder of the Will has to remove all suspicious
circumstances. Suspicion means doubt, conjecture or mistrust. But the fact that
natural heirs have either been excluded or a lesser share has been given to them, by
itself without anything more, cannot be held to be a suspicious circumstance,
especially in a case where the bequest has been made in favour of an offspring. In
P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar [1995 Supp (2) SCC 664 :
AIR 1995 SC 1852] it has been held that it is the duty of the propounder of the Will to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 39
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
remove all the suspected features, but there must be real, germane and valid
suspicious features and not fantasy of the doubting mind. In this case, the fact that
the whole estate was given to the son under the Will depriving two daughters was
held to be not a suspicious circumstance and the finding to the contrary recorded by
the District Court and the High Court was reversed. In Pushpavathi v. Chandraraja
Kadamba [(1973) 3 SCC 291 : AIR 1972 SC 2492] it has been held that if the
propounder succeeds in removing the suspicious circumstance, the court would have
to give effect to the Will, even if the Will might be unnatural in the sense that it has
cut off wholly or in part the near relations. In Rabindra Nath Mukherjee v.
Panchanan Banerjee [(1995) 4 SCC 459] it was observed that the circumstance of
deprivation of natural heirs should not raise any suspicion because the whole idea
behind execution of the Will is to interfere with the normal line of succession and so,
natural heirs would be debarred in every case of Will. Of course, it may be that in
some cases they are fully debarred and in some cases partly. The concurrent finding
recorded by the District Court and the High Court for doubting the genuineness of
the Will on the aforesaid ground was reversed."
23. 2006 AIR SCW 2404 - Nature of bequest-relevant only for purpose of deciding its authenticity
court not to sit in appeal over testators decision-Will - due execution proved-holding it as non
authentic on ground of dis inheritance of daughter - not proper.
(Gurdev Kaur v. Kaki, 2006 AIR SCW
2404=(2007) 1 SCC 546 )
24.REGRDING THE SOUND DISPOSING STATE OF MIND OF THE TESTATOR while executing
EX. D- 21: The plaintiff in his pleading alleges that Sri. M.W.Gurjar became abnormal by the end of
1991 and thereafter his mental and physical condition deteriorated and also pleads about the alleged
opinions of Dr. Maiya and Dr. Ramachandra Murthy about Sri. M.W.Gurjar suffering from senile
dementia (para.6 of the plaint) but in his evidence the same are proved to be false.
25. Pw-1 in his cross examination dated 28/01/2006 at para. 20 (1¹ line onwards) he says, "My
father was keeping normal health till his death, but he had diabetes and hypertension. Diabetes and
hypertension has not affected his day to day activities. It is true that when Ex. D-16 (lease deed
dated 30/12/92 in favour of plaintiff) was executed by my father, he was keeping a sound disposing
state of mind. It is true that my wife Dr. Sudha A. Gurjar is an attesting witness to Ex.D-16".
26. It is submitted that in order to show that Sri. M.W. Gurjar was in a sound state of mind
throughout his life the evidence of Pw-1 & the admitted documents pertaining to Sri. M.W. Gurjar
requires consideration. At page 24 of the cross examination of Pw-1 dated 20/02/2010 (4th line
from the bottom) he states as, "It may be true that my father though a diabetic patient he entered
into so many transaction till his death. It is true that even in the year 1992 while executing Ex. D-16
my father was a diabetic".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 40
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
27. In this regard the further evidence of Pw-1 admitting the writings of Sri. M.W. Gurjar play a vital
role in proof of his sound mental condition.
Pw-1 in his cross examination dated 22/10/05 at para. 4 admits as, "Now I see the copies of the
letters written by my father to various persons which are marked as Ex.D-3 to D-10". These letters
are written by Sri. M.W.Gurjar right from the year 1991 till 1994; which falsify the plea of senile
dementia pleaded by the plaintiff.
28. Pw-1 has also admitted the bank challans under which Sri. M.W. Gurjar had deposited various
amounts in Bank of Baroda right from the year 1994 to 1996 which are in his handwriting & signed
by him as per Ex. D-12 to D-15 and D- 36 to D-38. The plaintiff admits these documents in his cross
examination at para.7 on 22/10/05 and at page.21 dated 08/02/2010 (last but one para); which
proves his sound mind. Further at page 5 of the cross examination of Pw-1 dated 10/07/2007 (7th
line from bottom) he speaks as, "It is true that after the operation of the 2nd eye in the year April
1992, my father was managing his day to day affairs till his death, with the help of vision of one eye.
The witness volunteers that, only for medication purpose he was depending on us". Again at page 7
dated 10/07/07 Pw-1 says as, "My father had a good sense of dressing and the same sense of
dressing was continued by him till the year 1994- 95". A photograph Ex. D-39 taken on 27/01/96
which is admitted by Pw-1 at page 21 dated 08/02/10 (last para) shows the dressing sense of Sri.
M.W. Gurjar even in the year 1996; which testifies regarding the sound state of mind of him.
29. Even as to the daily habits of Sri. M.W. Gurjar Pw- 1 has spoken about it at page 14 of his cross
examination dated 11/12/09 (6th line from the top) he says as, "It is true that my father was regular
visitor either of the clubs daily, it is true that my father was looking after his expenses of the clubs
out of his own funds. Accordingly, my father was paying all the dues to the above referred clubs by
a/c payee cheque and sometimes by cash also". Again at page 19 dated 08/02/2010 (1" lien from the
top) Pw-1 says as, "It might be that my father is a systematic man & that he was maintaining all the
records pertaining to him even he did not lost small chit".
30. The plaintiff has examined three doctors as Pw-2 to Pw-4. It is submitted that Pw-2 is an eye
specialist & Pw-3 is specialist in internal medicine and cardiology, who have not treated Sri.
M.W.Gurjar for the alleged Senile Dementia having regard to their specialization in different fields
of medicine, other than psychiatry. Hence, the evidence of Pw-2 & Pw-3 is of no assistance to the
plaintiff.
31. The only evidence of a psychiatrist is that of Pw-4 who is a colleague of Plaintiff's sister-in-law by
name Dr. Latha. Since the plaintiff's wife is a doctor by name Dr. Sudha, she has used her sister to
influence Pw-4 to help her. Pw-4 in his cross examination at para. he says "I have examined Madhav
Waman Gurjar (M.W.Gurjar) only once" and further in para 3 he says "with the assistance of an aid
M.W. Gurjar could have executed transactions". Again in para.4 he says "The witness is now shown
Ex.D-21 & 22. By looking at them it is not possible for me to state whether M.W.Gurjar was capable
of making a Will even with the assistance of an advocate. The reason being that I had not tested him
for testamentary capacity at any time. Further at para.5 he admits as "late MW.Gurjar was brought
to me by Dr. Sudha wife of 1st plaintiff Sri. Atul M.Gurjar. Dr. Sudha's sister by name Dr. Latha was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 41
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
my colleague for about 8 years. It was she who requested me to help her sister". Even this evidence
of Pw-4 will not aid the plaintiff in any way since pw-4 has examined M.W. Gurjar only once on
24/06/92 and he has been requested to help plaintiff's wife as per his own version. At this juncture
it is worthwhile to refer to the cross examination of Pw-1 dated 10/07/2007 at page 5 (2nd line from
the top) he speaks as, "After 24/06/1992 there was no occasion for my father to visit the
psychiatrist. It is true that after 24/06/92 my father was never treated by psychiatrist". The above
aspects proves the fact that Sri. M.W. Gurjar was in a sound disposing state of mind.
32. 2008 (1) AIR Kar R 594 - Testator suffered paralytic stroke - by itself not sufficient it is to be
further established that due to such ill health he was incapacitated mentally - no such attempt made
by plaintiff - non disclosure of reason to exclude other grand children - does not amount to
suspicious circumstance.
"Rukmini Bai v. Umabai, (2008) 1 AIR Kant R 594
13. One of the primary factors which requires to be noticed is that the plaintiff, at the
first instance, had not questioned the Will in the suit, it is only on the filing of the
written statement and the contention being urged by the defendants, the plaintiff
thought it fit to amend the plaint to state that the Will had been obtained by fraud.
Except for stating that defendant 2 has created false and bogus Will from the said late
Ramachandra Kawatekar, there is no other pleading to contend, in what manner the
said document is either false or bogus. Though it is attempted to be explained by the
learned Counsel that the Will was known only during proceedings of the suit, the
P.W. 1 in her cross-examination has admitted knowledge prior to filing the suit. No
doubt, the law is well-settled that the propounder of the Will would have to remove
the suspicion if any with regard to the Will. In the instant case, the Will is a registered
document of the year 1968 and the plaintiff in fact should have pleaded the
suspicious circumstances if any under which the Will has been executed and only on
raising such suspicion, the defendants would have been in a position to remove the
suspicion if any. However, while tendering evidence, the plaintiff who was examined
as P.W. 1 has put forth the case that the testator-Ramachandra Kawatekar had
suffered paralytic stroke between the years 1963 and 1968 and was bedridden. The
attempt of the plaintiff is to contend that therefore the Will cannot be said to have
been executed by late Ramachandra Kawatekar out of his free will since Smt. Amba
Bai who was in control of late Ramachandra Kawatekar has got the same executed as
per her desire. The further evidence and the cross-examination of P.W. 1 is
voluminous. The essence of it is to that extent wherein surrounding circumstances
have been stated with regard to P.W. 1 being away and Rukmini Bai i.e., the second
defendant while staying with late Ramachandra Kawatekar has taken advantage of
the situation and got the Will, sale deed and gift deed executed. However in an
attempt to establish the main contention regarding illness of late Ramachandra
Kawatekar, the witnesses namely Yellappa-P.W. 2, Narasing Manappa Rasade-P.W.
3, Vasudev Mane-P.W. 5 and Arjun Subrao Kadam-P.W. 6 have been examined. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 42
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
said persons claim to be known to the family and that they were aware that late
Ramachandra Kawatekar had suffered paralytic strokes during the year 1962 to 1968.
A perusal of their evidence no doubt would indicate that they have stated regarding
their familiarity with the family and the fact that late Ramachandra Kawatekar had
suffered paralytic stroke. In fact P.W. 5 has stated that after suffering the third attack,
he was not in a position to get up or speak. While stating with regard to illness, it has
also been stated that Ramachandra Kawatekar was treated by Dr. Mummigatti, but
the said doctor is dead. Therefore, his son Dr. S.G. Mummigatti was examined as
P.W. 7 to state that his father was treating Ramachandra Kawatekar and thereafter he
had also treated him. However, in the cross- examination, the said doctor was unable
to give any details with regard to the treatment rendered nor the records maintained
in that regard. The evidence tendered by the said witnesses would not be of much
importance, in the present case of this nature, since there has been certain
inconsistencies in the evidence wherein the witnesses more particularly, P.Ws. 2 and
3 have been divergent in their evidence regarding the portion of the body to which
paralytic stroke was suffered when one says it is to the right portion, the other says
that it is to the left portion. Notwithstanding the fact that the said witnesses have not
been able to establish in unequivocal terms that late Ramachandra Kawatekar had
suffered paralytic stroke during 1963-68 and even if the contention of the learned
Counsel for the plaintiff is considered wherein he contends that the first defendant
herself has admitted in her evidence that late Ramachandra Kawatekar had suffered
paralytic stroke, and even if it is a fact, I am of the view that the same would not be
conclusive insofar as the question which is before us. Even assuming for a moment
that late Ramachandra Kawatekar had suffered paralytic stroke during periods 1963
to 1968 what requires to be further established is that due to such illness, he was
incapacitated mentally and was not in a position to comprehend what he was doing
and was not able to take any decisions with regard to any matter. In the case on hand,
there is no such attempt made by the plaintiff to establish this fact that late
Ramachandra Kawatekar was in such a state that he was unable to decide anything.
This is more so because it is contended by the plaintiff that Smt. Ambabai was
instrumental in getting the deeds executed. At the outset, Smt. Ambabai being the
wife of late Ramachandra Kawatekar was the step grandmother of the grandchildren
of late Ramachandra Kawatekar and a specific reason to prefer anyone with an
ill-motive was also required to be brought out convincingly. Contrary to this, as
against the contention put forth by the plaintiff, with regard to the illness of the
testator, apart from the fact that the Will dated 23-11-1968 is a registered document
executed and registered before the Sub-Registrar, the defendants have examined Sri
Mallikarjun Gangappa Nadakatti-D.W. 2 and Sri Shankarappa Channaveerappa
Uppin- D.W. 5 to establish that even during the periods 1963 to 1968 and thereafter,
the testator was personally looking after the agricultural activities and was supplying
the agricultural products to their shops. The said persons are business men who deal
in agricultural products of buying and selling the same. While receiving the goods
and when the payments are made appropriate receipts are maintained. The said
receipts which are said to have been maintained at an undisputed point of time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 43
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
during the said course of business have been exhibited at Exs. D.10 to D.55. The
receipts date upto the year 1970. In the said receipts late Ramachandra Kawatekar
has signed in acknowledgement of the transaction between the traders and himself
which would indicate that he was in a position to carry out his activities without any
hindrance. Therefore, if he could act on his own during the said period, there is
nothing to assume that as on the date of execution and registration of the Will, he
was not able to comprehend what he was doing. Therefore, the plaintiff had not
established that the Will had been brought about in the manner alleged by her. On
the other hand, the propounder of the Will viz., the second and 5th defendants
through the evidence of the first defendant who is also a signatory to the Will have
established that the Will had been executed by late Ramachandra Kawatekar knowing
the contents of the same.
14. The next aspect of the matter is as to whether the plaintiff has raised any other
suspicious circumstance regarding the Will and if so; whether the propounder of the
Will has established the Will keeping in view the well-settled principles of law on this
aspect. Further as to whether the Court below has appreciated it in its correct
perspective. The other suspicious circumstances raised on behalf of the plaintiff is
that the Will does not disclose the reason for excluding the other grandchildren; the
Will is dated 23-11-1968, whereas late Ramachandra Kawatekar died on 24-5-1987
and as such the circumstance to execute the Will so early in life has not been
explained; the attestors to the Will have not been examined and the sons examined
have only identified the signature, and as such the same does not amount to proof of
the contents. The Court below has taken note of the contentions put forth on behalf of
the plaintiff and by the defendants. Insofar as the non-disclosure of the reasons in Ex.
D.1 to exclude the other grandchildren the Court below on noticing the decision
rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Smt. Sushila Devi v. Pandit Krishna
Kumar Missir [AIR 1971 SC 2236 : (1971) 3 SCC 146.] and Rabindra Nath Mukherjee
v. Panchanan Banerjee (dead) by L.Rs. [AIR 1995 SC 1684 : (1995) 4 SCC 459.] has
rightly come to the conclusion that the same does not amount to a suspicious
circumstance. Though this alone would have been sufficient to uphold the finding of
the Court below on this aspect, considering that the plaintiff has filed cross-
objection, I deem it necessary to notice the decisions rendered by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Savithri v. Karthyayani Amma [(2007) 11 SCC 621 :
2007 AIR SCW 6787.] , wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has not only held that
depriving a share to the natural heir is not a suspicious circumstance but the
background facts should also be taken into consideration. In the instant case, the
plaintiff as well as the defendants 2 to 7 are all the grandchildren of late
Ramachandra Kawatekar bom through his first wife's daughter Smt. Krishnabai. To
Smt. Ambabai, i.e., the first defendant, all of them are the step grandchildren and she
did not have any issues of her own. Even though an allegation has been made against
Smt. Ambabai that she was instrumental in getting the Will executed, she has not
benefited herself in any manner, but the beneficiaries are the second and fifth
defendants who were also the step grandchildren like the others and as already
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 44
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
noticed no specific ill-motive is alleged. Hence, if Ramachandra Kawatekar and
Ambabai as grandparents have chosen only two of their grandchildren, they would
have had their own reasons even though the same has not been disclosed in the
document. This aspect no doubt could have been looked at from a different angle if
the Will was not a registered document and if the contention that it is a created
document by the beneficiaries was put forward and if it was anywhere nearer to the
date of death of the testator. In the instant case, the beneficiaries were minors on the
date of execution of the Will and it is not even the case that they have taken part in
the execution of Will. If the testator who is the grandfather in his wisdom had
thought it fit that the properties indicated in the Will should be enjoyed only by two
grandchildren after the demise of his wife Ambabai, this Court cannot sit in judgment
over the same as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Gurdev Kaur v.
Kaki [AIR 2006 SC 1975 : (2007) 1 SCC 546 : 2006 AIR SCW 2404.] . The duty of the
Court would only be to test the authenticity of the Will in terms of Section 63 of the
Indian Succession Act. Any and every circumstance is not a suspicious circumstance.
A circumstance would be suspicious when it is not normal or is not normally
expected in a normal situation or is not expected of a normal person. A Will is
normally executed to interrupt the normal succession so that the testator would
prefer some and exclude others and as such it cannot be said that it is unnatural or
suspicious. Therefore, the authenticity of the document would have to be considered,
In this regard, the circumstances indicated in the case of Savithri by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court would be available to the instant case. The Will is admittedly
registered and in the case on hand, the testator has lived for 19 years after the
execution and registration of the Will and as already noticed, the Exhibit 'D' series
would indicate that the testator was carrying out his activities without hindrance and
as such he had all the time in the world if he had any other intention. Hence, the
authenticity of the Will to that extent cannot be doubted from the surrounding
circumstance of this case.
15. The next aspect would be regarding the examination of the attesting witnesses. It
cannot be disputed that both the attesting witnesses had expired, since the same is
established by Exs. D.2 and D.3 being the death certificates. Hence, the nature of
proof would be as contemplated under Section 69 of the Indian Evidence Act. In fact,
in the instant case the sons of the deceased attesting witnesses have been examined
as D.Ws. 3 and 4, who have identified the handwriting and signature of their father
and they are the natural persons to identify the same. The proof of the contents of the
documents by the said witnesses is not a requirement of law and as such, the Court
below has erred on this aspect. One other aspect is that one of the attesting witness
namely Rudrappa Basavanthappa Menasinkai is also a witness to the sale deed dated
18-4-1959 whereunder the testator had purchased the property and the same is
marked as Ex. D.5(a). This would indicate that he was a person who was known to the
testator and therefore a natural attesting witness. That apart, even though the first
defendant Smt. Ambabai has joined the Will, since she is not the owner of the
properties, she would not be the testator and if she is considered as a witness, she
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 45
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
would be the most competent witness not only for proving the signature of the
testator, but also to the circumstances of the Will. The first defendant was examined
as D.W. 1 and has stated in detail with regard to the family details. The signature on
the Will was identified as D.1(a) and (b) and she has stated with regard to the Will.
She has also identified the signature of her husband of Exs. D.6, D.7 and D.8 which
are lease deeds which are not only similar but documents subsequent to the period of
the illness alleged by the defendants. Though, she has been cross-examined at length,
there is nothing to discredit the evidence whereby she has identified and proved the
signature of the testator."
33. REGARDING SUSPICIOUS CIRCUMSTANCES IF ANY:- The above stated submissions clearly
establishes that there are no suspicious circumstances whatsoever surrounding the execution of the
Will. The argument of the appellant that the scribe of Ex. D-21 being an advocate was representing
the defendant in the trial court for some time is a suspicious circumstance does not hold any water,
since there is no such bar for so doing, since the advocate who has drafted Ex. D21 has done his
work at the behest of Sri. M.W. Gurjar, his appearance as a counsel for the defendant in the trial
court will be of no consequence to doubt his bonafides and the genuineness of the Will Ex. D-21.
34. AIR 2006 SC 370-Para.13 - simply because he has signed some of the pages twice was not a good
ground to hold that the Will was suspicious.
"Hazara Bradri v. Lokesh Datta Multani,AIR 2006 SCC 370 = (2005) 13 SCC
13. Learned Single Judge has discarded the Will on the ground that the same was surrounded by
suspicious circumstances. The Division Bench after an elaborate discussion has discarded all the
suspicious circumstances. The Division Bench came to the conclusion that the Will was natural and
was executed by Sardar Sujan Singh out of love and affection for the respondent whom he treated
like his son. It was further held that he did not deprive his wife of the property. He left his property
to his wife for her lifetime without any power to alienate the same in any manner and after her death
the property was to go to the respondent as absolute owner. Smt Ram Kaur had attested the Will. It
was found that Pt. Thakur Datta Multani, father of the respondent was a very close friend of Sardar
Sujan Singh which was evident from the fact that he had appointed him as the executant of his Will.
That Sardar Sujan Singh had executed the Will out of his own volition in a healthy state of mind and
had appended his signature on each page of the Will. Simply because he had signed some of the
pages twice was not a good ground to hold that the Will was suspicious."
35. COMPLIANCE OF LAW:- The Will Ex. D-21 has been executed in compliance of Section 63 of
Indian Succession Act, 1925, and Section 68 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Regarding the
compliance of Section. 63 of Indian Succession Act, 1925, the Will has been executed by Sri. M.W.
Gurjar in presence of the two witnesses contained therein who have seen him signing and thereafter
have attested the said document as attesting witnesses, which fact is forthcoming from the
documents Ex. D-21 itself and also the evidence of Dw-2. Inspite of the admission of Ex. D-21 by
plaintiff in toto, Dw-2 is examined to speak about the aspect of execution and attestation of the Will
Ex. D-21, which he has successfully done, which complies with Section 68 of Indian Evidence Act,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 46
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
1872.
It is submitted that Dw-2, the attesting witness has spoken about execution of Will Ex. D-21 dated
25/02/93 & the signing of the same on all pages by M.W. Gurjar in presence of himself, Dr. S.G.
Deshpande & an advocate; infers that all the four persons were physically present at the time of
execution of the Will and the attestors have signed the same in presence of Sri. M.W. Gurjar. This
statement itself would prove the fact of the required attestation by the other witness in presence of
Sri.M.W.Gurjar. This fact is further fortified from the recitals of the Will itself found above the
signatures of the attestors. It is to be noticed that Dw-2 has not at all been cross examined by the
plaintiff regarding the execution and attestation of the Will.
Furthermore, the law is settled to the effect that both the attesting witnesses need not sign
simultaneously as held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in AIR 2013 SC 2088 at para.21 to 23 and also in
2012 AIR SCW 2347. The totality of the circumstances stated above will dispel the contentions of the
appellant that the attestation is improper, though the same is done in accordance with law."
41. In view of the rival contentions of the parties, this Court meticulously perused the material on
record. On such perusal of the material on record following points would arise for consideration:
1) Whether the appellants have made out a case that late M.W. Gurjar died intestate
and his estate mentioned in plaint schedule 'A' to 'C' are available for partition?
2) Whether defendant Nos.1 and 5 have successfully established that Sri M.W. Gurjar
executed a Will on 06.11.1992 and 23.02.1993 bequeathing the estate of Sri M.W.
Gurajar in favour of first defendant and the said Will was duly executed?
3) Whether the impugned judgment is suffering from legal infirmity or perversity and
thus calls for interference?
4) What order?
Regarding point Nos.1 to 3:
42. In the instant case, there is no dispute that schedule properties were owned by Sri M.W. Gurjar
out of the self earnings. Sri M.W. Gurjar was employed by M/s Kirloskar Group of Companies and
he retired in the year 1973. Post retirement he was been paid honorarium of Rs.2500/- per month
by his employer till June 1995.
43. According to plaintiffs, Sri M.W. Gurjar died intestate as per their pleadings. However, in the
very plaint itself, they mentioned that M.W. Gurjar has executed a Will which they came to know
soon after his death when first plaintiff has sent his relatives for seeking division of the properties.
44. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the said Will is not executed properly by M.W. Gurjar and the
same is concocted by the first defendant with active collusion of the attesting witnesses and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 47
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
therefore, the Court has to ignore the Will and decree the suit by granting 1/3rd share in the suit
properties for the plaintiffs.
45. Oral evidence placed on record on behalf of the plaintiff is in the form of examination-in-chief of
P.W.1 who is the first plaintiff is nothing but the replica of plaint averments. In his
cross-examination, it is admitted by him that he worked in Indo Malaysia Engineering Company in
Malaysia for the period of 1972 to 1977. When he returned to India in the year 1977, he continued to
work in Kirloskar Group of Companies. He admits that first defendant on completion of his B.Com
decree in the year 1972, also joined Kirloskar Group of Companies with the influence of M.W. Gurjar
and worked till 1982. It is admitted by him that till the year 1981, first plaintiff, first defendant and
M.W. Gurjar all lived in suit schedule 'A' property. On confrontation, he admits that the signature of
M.W. Gurjar in Exs.D.1 and D.2 and so also copies of letters written by Sri M.W. Gurjar to various
persons which were marked at Exs.D.1 to D.10.
46. Ex.D.1 is the letter written by M.W. Gurjar to first plaintiff dated 16.10.1973 wherein there is
mention that there was a query by the Income Tax Officer as to how did first plaintiff got
Rs.35,000/-.
47. Ex.D.2 is yet another letter written by M.W. Gurjar dated 07.05.1973 mentioning about Ex.D.1.
48. Other letters are written by M.W. Gurajar to few other persons and few other concerns.
49. P.W.1 has admitted the signatures of Sri M.W. Gurjar in all those correspondence.
50. The bank counter foils are marked through D.W.1 as Exs.D.12 to D.15 to establish that bank
challens were also filled up by M.W. Gurjar as dated as 09.09.1995.
51. Certified copy of the lease deed - Ex.D.16 is in respect of first floor portion which was registered
in the office of Sub-Registrar which is in occupation of the first plaintiff.
52. Ex.D.17 is the Will dated 25.05.1984. Ex.D.18 is yet another Will dated 06.11.1992. Ex.D.21 is the
last Will which is registered in the office of the Sub-Registrar dated 25.02.1993.
53. In the cross-examination of P.W.1 these documents were confronted and on the admission of
P.W.1, they were got marked. It is pertinent to note that all the 'D' series documents are got
exhibited in the cross-examination of P.W.1.
54. P.W.1 further admits that Dr. S.G. Deshpande who was close relative of the family and Sri
S.V.Amurute, another close relative have attested Ex.D.21.
55. He also admits that draft of Ex.D.21 is marked at Ex.D.22. He admits that signature of M.W.
Gurjar beneath the words 'draft approved' in Ex.D.22.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 48
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
56. He also admits that he had taken his father for breaking open the lockers kept in the Canara
Bank. He also admits that after breaking open the locker, the entire gold jewellery was brought to
his house. In the next breath he has stated that the entire gold jewellery was given to his hands.
57. He admits that between the period 1990 to 1994, his mothers jewellery was in his custody. He
admits that in the year 1994 as per the directions of M.W. Gurjar, he shared the jewellery with first
and fourth defendants.
58. Further he admits that creation of trust for providing financial assistance for fourth defendant.
He has answered that he does not have any idea when the trust stopped functioning. He admits that
S.V. Amrute (D.W.2) is one of the trustees of the said trust. He admits that he occupied the first
floor as a tenant under his father.
59. He also admits that mental condition of fourth defendant continued in the same manner. In
paragraph No.20 he has specifically admitted that his father (M.W. Gurjar) was keeping normal
health till his death, except diabetes and hyper tension. He also admits that diabetes and hyper
tension did not affect his day to day activities.
60. He admits that Ex.D.16 was executed by M.W. Gurjar when he was keeping sound and disposing
state of mind. He also admits that his wife is an attesting witness to said Ex.D.16. It is also admitted
by him that his father possessed testamentary capacity till his death.
61. D.Ws.2 to 4 are the doctors who treated M.W. Gurjar. Among them, P.W.2 doctor who attended
Gurjar in Prabha eye clinic, who deposed about the eye surgery. In his cross-examination, he admits
that Sri Gurjar lost his sight in right eye.
62. He admits that Sri Gurjar last his right eye due to post operative infection. He has also admitted
that Alzheimer's disease can progress acutely over a stretched period of time and it is his suspicion
that Sri M.W. Gurjar was suffering from Alzheimer.
63. P.W.3 in his cross-examination admitted that he was treating M.W. Gurjar for diabetes and
hyper tension. He admits that if a person is suffering from hallucination, he cannot deal with his
bank transaction and day to day operations.
64. P.W.4 is a psychiatrist who said to have treated M.W.Gurjar. In his cross-examination admits
that he has treated M.W. Gurjar only once and at that time there was no proven efficacious
medication for his health condition.
He also answered that M.W.Gurjar was suffering from Senile Dementia Alzheimer type disease. He
has also answered that M.W. Gurjar has retained the mental capacity to the extent of 40%. While
confronted with Exs.D.5 and D.6, the witness has answered that he cannot definitely say whether
M.W. Gurjar was capable of executing Exs.D.5 and D.6. When confronted with Exs.D.8 and D.9, and
questioned that it is written by a normal person, he has answered that he could not comment
whether Gurjar had command over his faculties in a proper manner. He also answered same in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 49
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
manner with regard to Ex.D.16.
65. The above is the oral evidence placed on record on behalf of the plaintiffs to doubt the mental
capacity of Gurjar in executing Ex.D.21.
66. As against the said evidence, on behalf of the propounder of the Will first defendant got
examined as D.W.1 and he has filed an affidavit in lieu of the examination in chief practically
reiterating the contents of his written statement.
67. In his cross-examination, he has answered that he is Commerce graduate and he was working
earlier. He further answered that later on he is carrying on the business in diesel generator sets.
68. In his further cross-examination he has answered that M.W. Gurjar was managing his financial
affairs himself and he had sound mental capacity till his death. In the long cross-examination except
suggesting that M.W.Gurjar did not possess the required mental capacity and he has concocted
Ex.D.21 with the help of S.G. Deshpande and S.V.Amrute, no other useful materials are elicited so as
to disbelieve proper execution of Ex.D.21 or advance the case of plaintiffs.
69. S.V. Amrute is examined as D.W.2, who is one of the attesting witnesses to the Will dated
25.02.1993. He also deposed that he was acquainted with the family affairs of M.W.Gurjar as he is a
close relative of the family.
70. He has further deposed that he has seen M.W. Gurajar signing Ex.D.21 and later he has signed
Ex.D.21.
Thereby, the propounder of Ex.D.21 (first defendant) has discharged the burden in establishing
Ex.D.21 in due compliance to requirement of Section 63 of Indian Succession Act and Section 68 of
the Indian Evidence Act.
71. In his cross-examination he stated that in the year 1962 he has come to Bengaluru and lived with
M.W. Gurjar for the period of four years. He has admitted that most of the transactions of M.W.
Gurjar was informed to him by M.W. Gurjar. He has further answered that first plaintiff well placed
financially, so also his wife. He has further answered that the relationship between first plaintiff and
his wife with M.W. Gurjar was not good since 1977. He has further answered that the same was told
to him by M.W. Gurjar himself.
72. He has also answered that M.W.Gurjar was not diabetic patient, and he was having sound health
and mental condition. He denied the suggestion that M.W. Gurjar was not having sufficient mental
capacity to execute the Will and he has given active support with first defendant and with doctor to
concoct Ex.D.21.
73. With regard to appreciate proof of Will, the legal principles enunciated in the decision in H.
Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and others reported in AIR 1959 SC 443 are culled out
here under, which reads as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 50
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
"18. What is the true legal position in the matter of proof of wills? It is well- known
that the proof of wills presents a recurring topic for decision in courts and there are a
large number of judicial pronouncements on the subject. The party propounding a
will or otherwise making a claim under a will is no doubt seeking to prove a
document and, in deciding how it is to be proved, we must inevitably refer to the
statutory provisions which govern the proof of documents. Sections 67 and 68 of the
Evidence Act are relevant for this purpose. Under Section 67, if a document is alleged
to be signed by any person, the signature of the said person must be proved to be in
his handwriting, and for proving such a handwriting under Sections 45 and 47 of the
Act the opinions of experts and of persons acquainted with the handwriting of the
person concerned are made relevant. Section 68 deals with the proof of the execution
of the document required by law to be attested; and it provides that such a document
shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for
the purpose of proving its execution. These provisions prescribe the requirements
and the nature of proof which must be satisfied by the party who relies on a
document in a court of law. Similarly, Sections 59 and 63 of the Indian Succession
Act are also relevant. Section 59 provides that every person of sound mind, not being
a minor, may dispose of his property by will and the three illustrations to this section
indicate what is meant by the expression "a person of sound mind" in the context.
Section 63 requires that the testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or it shall
be signed by some other person in his presence and by his direction and that the
signature or mark shall be so made that it shall appear that it was intended thereby to
give effect to the writing as a will. This section also requires that the will shall be
attested by two or more witnesses as prescribed. Thus the question as to whether the
will set up by the propounder is proved to be the last will of the testator has to be
decided in the light of these provisions. Has the testator signed the will? Did he
understand the nature and effect of the dispositions in the will? Did he put his
signature to the will knowing what it contained? Stated broadly it is the decision of
these questions which determines the nature of the finding on the question of the
proof of wills. It would prima facie be true to say that the will has to be proved like
any other document except as to the special requirements of attestation prescribed by
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act. As in the case of proof of other documents so
in the case of proof of wills it would be idle to expect proof with mathematical
certainty. The test to be applied would be the usual test of the satisfaction of the
prudent mind in such matters."
19. However, there is one important feature which distinguishes wills from other documents. Unlike
other documents the will speaks from the death of the testator, and so, when it is propounded or
produced before a court, the testator who has already departed the world cannot say whether it is his
will or not; and this aspect naturally introduces an element of solemnity in the decision of the
question as to whether the document propounded is proved to be the last will and testament of the
departed testator. Even so, in dealing with the proof of wills the court will start on the same enquiry
as in the case of the proof of documents. The propounder would be called upon to show by
satisfactory evidence that the will was signed by the testator, that the testator at the relevant time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 51
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
was in a sound and disposing state of mind, that he understood the nature and effect of the
dispositions and put his signature to the document of his own free will. Ordinarily when the
evidence adduced in support of the will is disinterested, satisfactory and sufficient to prove the
sound and disposing state of the testator's mind and his signature as required by law, courts would
be justified in making a finding in favour of the propounder. In other words, the onus on the
propounder can be taken to be discharged on proof of the essential facts just indicated.
74. In a Judgment of co-ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of J.T. Surappa and another vs. Sri
Satchidhanandendra Saraswathi Swamiji Public Charitable Trust and Others, reported in ILR 2008
KAR 2115 it is held as under:
"(A) INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925 --
SECTION 2(h) -- Will -- Proof of -- Legal requirements -- Duty of the Court -- Five steps to be
considered -- HELD, Under the Act, the Will to be valid, should be reduced into writing, signed by
the testator and shall be attested by two or more witnesses and at least one attesting witnesses shall
be examined. If these legal requirements are not found, in the eye of law there is no Will at all.
Therefore, the first step is that if the documents produced before the Court prima facie do not satisfy
these legal requirements, the Court need not make any further enquiry, in so far as its due execution
is concerned and can negative a claim based on the said document -- FURTHER HELD, The second
step is that when the legal heirs are disinherited, the Court has to scrutinize the evidence with
greater degree of care than usual -- The third step would be to find out whether the testator was in a
sound state of mind at the terms of executing the Will -- The fourth step would be to find out
whether there exists any suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will -- The fifth
step is to consider whether the Will that is executing is in accordance with Section 63 of the Act read
with Section 68 of the Evidence Act.
(B) INDIAN SUCCESSION ACT, 1925 --
SECTION 63 R/W SECTION 68 -- Execution of a Will under -- Attestation and Execution
-- Procedure -- HELD, The Will that is executed is in accordance with Section 63 of the Act read with
Section 68 of the Evidence Act. The Will is a document required by law to be attested. The execution
of Will must include both execution and attestation.
"Attestation" and "execution" are different acts, one following the other. There can be
no valid execution without due attestation, and if due attestation is not proved, the
fact of execution is of no avail -- The Court has to find out whether the Will bears the
signature of the testator and the said signature is placed at a place with the intention
of giving effect to the Will. Further the said Will has been attested by two witnesses
and whether the witnesses have seen the testator affixing his signature to the Will in
their presence and if not at least they receive from the testator a personal
acknowledgement of his signature or mark and each of them shall sign the Will as
attesting witness in the presence of the testator though it shall not be necessary that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 52
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
both of them should be present at the same time -- FURTHER HELD, Section 68 of
the Evidence Act deals with proof of execution of documents required by law to be
attested. A Will is a document which requires to be attested under Section 63(c) of
the Act. Therefore, the said document shall not be used as evidence until at least one
attesting witness has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be
an attesting witness alive and subject to the process of the Court and capable of
giving evidence. Whether such a Will is registered or not registered, in the eye of law
it makes no difference.
Even if the said Will is registered under the provisions of the Indian Registration Act,
1908 whether the execution of the Will is admitted or denied, it is necessary to call an
attesting witness in proof of the execution of the said Will. Under no circumstances
the proof of execution of the Will is dispensed with in law -- It is only after the Court
is satisfied that all these tests are successfully passed, the Court can declare that Will
is executed in accordance with law, as such it is valid and enforceable."
75. Gist of the legal principles enunciated in above decisions is that to succeed in proving the Will,
the propounder of the Will is required to place satisfactory evidence that:
(i) the Will was duly signed by the
testator;
(ii) the testator at the time of signing the
Will was in a sound and disposing state of mind;
(iii) the testator understood the nature and effect of the dispositions; and
(iv) that the testator had put his signature on the document of his own free Will and lastly
(v) That the Will is free from suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the Will.
76. It is pertinent to note that the celebrated principles of law enunciated in Thimmajamma's case
supra, which is usually termed as 'panchapadi' is being followed practically in almost all judgments
rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court on the point.
77. This Court also had an occasion to consider legal principles which would govern the proof of Will
following the dictum in the case of Thimmajamma and other authoritative pronouncements of the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Krishna Rao referred to supra.
78. Relevant portions in the case of Krishna Rao supra is culled out hereunder for the sake of
convenience.
115. "The next question that needs attention of this court in upholding the genuineness of the
disputed Wills is that improper distribution or bequeath under the Wills and Codicil.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 53
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
116. Admittedly the contents of the Wills and codicil referred to supra answers the said question in
abundance. The testators namely Murthy Rao and Rangamma had their own reasons in arriving at
the conclusion as to bequeath and in the absence of contra evidence placed on record by the
plaintiff, this court has to record a finding that mere disinheritance of other sharers or lesser share
has been given to few sharers would not ipso facto be treated as suspicious circumstance to doubt
the genuineness of the wills and codicil as is held by Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Savithri and
others Vs. Karthyayani Amma and others reported in (2007) 11 SCC 621.
117. Further, in the case of P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar reported in -
1995 Supp (2) SCC 664, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that -
"It is the duty of the propounder of the Will to remove all the suspicious
circumstances surrounding the Will. But such suspicion must be real, germane and
valid and not fantasy of the doubting mind. Further it is also held that merely on the
ground that the whole of estate was given to a son in exclusion to the daughter itself
is not sufficient to generate suspicion regarding the Will."
118. While explaining the meaning of what is a suspicious circumstance surrounding a Will, in the
case of Indu Bala Bose v. Manindra Chandra Bose reported in (1982) 1 SCC 20 the Hon'ble Apex
Court explained the meaning of the word "suspicious" in the following words-
"Needless to say that any and every circumstances is not a "suspicious"
circumstance. A circumstance would be "suspicious" when it is not normal or is not normally
expected in a normal situation or is not expected of a normal person."
119. It is argued on behalf of plaintiff that health condition of Murthy Rao and Rangamma was not
sound in view of the admissions obtained in the cross examination of DW1 and therefore, a thick
cloud of suspicion is hovering over the veracity of the Wills and Codicil.
120. But the material evidence on record is not sufficient enough to hold that physical ailments of
both the testators interfered in mental fitness in taking appropriate decision. It is settled principles
of law that sound and disposing state of mind is to be tested in a given case depending upon the
facts and circumstances of that case.
121. In the case on hand, when such test is applied, the material evidence on record placed by the
parties are not sufficient enough to hold that testators did not possess required mental fitness at the
time of execution of Wills and Codicil. Detailed cross examination of attesting witnesses on behalf of
the plaintiff did not yield any plausible material in establishing weak or fragile mental fitness of the
testators.
122. Further, though the propounder is expected to prove the Will by placing sufficient and cogent
evidence, the propounder is not expected to prove a Will by mathematical certainty. The burden
expected to be discharged by law is only to the extent that the propounder has to show the execution
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 54
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
in terms of the essential statutory requirements under the Act; absence of suspicious circumstances;
and mental fitness of the testator. Thus, while appreciating the material evidence placed on record,
the court is not expected to look for strict proof. In a given case, the rule to be applied in such cases
is the celebrated rule namely, "Arm Chair rule". More so, while interpreting the contents of a Will.
Said rule envisages that:
"You may place yourself, to speak, in (the testator's) armchair, and consider the
circumstances, by which he was surrounded when he made his Will, to assist you in
arriving at his intention."
123. As to the discharge of burden by the propounder of will, Hon'ble Apex Court in Shivakumar &
Others. v. Sharanabasppa, reported in (2021) 11 SCC 277 has categorically held that if a person
challenging the Will alleges fabrication or fraud, undue influence, coercion etc., in regard to the
execution of the Will, such pleas have to be proved by him. In the case on hand, plaintiff having
joined the issue with regard to proof of Wills and Codicil did not lead any rebuttal evidence to
establish that Wills and Codicil are fabricated or got executed by playing fraud or coercion on
testators.
124. To sum up, it is enough to refer to one of the recent decisions of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case
of Kavita Kanwar vs. Mrs. Pamela Mehta and Others reported in (2021) 11 SCC 209, wherein
Hon'ble Apex Court referred to almost all previous decisions right from H.Venkatachala Iyengar
supra and held that in a given case a suspicion is created are essentially those where either the
signature of the testator is disputed or the mental capacity of the testator is questioned. In the
matter of appreciating the genuineness of the execution of a Will, there is no place for the Court to
see whether the distribution made by the testator was fair and equitable to all of his children. It is
further held that the Court is not required to apply Article 14 of the Constitution of India, to
dispositions under a Will.
125. There cannot be any dispute with regard to the legal principles enunciated in Madhukar supra
relied on by the learned counsel for respondent. In fact, in paragraph No.9 of the said judgment
referred to supra, their lordships have ruled that when once the propounder adduces prima facie
evidence in proving the competence of the testator and execution of the Will in the manner
contemplated under the law, the contestant opposing the Will should place such material on record
rebutting the material evidence placed by the propounder as the onus would shift to the contestant
of the Will. If any such evidence is placed by the person who opposes the Will, the onus would again
shift back to propounder. In the case on hand, there is no rebuttal evidence placed by the plaintiff
who is contesting the genuineness of the Wills and Codicil. As such, the onus did not re-
shift to the propounder-first defendant. Therefore, the decision in Madhukar's case supra, is not of
much avail to the respondent-plaintiff in their case being advanced to any extent.
126. Since, this court has discussed at length as to the legal principles in establishing the
genuineness of a Will in a given case with authoritative pronouncements of Hon'ble Apex court,
further discussion on the decisions relied on by the learned counsel for the appellants is not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 55
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
necessary."
79. In the light of the legal principles enunciated in Thimmajamma, J. T. Surappa and Krishna Rao
supra, when the material evidence on record is analyzed, having regard to the admissions made by
P.W.1 in his cross-
examination that M.W. Gurjar had a normal health till his death assumes a greater importance in
assessing the mental health (capacity or fitness) of M.W. Gurjar at the time of execution of Ex.D.21.
80. Further, the doctors who have been examined on behalf of plaintiff as P.Ws.2 to 4, have not
specifically stated as to what exactly the mental deficiency that M.W.Gurjar possessed so as to
accept the contention on behalf of plaintiff that M.W.Gurjar was not mentally fit to execute Ex.D.21
inasmuch as each of those witnesses have gone on giving different versions in their examination-in-
chief itself. Further, Ex.D.22 is the draft of Ex.D.21.
P.W.1 admits signature of Sri M.W.Gurjar beneath the words 'draft approved' in Ex.D.22. Material
on record also depicts that Sri M.W.Gurjar was attending his day to day activities including the
financial aspects in filling up bank challans etc., Further, Ex.D.16 came to be executed on 31.12.1992
which is few months earlier to execution of Ex.D.21. Ex.D.16 is not in dispute. In fact, wife of first
plaintiff is an attesting witness to said document.
81. If at all as is canvassed by plaintiff that M.W.Gurjar was suffering from senile dementia, soon
after the eye surgery, how could M.W.Gurjar execute Ex.D.16 is a question that remains unanswered
on behalf of the plaintiff. Moreover, Ex.D.21 is a registered document and M.W.Gurjar has visited
the office of the Sub Registrar along with D.W.2-S.V.Amruthe for the purpose of execution and
registration of Ex.D.21. It is not forthcoming on record that along with M.W.Gurjar first defendant
or his wife had accompanied M.W.Gurjar either to the office of the advocate who drafted Ex.D.21 or
to the office of the Sub Registrar. Therefore, it should be presumed that Ex.D.21 has been executed
in the natural course by Sri M.W.Gurjar.
82. In view of the foregoing discussion, the theory put forth on behalf of the plaintiff that
M.W.Gurjar did not possess required mental fitness in executing Ex.D.21 cannot be countenanced in
law. As such, this Court has no hesitation whatsoever in holding that M.W.Gurjar had sufficient
mental capacity to execute Ex.D.21.
83. This would take us to the next step, namely, suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will.
According to plaintiff, exclusion of first plaintiff and fourth defendant in the bequeath made under
Ex.D.21 is the suspicious circumstance and depict the hand of first defendant in background in
concocting Ex.D.21 with active collusion of attesting witnesses.
84. In order to appreciate the said aspect of the matter, material available on record is suggestions
made to first defendant and D.W.2 in the cross-examination. It is pertinent to note that those
suggestions have been denied by D.Ws.1 and 2 categorically. Moreover, D.W.2 being close relative,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 56
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
did not possess any enmity or animosity against plaintiff nor any extra affinity towards the first
defendant to depose in favour of the propounder of the Will. Mere answer of D.W.2 in
cross-examination that M.W.Gurjar did not suffer from diabetes itself is not sufficient to discard his
entire evidence. Nor such answer did not shake the credibility of the version of D.W.2 in entirety.
85. It is now settled principles of law that mere exclusion of a kith and kin from bequeath do not
ipso facto can be treated as a suspicious circumstance in view of the principles of law enunciated in
the aforesaid decisions.
86. Further, in the case on the hand, the contents of Ex.D.21 itself make it clear that why
M.W.Gurjar has excluded first plaintiff from the bequeath. It is also pertinent to note that First
plaintiff possess an immovable property at R.M.V Extension. Material evidence show that purchase
of the said property M.W.Gurjar had contributed financially. If M.W.Gurjar had decided to bequeath
portion of the suit property (Gurjar house) in favour of first plaintiff, during his life time, he would
not have treated first plaintiff as a tenant in the first floor of the property vide Ex.D.16. Very fact that
first plaintiff has been allowed to occupy portion of the Gurjar's house as tenant that too in the
lifetime of M.W.Gurjar presupposes that all was not well in the relationship between first plaintiff
and late M.W.Gurjar. Therefore, while considering the intent of the executant in interpreting the
bequeath made under the Will, the Court has to step into the shoes of the executant and find out
whether the bequeath is reasonable or not.
87. Further, Attestors' oral testimony in this regard assumes a significant importance. In this regard,
D.W.2 one of the attestors to Ex.D.21 categorically answered in cross-examination that relationship
between first plaintiff and M.W.Gurjar was not cordial. He has answered that he came to know
about the same from M.W.Gurjar himself.
88. Further, it is also found from contents of Ex.D.21 that life interest has been created in favour of
defendant No.4 who is the mentally challenged sister of first plaintiff and first defendant which was
not the case in earlier Will.
Therefore, the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant that Will is to be construed as suffering
from suspicious circumstances cannot be countenanced in law.
89. Since P.W.1 has admitted the signature of M.W.Gurjar on Ex.D.21, attestor has also identified
the signature of M.W.Gurjar and has deposed that he has signed Ex.D.21 after M.W.Gurjar has
signed, there is sufficient compliance of legal requirements with regard to the proof of Will. No
rebuttal evidence is placed on record by plaintiff with regard to proof of Will after examination of
propunder and Attestor.
90. No other point is urged either to hold that Ex.D.21 is not valid on behalf of the appellant.
91. In view of the fact that the plaintiffs/appellants have themselves relied on the judgment of this
Court in Krishna Rao and in view of the above discussion, of factual aspects this Court does not
deem it fit to carry out further discussion on the other judgments relied on by the parties in detail
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 57
Sri Atul M Gurjar vs Sri Mohan M Gurjar on 21 December, 2023
referred to supra.
92. In view of the foregoing discussion, point No.1 is answered in the Negative and point No.2 in the
affirmative and point No.3 in the Negative.
Regarding point No.4:
93. In view of findings on point Nos.1 to 3, this Court pass the following:
ORDER Appeal is meritless and is hereby dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Sd/-
JUDGE SRA/MR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42487676/ 58
