Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on
30 January, 2020
Bench: K.N.Phaneendra, Pradeep Singh Yerur
:1:
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
R
ON THE 30 T H DAY OF JANUARY 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.N. PHANEENDRA
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP SINGH YERUR
WRIT PETITION NO.105359 OF 2019 (GM-KLA)
AND
WRIT PETITION NO.114148 OF 2019
BETWEEN
1. SRI. R. V. JATTANNA
S/O V.D. JATTANNA,
AGE: 61 YEARS,
THE THEN COMMISSIONER TMC KARWAR,
PRESENTLY WORK ING AS
COMMISSIONER OF
TOWN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL,DANDELI,
DIST: UTTARA KANNADA,
2. SRI. MOHANRAJ
ASSISTANT ENGINEER,
CITY MUNICIPAL COUNCIL KARWAR,
DIST: UTTARA KANNADA.
... PETITIONERS
(BY SRI. J. S. SHETTY, ADVOCATE)
AND
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY ITS SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF
URBAN DEVELOPMENT,
:2:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 1
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
VIKASA SOUDHA,
BENGALURU.
2. UPA-LOKAYUKTA-1
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA OFFICE,
M.S. BUILDING,
DR.B.R.AMBEDKAR VEEDHI,
BENGALURU.
3. SRI.SHRIKANT IRA BANVAYEKAR
AGE: MAJOR,
R/O: M.G. ROAD,
NEAR LIC OFFICE,
KAJUBHAG, TQ: K ARWAR,
DIST: UTTARA KANNADA.
4. DYSP, KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA
KARWAR,
DIST: UTTARA KANNADA.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. G. K. HI REGOUDAR, GOVT. ADV., FOR R1;
SRI. SANTOSH B. MALAGOUDAR, ADV., FOR R2 & R4;
R3- NOTICE SERVED)
THESE WRIT PETITIONS ARE FILED UNDER
ARTICLES 226 AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH THE GOVERNMENT ORDER
No.NaAaE62/DMK /2018, BENGALURU DATED
28.07.2018, PASSED BY THE FIRST RESPONDENT, THE
COPY OF WHICH HAS BEEN PRODUCED HEREWITH AND
MARKED AS ANNEXURE-A AND ALSO THE REPORT
SUBMITTED BY THE SECOND RESPONDENT IN
COMPLAINT DATED 28.04.2018 IN Compt/Uplok/BGM-
2495/17/ARE-6 and Compt/Uplok/BGM-2316/17/ARE-6,
THE COPY OF WHICH HAS BEEN PRODUCED HEREWITH
AND MARKED AS ANNEXURE-B, INSOFAR AS
PETITIONERS ARE CONCERNED.
THESE WRIT PETITIONS COMING ON FOR
PRELIMINARY HEARING, THIS DAY, K.N.PHA NEENDRA,
J., MADE THE FOLLOWING:
:3:
ORDER
The present writ petitions are filed seeking relief of quashing the government order passed by the 1 s
t respondent/the State of Karnataka in No. NaAaE62/DMK/2018, Bengaluru, dated 28.07.2018 as
per Annexure-A and also the report submitted by the 2 n d respondent i.e. Upa-lokayukta in
Complaint dated No.28.04.2018 in Compt/Uplok/BGM-2495/17 /ARE-6 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 2
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
Compt/Uplok/BGM-2316/17/ARE-6 as per Annexure-B and for such other reliefs as the Court
deems fit to grant under the circumstances of the case.
2. We have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for petitioners and the learned Government
Advocate for respondent No.1 and the learned standing counsel for respondent Nos.2 and
4. We have also carefully perused the legal grounds raised in these writ petitions and also the factual
aspects. The facts which are not in dispute are that the Upa-lokayukta/2 n d respondent, after
conducting a preliminary enquiry, submitted his report on 28.04.2018 holding that a prima-facie
case has been made out for the purpose of conducting disciplinary enquiry against the petitioners
and as per Annexure-B, requested the 1st respondent/ State Government to entrust the matter to the
Lokayukta for the purpose of conducting disciplinary enquiry, as per paragraph 11 and 12 of the
order. After receipt of the said order, the government passed an order as per Annexure-A, entrusting
the matter to Upa-lokayukta for conducting disciplinary enquiry as contemplated under Section 14
of the CCA Rules. Further, it is also not in dispute that the said disciplinary enquiry is pending
before Upa-lokayukta and report is awaited.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioners Mr.J.S.Shetty strenuously contends before this Court
drawing our attention to Section 12 of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act (for short "the Act")
particularly, with reference to Section 12(3) and 12(4) of the Act and argued that, the government
has got power to receive the report from Upa- lokayukta under Section 12(3) of the Act, and in turn
also the request made by the Upa-lokayukta to hold a disciplinary enquiry against the employee of
the government or any public servant. But the government itself cannot refer back the matter to
Upa-lokayukta to conduct for further disciplinary enquiry, because it is only the action that has been
taken by the government to be reported to Upa- lokayukta as per Section 12(4) of the Act. The
wordings used in the said provision that the action taken by the government should be intimated to
the Lokayukta or Upa-lokayukta or the action proposed to be taken on the basis of the report shall
be intimated to Upa-lokayukta.
4. Referring to the present case the learned counsel very strenuously argued before this Court that,
the petitioners are the municipal servants and they are governed by separate rules called as
Karnataka Municipalities (Recruitment of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010. He has also drawn
our attention to Rule 11 and contended that though the Karnataka Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 was made applicable to the servants of the municipality, but subject
to modifications specified in Schedule-III. Therefore, the learned counsel contends, if the said
provision is read in their proper perspective, the authorities mentioned therein is not the
government but municipal authorities, who are the disciplinary authorities, appointing authorities
and removing authorities of its servants. Further it is contended that the employees of
Municipalities and Corporation cannot be called as public servants, but they are only to be called as
employees of the municipality. Therefore, he specifically contends before this Court that even the
provisions of CCA Rules, particularly, Rule 14(A) is applicable, the government has only got power
to receive report from Lokayukta under Section 12(3) of the Act, but the government cannot entrust
back the proceedings to Upa-lokayukta for the purpose of conducting disciplinary enquiry. At the
most, the government under section 12(4) of the Act can propose the action taken by it to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 3
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
Upa-lokayukta, that Government has intimated the concerned disciplinary authorities to take action
against its employees either by themselves conducting the disciplinary enquiry (D.E) or by
entrusting the same to Upa-lokayukta. Therefore, he contends in this particular case, as the
petitioners are municipal employees, the government has no jurisdiction to propose any action to be
taken against them and entrust the matter to Upa-lokayukta, for to conduct the disciplinary enquiry.
Hence, the entire proceedings pending before Upa-lokayukta is vitiated by serious illegality. Hence,
the same is liable to be quashed.
5. The learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 and 2 attaching the above said submission made by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, submitted that the proposed action, as contained in sub- clause 4
of Section 12 of the Act, includes the government, which is a superior authority to all the other
instrumentalities departments in State like Municipal Administrations and other authorities, has got
power to refer the matter to Upa-lokayukta for disciplinary enquiry under the Act. They also relied
upon the CCA Rule 14-A and submitted that only after receipt of Upa-lokayukta's report, after
conducting the disciplinary enquiry, then only the government for the purpose of inflictment the
punishment to the delinquent employee has to send the matter to the disciplinary authorities for
appropriate action under Rule 12 of the CCA Rules. Therefore, they submit that it goes without
saying that the proposed action as mentioned in Section 12(4) of the Act, includes referring of the
matter by the government to the Upa-lokayukta for disciplinary enquiry. It is submitted by the
learned counsel that some disciplinary authorities, who are the government servants, even the
Panchayath Officers and Deputy Commissioners, Assistant Commissioners and some of the officers,
who are working under the government, they may, after the receipt of report of the Upa-lokayukta,
sit over the same and nullify the effect of the report submitted by the Upa-lokayukta and discharge
their employees then and there itself, even without conducting the disciplinary enquiry. The main
object of introducing Karnataka Lokayukta Act and the relevant provisions therein empowering
government, which is the superior authority to all the authorities in the state, if it feels that it is
necessary to take disciplinary action, the government itself can refer the matter to the Upa-
lokayukta after satisfying itself with reference to the report submitted by the Upa-lokayukta so as to
avoid the mischief that may happen, if the said report of the Upa-lokayukta is sent to the
disciplinary authorities by empowering them either to take action or to refer the matter to Upa-
lokayukta. Therefore, the magnanimous intentions of the legislatures have to be read into the
provisions under Section 12(4) of the Act. They also relied upon various rulings, which we are going
to discuss little later.
6. Before considering the submissions of the respective counsels, we would like to have a brief look
at the provisions of Karnataka Lokayukta Act, which defines who is a public servant, which is the
competent authority and who is the disciplinary authority.
7. Apart from defining who is a Government Servant under Section 2(6) of the Act, Section 2 clause
(12) of the Act defines who is a public servant. Very sensibly the Karnataka Lokayukta Act does not
refer the word "government servant" in this section it refers to "public servant". clause (12) of
Section 2 reads as follows:
"12. "public servant" means a person who is or was at any time,-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 4
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
(a) the Chief Minister,
(b) a Minister,
(c) a member of the State Legislature;
(d) a Government Servant:"
(e) the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman
(by whatever name called) or a member of a local authority in the State of Karnataka
or a statutory body or corporation established by or under any law of the State
Legislature, including a co-operative society, or a Government Company within the
meaning of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 and such other corporations or
boards as the State Government may, having regard to its financial interest in such
corporations or boards, by notification, from time to time specify.
(f) Member of a Committee or Board,
statutory or non-statutory,
constituted by the Government; and
(g) A person in the service or pay of,-
(i) a local authority in the State of Karnataka;
(ii) a statutory body or a corporation (not being a local authority) established by or
under a State or Central Act, owned or controlled by the State Government and any
other board or corporation as the State Government may, having regard to its
financial interest therein, by notification, from time to time, specify;
(iii) a company registered under the Companies act, 1956, in which not less than fifty
one per cent of the paid up share capital is held by the State government, or any
company which is a subsidiary of such company;
(iv) a society registered or deemed to have been registered under the Karnataka
Societies Registration Act, 1960, which is subject to the control of the State
Government and which is notified in this behalf in the official Gazette;
(v) a co-operative society;
(vi) a university;
Explanation.- In this clause, "co-operative society" means a co-operative society
registered or deemed to have been registered under the Karnataka Co-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 5
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
operative Societies Act, 1959, and "university" means a university established or deemed to be
established by or under any law of the State Legislature.
8. On plain reading of the above said provision, it not only encompasses all the public servants but
also under Section 2(g) encompass the other employees of various other statutory bodies,
corporations established by or under the State.
9. It is not in dispute that the petitioners are working under the municipality as the employees of the
municipality. Therefore, he also falls under the definition of public servant particularly under
Section 2(g) of the Act. The learned counsel for the appellant strenuously contends before the Court
that in view of the separate Rules i.e., the Karnataka Municipalities (Recruitment of Officers and
Employees) Rules, 2010, Rule 11 says that wherever the word "government servants" are used there
the employees of the municipalities has to be read in to, that's why the government servant wording
is not used in Karnataka Lokayukta Act but it is a public servant the definition has been given. So
whether, he is working as a "government servant"
by said substitution of rule 11 or he is working under any "public authorities" or any
other statutory authorities they all categorized as public servants as per Section 2 (12)
of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act. Therefore, the petitioners also fall under the
category of public servants as per the above said provision irrespective of the
nomenclature given to him under Rule 11 of the Karnataka Municipalities
(Recruitment of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010.
10. Now, we have to examine the provision under Section 12 of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act in
order to resolve the above said submission made by learned counsel, the said provisions reads as
under:
"12. Reports of Lokayukta, etc.- (1) If, after investigation of any action involving a
grievance has been made, the Lokayukta or an Upa-lokayukta is satisfied that such
action has resulted in injustice or undue hardship to the complainant or to any other
person, the Lokayukta or an Upa- lokayukta shall, by a report in writing, recommend
to the competent authority concerned that such injustice or hardship shall be
remedied or redressed in such manner and within such time as may be specified in
the report.
(2) The competent authority to whom a report is sent under sub-section (1) shall,
within one month of the expiry of the period specified in the report, intimate or cause
to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta the action taken on the report.
(3) If, after investigation of any action involving an allegation has been made, the
Lokayukta or an Upa-lokayukta is satisfied that such allegation (is substantiated)
either wholly or partly, he shall by report in writing communicate his findings and
recommendations along with the relevant documents, materials and other evidence
to the competent authority.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 6
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
(4) The competent authority shall examine the report forwarded to it under
subsection (3) and within three months of the date of receipt of the report, intimate
or cause to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the basis of the report.
(5) If the Lokayukta or the Upa-
lokayukta is satisfied with the action taken or proposed to be taken on his
recommendations or findings referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3), he shall close the
case under information to the complainant, the public servant and the competent
authority concerned; but where he is not so satisfied and if he considers that the case
so deserves, he may make a special report upon the case to the governor and also
inform the competent authority concerned and the complainant.
(6) The Lokayukta shall present on or before 31 s t October of every year, a
consolidated report on the performance of his functions and that of the Upa-
lokayukta under this Act to the Governor.
(7) On receipt of the special report under sub-section (5), or the annual report under sub-section (6),
the governor shall cause a copy thereof together with an explanatory memorandum to be laid before
each house of the state Legislature.
(8) The Lokayukta or an Upa-
lokayukta may at his discretion make
available, from time to time, the
substance of cases closed or otherwise
disposed of by him which may appear to him to be of general, public, academic or professional
interest in such manner and to such persons as he may deem appropriate."
11. The above provision in the Lokayukta Act shows that, if any complaint is lodged against any
public servant to Upa-lokayukta by anybody, including the disciplinary authorities or the
government or even the action to investigate suo- motu taken up by Upa-lokayukta then under Sub-
section (3) of Section 12, the Lokayukta after investigation or preliminary enquiry regarding the
allegations made against a public servant if he is satisfied that such allegations, either wholly or
partly true, then he shall make a report in writing, communicating his findings and
recommendations along with relevant documents, materials and other evidence to the competent
authority. Sub-clause (4) says that the competent authority shall examine the report forwarded to
under Sub-Section (3) and within three months of the date of receipt of the report, intimate or cause
to be intimated to the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta the action taken or proposed to be taken on
the basis of the report. The wordings used in Sub-Section (4) of Section 12 i.e., action taken or
proposed to be taken falls for interpretation by us in this particular petition. Of-course, it goes
without saying that, if the Government itself is the disciplinary authority, the Government can
directly take action by accepting the report and initiate further disciplinary enquiry either by itself
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 7
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
under the relevant CCA Rules or it can entrust the matter to Upa-lokayukta for disciplinary enquiry.
After receiving further report from Upa-lokayukta government can act upon the report and take
further action to impose penalty as per CCA Rules.
12. If the Government is not the competent authority in such an eventuality whether it is incumbent
upon the Government to send the investigation or enquiry report submitted by the Upa-lokayukta
under Section 12(3) to the concerned disciplinary authorities either to take action, to proceed with
the disciplinary action or to intimate the Upa-lokayukta the action taken are proposed to be taken
against its employee on the basis of the report. In order to understand this anomaly the court has to
go through the Rule 14-A of CCA Rules. Before that as we have categorically examined the
Municipalities Rules noted above, the CCA Rules of the Karnataka Civil Services Rules has been
adopted with certain modification as per Rule 11(1) of the Karnataka Municipalities (Recruitment of
Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010, which reads as follows:
11. Application of certain other Rules : Without prejudice to these rules, the
provisions of.-
(1) The Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 shall
apply subject to modifications specified in Schedule III.
Proviso to this, is also there underneath said provision which reads as follows:
"And other rules, made or deemed to have been made under the Karnataka State Civil
services, Act, 1978, orders and special orders of Government issued from time to
time, and adopted in those Rules shall mutatis mutandis apply to the employees
appointed under these rules subject to modifications made in these rules. Provided
that the expressions "government servant(s)", "Head of the department/s", "Head of
the Offices", "The government" or/and "the Governor", wherever they occur in the
Acts and Rules enumerated above, shall respectively mean "Municipal employee(s)"
"Deputy Commissioner or Director of Municipal Administration or any of his
subordinates notified by Government from time to time, as the case may be",
Municipal Commissioner in respect of City Municipal Council and Chief Officer in
respect of Town Municipal and Town Panchayat in the State", and "Government in
Urban Development Department"
13. Of-course, by reading into these provisions with proviso, it clearly discloses that wherever the
wordings used as government in the CCA Rules that should be replaced by the authorities
mentioned in the proviso. That means to say, this rule clearly indicates that the rule wants to replace
the government as a disciplinary authority with that of authorities under the Municipalities Act as
appointing authorities, removing authorities or the disciplinary authorities. There is no dispute so
far as this aspect is concerned, that Municipal Administration is disciplinary authority so far as the
petitioners are concerned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 8
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
14. Now coming back to Rule 14-A of the Karnataka Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1957, which is also
mutatis mutandis applicable to the Municipal Employees. Rule 14-A is the relevant provision, which
reads as follows:
"14-A. Procedure in cases entrusted to the Lokayukta.- (1) The provisions of
sub-rule(2) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Rules 9 to 11-A and 13, be
applicable for purposes of proceedings against Government Servants whose alleged
misconduct has been investigated into by the Lokayukta or an Upa-lokayukta either
under the provisions of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 or on reference from
Government or where offences alleged against them punishable under the Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1947, or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has been
investigated by the Karnataka Lokayukta Police before 21 s t day of December, 1992.
(2) (a) where an investigation into any allegation against.-
(i) a member of the State Civil Services Group 'A' or group 'B', or
(ii) a member of the State Civil Services Group 'A' or group 'B' and a member of the
State Civil Services Group 'C' or Group 'D', or
(iii) a member of the State civil Services Group 'C' or group 'D' the Lokayukta or the
Upa-lokayukta or, (before the 21-12-1992), the Inspector-
General of Police of the Karnataka Lokayukta police is of the opinion, that disciplinary proceedings
shall be taken, he shall forward the record of the investigation along with his recommendation to the
Government and the Government, after examining such record, may either direct an inquiry into the
case by the Lokayukta or the Upa-
lokayukta or direct the appropriate Disciplinary Authority to take action in accordance with Rule 12.
(b) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry into a case under clause (a) the enquiry may be
concluded either by the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta, as the case may be, or an officer on the
staff of the Lokayukta authorized by the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta to conduct the inquiry.
Provided that the inquiry shall not be conducted by an officer lower in rank than that of Government
Servant against whom it is held:
Provided further that an inquiry against a government servant not lower in rank than that of a
deputy Commissioner shall not be conducted by any person other than the Lokayukta or the Upa-
lokayukta or an Additional Registrar (Inquiries).
Provided also that an officer on the staff of the Lokayukta authorities to conduct an inquiry under
clause (b) shall not have the power to appoint another officer to conduct it wholly or in part.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 9
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
(c) The Lokayukta, the Upa-lokayukta or the officer authorized under clause (b) to conduct an
inquiry shall conduct it in accordance with the provisions of Rule 11 insofar as they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this rule and for that purpose shall have the powers of the
disciplinary Authority referred to in the said rule.
(d) After the inquiry is completed, the record of the case along with the findings of the Inquiring
Officer and the recommendation of the Lokayukta or the Upa-lokayukta as thecase may be, shall be
sent to the Government.
(e) On receipt of the record under clause (d) the Government shall take action in accordance with
the provisions of Rule 11-A and in all such cases the government shall be the Disciplinary Authority
competent to impose any of the penalties specified in Rule 8.
(3) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall be applicable to members of the Karnataka Judicial Services or
Government Servants under the administrative control of such members or of the High court of
Karnataka."
15. On careful perusal of the said provision, Rule 14-A(2) is the relevant provision so far as this case
is concerned. Rule (2) (a) Sub-clause (i) to
(iii) discloses that, all the officers in group-A, B, C and D are covered. If the disciplinary authority
wants to initiate proceedings, in such an eventuality, the authority shall forward the record for
investigation along with the recommendation to the Government and the Government after
examining such record may either direct an enquiry into the case by the Lokayukta or the Upa-
lokayukta or direct the appropriate disciplinary authority to take action in accordance with Rules 12
of the CCA Rules. Therefore, this provision only contemplates that only after the government
receives any report either from the disciplinary authority or from the Lokayukta, in such an
eventuality for the purpose of considering the said report under Rule 12 only, the government can
direct the disciplinary authorities to take action in accordance with law under Rule 12 of the CCA
Rules.
16. Rule 12 of the Karnataka Civil Services (CCA) Rules 1957, which reads as follows:
12. Procedure for imposing minor penalties.-(1) subject to the provisions of
sub--Rule(3) of rule 11-A, no order imposing on a Government Servant any of the
penalties specified in clauses (i) to (iv-a) of Rule 8 shall be made except after.-
(a) informing the government servant in writing of the proposal to take action against
him and of the imputations of misconduct or misbehavior on which it is proposed to
be taken, and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making such representation as
he may wish to make against the proposal;
(b) holding an inquiry in the manner laid down in sub-rules (3) to (23) of Rule 11, in
every case in which the Disciplinary Authority is of the opinion that such inquiry is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 10
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
necessary;
Provided that no order imposing a penalty of withholding increments with
cumulative effect shall be made without holding an inquiry in the manner laid down
in sub-rules (3) to (23) of Rule 11.
(c) taking the representation, if any, submitted by the Government servant under
clause (a) and the record of inquiry, if any, held under clause (b) into consideration;
(d) recording a finding on each
imputation of misconduct or
misbehavior, and
(e) consulting the Commission where
such consultation is necessary.
(2) The record of the proceedings in such cases shall include.-
(i) a copy of the intimation to the Government Servant of the proposal to take action
against him;
(ii) a copy of the statement of
imputations of misconduct or
misbehavior delivered to him.
(iii) his representation, if any;
(iv) the evidence produced during the
inquiry;
(v) the advice of the Commission, if
any;
(vi) the finding on each imputation of
misconduct or misbehavior and
(vii) the orders on the case together with the reasons therefore.
17. On meaningful reading of the above said provision, the said Rule 12 is applicable only after the
disciplinary enquiry is conducted and the delinquent employee was held to be guilty of the
allegations made against him and this provision empowers the disciplinary authority to impose the
penalties upon him.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 11
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
18. Therefore, it goes without saying that the said provision is applicable only after receipt of the
report of the disciplinary enquiry either from the disciplinary authority or from the Upa-lokayukta.
Therefore, the arguments addressed by the learned counsel that the Government cannot entrust the
matter to the Upa-lokayukta and receive any report with regard to the disciplinary enquiry is not
acceptable on careful harmonious reading of the provisions under Lokayukta Act, with the
Municipalities Rules as noted above.
19. In this background, some of the relevant provisions considered by this Court is also to be looked
into.
20. In a decision of this Court in W.P.No.2581/2016 between S.V.Ramesh Vs. State of Karnataka
almost similar point fell for consideration. At paragraph No.15 of the said judgment, after
considering the provisions of the Lokayukta Act, and a separate Rule applicable to BWSSB, the
Court has held in the following manner:
"15. From the aforementioned discussion, it is amply clear that by virtue of the
Notifications dated 12.10.1982 and 1.3.2006 mentioned supra, the CCA Rules are
made applicable to the BWSSB officials also. Thus aforementioned provisions of CCA
Rules clearly depict that disciplinary action can be initiated against the petitioner
(BWSSB employee) without taking consent of BWSSB under the provisions of
Lokayukta Act. Morevover as clarified by us in the aforementioned paragraphs, the
petitioner falls within the definition of 'public servant' as found under Section
2(12)(g) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act. Hence, there is no hurdle for
Upa-Lokayukta to investigate into the matter and to submit the report under Section
12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act. So also there is no bar for the State
Government to entrust the matter for disciplinary enquiry to Upa-Lokayukta as per
the provisions of Section 12(4) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act."
21. The above said paragraph is read in proper perspective, it goes without saying that all the
employees who are covered under Section 2(12)(g) are to be considered as public servants and there
is no bar for the State government to entrust the matter for disciplinary enquiry to Upa- lokayukta
in respect of those public servants who are referred to under Section 2(12)(g) as per the provision of
Section 12(4) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act.
22. In another ruling cited by Mr.J.S.Shetty for petitioners, in W.P.No.10999-11006/2017, vide
judgment dated 15.06.2019, this Court has made an observation with reference to some GTTC
employees in fact in our opinion the above said judgment cited by the learned counsel is not in a
straight jacket manner applicable to this particular case. At paragraph No.7 of the judgment, the
Court has observed in the following manner:
"7. Learned counsel for the petitioners would submit that the action of Respondents
No.2 and 3 entrusting the enquiry to the Upa Lokayukta is wholly illegal and without
jurisdiction. The provisions of CCA Rules would have no application to the
petitioners as they have their own Certified Standing Orders, which deals with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 12
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
disciplinary matters and procedure for conducting enquiry against the employees of
GTTC. Further it is submitted that the Upa Lokayukta, on a complaint received has
investigated and submitted his report. It is not a complaint referred to the Lokayukta
by the Government or the second respondent. On submission of the report under
Section 12(3) of the Lokayukta Act by the Upa Lokayukta, the second respondent
could not have entrusted the enquiry to the Upa Lokayukta. He relies upon Section 3
of CCA Rules in support of his submission. It is his contention that there is no
provision for entrusting the enquiry to the Upa Lokayukta either under the certified
Standing Orders of GTTC or in the Rules and Regulations of GTTC."
23. This Court was of the opinion that when the separate certified standing orders or Rules govern a
particular employee, if that particular rules or standing orders does not provide any empowerment
to the disciplinary authorities to refer the matter to any other instrumentalities like Upa- lokayukta
to conduct disciplinary enquiries in such an eventuality the entrustment of the enquiry by such
authorities, violates the specific rules under the special rules governing those employees. Therefore,
the provision under Section 12(4) was not at all found to be applicable in the said case.
24. In fact almost similar point fell for consideration before this Court in a decision reported in ILR
2018 Karnataka 2347 between Gopal Hanumanth Kase Vs. The State of Karnataka. This Court after
in detail discussing the provisions under Section 12(3) and also Section 12(4) of the Act has come to
the conclusion that, the report submitted by the Upa-lokayukta under Sub-clause (3) of Section 12
recommending initiation of disciplinary action against the petitioner who was also a employee of the
municipal corporation i.e., who was working as Commissioner, City Municipal Counsel,
Jamakhandi. After considering the municipalities Rules as noted above, the Court has come to the
conclusion that, once perusal of the contents of the report made by Lokayukta under Section 12(3) of
the Act and after satisfying itself government takes a decision to refer the matter to Lokayukta for
disciplinary enquiry and the same is not against any law, the government was well within its power
to entrust the Lokayukta for further disciplinary enquiry. The Court also has relied upon various
rulings to come to such a conclusion.
25. Under the Lokayukta Act what is to be looked into is the wordings used in Section 12 or under
Section 2(4) about who is the competent authority. Section 2(4) reads as follows:
"2. Definition.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires.-
(1) xxxx (2) xxxs (3) xxxx (4) "competent authority" in relation to a public servant
means.-
(a) in the case of Chief Minister or a
member of the State Legislature,
the Governor acting in his
discretion;
(b) in the case of a Minister or
Secretary, the chief Minister,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 13
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
(c) in the case of a government
servant other than a Secretary,
the Government of Karnataka;"
(d) in the case of any other public
servant, such authority as may be
prescribed;
26. The said provision particularly Section
2(4)(d), it says that in the case of other public servant such authority as may be
prescribed. If we read this provision in consonance with Rule 3 i.e., the Karnataka
Lokayukta Rules, 1985 which says that, who is the competent authority, which reads
as follows:
"3. Competent Authority.- In respect of the public servants referred to in
sub-clause(d) of clause (4) of Section 2, the Government of Karnataka shall be
Competent Authority."
27. Therefore on harmonious reading of section 2 sub clause (4) (d) with Rule 3, they clearly disclose
that, the Government is the competent authority to take action against public servants referred to
under Sub-clause (d) of Clause 4 to Section 2. Therefore, whatever may be the nomenclature that
has been used in other enactment prescribing them as disciplinary authorities that cannot override
the definition of competent authority as defined under the Karnataka Lokayukta Act and Rules,
unless and until the said provisions are declared as ultra virus are the said provisions or against the
other principles of law. Therefore, for all practical purposes, if any matter comes within the purview
of Karnataka Lokayukta Act, the Courts are bound to ascertain the exact definition of the relevant
wordings with reference to the said Act and not with reference to any other enactment.
28. Revisiting the provision under Section 12(3) and (4), therein the wordings used are "competent
authority" and not a "disciplinary authority" therefore, for all practical purposes the competent
authority as referred to in sub clause (4) of Section 12 is the Government, which has the power
under the said provision either directly to take action or propose any action to be taken against a
public servant who is covered under Section 2(12)(g) of the Act.
29. Before referring to the sanctity of appointing the Chief Justices and Judges of the High Court as
Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha, we may feel it just and necessary to note here the object of
introducing the Lokayuktha institution.
30. His Excellency, President of India vide notification dated 05.01.1966 appointed the
Administrative Reforms Commission for addressing "Problems of Redress of citizens' Grievances"
interalia with the object for ensuring the highest standards of efficiency and integrity
in the public services, for making public administration a fit instrument for carrying
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 14
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
out the social and economic policies of the Government and achieving social and
economic goals of development, as also one responsive to people. The Commission
was also asked to examine the various issues including the problems of redress of
Citizens' Grievances mainly concentrating with regard to the eradicating corruption
which was rampant. The Commission after elaborate discussion suggested for
establishment of Lokpal in Centre and Lokayuktha in States holding that the hands of
Governments would be strengthened by such institutions. It was considered that, the
public opinion has been agitated for a long time over the prevalence of corruption in
the administration and it is likely that the cases coming up before Lokayuktha, which
is an independent authority, might involve in dealing with the allegations of corrupt
motive and favouritism in respect of Government authorities and as well as public
servants. Therefore, the institution should be so strong to deal with such cases. The
Commission also suggested as the Ministers, Secretaries and other persons occupying
highest position would also come under the purview of Lokayuktha, therefore, the
said institution must be headed by a strong, dedicated and equipped personality.
Perhaps, that may be the reason the retired Chief Justices and Judges of the High
Court are preferred for appointment of Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha. It is also to
be a notable point that, the persons who occupy such position should be independent
and impartial. Their investigations and proceedings should be conducted in a private
and informal in character. The appointment of Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha,
therefore is purely non political and their status is compared with the highest judicial
functionaries in the Country, they should deal with the matters in the discretionary
fields involving acts of injustice, corruption or favourtism. Therefore, the proceedings
should not be subject to judicial interference and they are given the maximum
latitude and powers in obtaining information relevant to their duties. Bearing in
mind these essential features of the institutions, the persons who occupy such highest
positions who are shown integrity to the institutions for which they have worked, are
selected as Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha.
31. In the above said backdrop, the object and purpose and also considering the status of
Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha were selected from the judicial system has to be borne in mind in
order to ascertain the veracity of the powers given to the government under the Lokayuktha Act has
to be tested. Under the Act, the Upalokayuktha after considering the allegations made against any
public servant or a government servant and after examining the materials provided and collected by
him and after giving opportunity to the delinquent employee, sends a report to the government
under Section 12(3) of the Act. The said report would be sent by Upalokayuktha after satisfying
himself that the allegations are wholly or partially true and after expressing his satisfaction he would
send a report under the above said provisions. Therefore, when a highest functionary of the said
institution and particularly after taking into consideration the above said criterias, sends a report,
such report should not be in any manner taken by any person in a casual manner, lot of sanctity and
weight is attached to such reports. Perhaps that may be the reason that if a report is submitted by
Lokayuktha and Upalokayuktha to the Government, if it is sent to any other disciplinary authority or
to the concerned department, there is chances of those authorities sitting over the opinion of
Lokayuktha and exercising their powers to nullify the effect of the said report of Upalokayuktha by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 15
Sri.R.V.Jattanna S/O V.D. Jattanna vs The State Of Karnataka on 30 January, 2020
simply sending action taken report, even under certain circumstances casually saying that no action
is necessary. Therefore, the government which is the highest super power when compared to all
other departments of the government which acts as parent prageria of almost all the employees of
the government department and other public servants who work in various other public institutions,
to receive the report submitted by Lokayuktha u/S 12(3) and also empowered to entrust the matter
to the Lokayuktha if any further disciplinary enquiry to be conducted.
32. It is also to be noted that, if the government itself is the disciplinary authority, it itself can take
appropriate action against the delinquent employee by conducting enquiry by itself or referring the
matter to Upalokayuktha for further disciplinary enquiry under the provisions of CCA Rules.
33. There is no bar under any other provision of law because Rule 14(a)(ii)(iii), which we have
already referred to, the Government has got power to refer the matter to disciplinary authorities
concerned only for the purpose of imposing punishment u/s 12 to the disciplinary authorities after
receiving the report from the Upalokayuktha, particularly after the disciplinary enquiry is conducted
and report is submitted with recommendation by the Lokayuktha. So, this will clarify the situation
that under Rule 14(A)(iii), the Government has got power to receive the disciplinary enquiry report
and thereafter only it can refer the same to the disciplinary authorities to impose penalty when the
Government itself is not the disciplinary authority to impose punishment. Therefore, till that point
of time under section 12 sub-section (4), the government has all the powers which the disciplinary
authority has got to refer the matter to the Upa-lokayukta for to conduct the disciplinary enquiry
and to report back to the Government.
34. Therefore, looking to the above said relevant provisions and the rulings we are of the opinion
that there is absolutely no illegality or irregularities committed by the government in receiving the
preliminary investigation report under Section 12(3) of he Act and thereafter again referring the
matter to the Upa-lokayukta for conducting the disciplinary enquiry. Hence, the writ petition fails
and the same is liable to be dismissed, accordingly dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE yan/ EM/bvv
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79374035/ 16
