Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF APRIL, 2023 R
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No. 5861 of 2023 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN:
1. SRI H.SIDDARAJU
AGED ABOUT 57 YEARS
S/O LATE HENJARAPPA
2. SMT. K.ANITHA
AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS
W/O H.SIDDARAJU
BOTH ARE R/AT NO. 502, 'A' BLOCK,
NO. 72, DIVYA MSR GATEWAY
OFF M.S.RAMAIAH ROAD,
GOKULA,
BENGALURU - 560 054
... PETITIONERS
(BY SRI SAMPATH A., ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. THE UNION OF INDIA
BY ITS SECRETARY
NEW DELHI - 110 001.
2. THE DEPARTMENT OF
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE,
UNION OF INDIA,
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 1
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
NEW DELHI - 110 001.
REPRESENTED BY SECRETARY
3. THE KARNATAKA STATE
ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND
SURROGACY BOARD,
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND
FAMILY WELFARE
GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA,
VIKASA SOUDHA,
BENGALURU - 560 001.
REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY
4. APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY UNDER THE,
SURROGACY ACT ,
K.C.GENERAL HOSPITAL,
MALLESHWARAM,
BENGALURU - 560 003.
REPRESENTED BY ITS SECRETARY
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI M.N.KUMAR, CGC FOR R1 AND R2)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH SECTION 4(iii)(c)(I)
OF THE SURROGACY REGULATION ACT, 2021 BNO.CG.DL-
E.251220-21-232118 AT ANNEXURE-D RECEIVED ASSENT OF
HONBLE PRESIDENT ON 25.12.2021 IN SO FAR AS IT RELATES TO
DISQUALIFYING THE PETITIONER NO.1 FROM BECOMING AN
INTENDEND FATHER DUE TO HIS AGE AND ALSO QUASH SECTION
2(1)(zg) AT ANNEXURE-D IN SO FAR IT MANDATES THAT THE
SURROGATE MOTHER SHOULD BE RELATED TO THE INTENDED
COUPLE OR THE INTENDING WOMAN.
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 31.03.2023, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
3
ORDER
"All love begins and ends with motherhood, by which a woman plays the God. Glorious it is as the
gift of nature, being both sacrosanct and sacrificial, though; now again, science has forced us to alter
our perspective of motherhood," says Robert Brown. The altered perspective is what forms the
kernel of this conundrum.
The petitioners are before this Court calling in question validity of Section 2(1)(zg) and Section
4(iii)(c)(I) of the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act' for short).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 2
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, facts in brief, are as follows:
The petitioners are husband and wife, from their wedlock had a son. The mother
owing to certain health problems, undergoes surgery for removal of her uterus and,
therefore, the uterus is no longer a part of the body of the mother. The son of the
petitioners, completes his MBBS course and was undergoing internship at a College
in Mangalore. The son on 13-12-2022, dies due to a road traffic accident. The couple
on losing their son go into depression.
3. The 1st petitioner is working as a First Division Assistant in the Government Arts College,
Bengaluru and the second petitioner is a home maker and a business woman, is what is averred in
the petition. The further averment in the petition is that, the 1st petitioner visited several Shishu
Kendras/ home for children, who informed him about the process of registering with Central
Adoption Resource Authority, which is a nodal body of the Central Government monitoring and
regulating in-country and inter-country adoption under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. The 1st petitioner was told that there is large number of
prospective parents registered in the organization and it would take minimum of 3 years for the
petitioners to get a child in adoption. Later on medical consultancy, the petitioners come to know
that they could have a child by way of surrogacy, within nine months and are told that surrogacy is
regulated by the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021 ('the Act' for short) and the Surrogacy
(Regulation) Rules, 2022 framed under the Act.
4. In furtherance of the intention of the petitioners to have a child on surrogacy, the sister-in-law of
the 1st petitioner, one Smt. S.M.Prathiba comes forward to donate her egg and a close family friend
Smt. Priyasarvanan, aged about 25 years and a mother of two children had agreed to be a surrogate
mother and the sperm of the 1st petitioner would be used to fertilize the donated egg. It is averred
that, it is purely for altruistic purpose and no commercial intentions are behind it. What comes as an
embargo, are the provisions of the Act which prohibit the petitioners and the like to have a child by
way of surrogacy. It is in the wake of provisions of the Act placing such embargo and the desire of
the 2nd petitioner to become a mother by surrogacy, has led the petitioners to this Court, in the
subject petition, calling in question those provisions which place an embargo upon the intention of
the petitioners to have a child by way of surrogacy.
5. Heard Sri A. Sampath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Sri M.N. Kumar, learned
Central Government Council appearing for respondents 1 and 2.
6. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that the petitioners were a happy
family of couple with a child/ boy, who was about 23 years old. The boy meets with a road accident
and dies. On the death of the only child, the health of the 2nd petitioner began to completely
deteriorate due to acute depression. The couple then wanting another child by way of adoption, were
told that it is going to take 3 or 4 years and on further consultation told that surrogacy was the only
method to bear the child. Sister in-law of the 1st petitioner who is 35 years old has come forward to
donate her egg and a family friend aged 25 years and having two children has agreed to be a
surrogate mother and the sperm of the 1st petitioner would be used to fertilize the donated egg. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 3
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
the entire process, there is no financial consideration as they are all closely knit family or like a
family. However, certain provisions of the Act are coming in the way of the 2nd petitioner becoming
a mother. It is, therefore, those provisions are called in question, as according to the learned counsel
for the petitioners, those provisions have nothing to do with the object sought to be achieved, for
enacting the Act. Therefore, the petitioners call them in question, in this petition.
7. On the other hand, Sri M.N.Kumar, learned Central Government Counsel representing
respondents 1 and 2 would vehemently refute the submissions to contend that merely because it
does not suit the petitioner, a provision cannot be held to be contrary to law. Detailed deliberations
have gone into while promulgating the Act as the country had become a hub of lending a womb for
surrogacy, for people in India and abroad who are affluent, who would exploit the plight of poor
women, in the rural areas of the country. He would contend that the petitioners will have to
approach State Surrogacy Board, under the Rules for redressal of their grievance and cannot call in
question the provisions of the Act. He would further submit that identical issues are pending
consideration at the hands of the Apex Court where various provisions of the Act have been called in
question and this petition will have to await the outcome of proceedings before the Apex Court.
8. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and have perused the material on record. In furtherance whereof, the issue that falls for
consideration is, whether the petitioners will be entitled to the prayers that are sought for?
9. Before embarking upon the consideration of the issue of surrogacy brought up before this Court
in the lis, I deem it appropriate to notice the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in the case of
BABY MANJI YAMADA VS. UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHER reported in (2008) 13 SCC 518,
wherein, the Apex Court considered what is surrogacy and different kinds of surrogacy while
observing as follows:
"8. Surrogacy is a well-known method of reproduction whereby a woman agrees to
become pregnant for the purpose of gestating and giving birth to a child she will not
raise but hand over to a contracted party. She may be the child's genetic mother (the
more traditional form for surrogacy) or she may be, as a gestational carrier, carry the
pregnancy to delivery after having been implanted with an embryo. In some cases
surrogacy is the only available option for parents who wish to have a child that is
biologically related to them.
9. The word "surrogate", from Latin "subrogare", means "appointed to act in the
place of". The intended parent(s) is the individual or couple who intends to rear the
child after its birth.
10. In traditional surrogacy (also known as the Straight method) the surrogate is
pregnant with her own biological child, but this child was conceived with the
intention of relinquishing the child to be raised by others; by the biological father and
possibly his spouse or partner, either male or female. The child may be conceived via
home artificial insemination using fresh or frozen sperm or impregnated via IUI
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 4
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(intrauterine insemination), or ICI (intracervical insemination) which is performed at
a fertility clinic.
11. In gestational surrogacy (also known as the Host method) the surrogate becomes
pregnant via embryo transfer with a child of which she is not the biological mother.
She may have made an arrangement to relinquish it to the biological mother or father
to raise, or to a parent who is themselves unrelated to the child (e.g. because the child
was conceived using egg donation, germ donation or is the result of a donated
embryo). The surrogate mother may be called the gestational carrier.
12. Altruistic surrogacy is a situation where the surrogate receives no financial reward
for her pregnancy or the relinquishment of the child (although usually all expenses
related to the pregnancy and birth are paid by the intended parents such as medical
expenses, maternity clothing, and other related expenses).
13. Commercial surrogacy is a form of surrogacy in which a gestational carrier is paid
to carry a child to maturity in her womb and is usually resorted to by well-off infertile
couples who can afford the cost involved or people who save and borrow in order to
complete their dream of being parents. This medical procedure is legal in several
countries including in India where due to excellent medical infrastructure, high
international demand and ready availability of poor surrogates it is reaching industry
proportions. Commercial surrogacy is sometimes referred to by the emotionally
charged and potentially offensive terms "wombs for rent", "outsourced pregnancies"
or "baby farms".
14. Intended parents may arrange a surrogate pregnancy because a woman who intends to parent is
infertile in such a way that she cannot carry a pregnancy to term. Examples include a woman who
has had a hysterectomy, has a uterine malformation, has had recurrent pregnancy loss or has a
health condition that makes it dangerous for her to be pregnant. A female intending parent may also
be fertile and healthy, but unwilling to undergo pregnancy."
(Emphasis supplied) In the light of what is considered by the Apex Court, surrogacy is an
arrangement in which a women (surrogate) agrees to carry and give birth to a child on behalf of
another person or couple (the intended, intending or commissioning parents). Surrogacy involves a
process known as in vitro fertilization (IVF), a procedure by which, embryos are created in a lab and
implanted into the surrogate. There are 2 types of surrogacy medically evolved, now known:
(i) Gestational surrogacy:
In gestational surrogacy, the surrogates egg is not used in conception, therefore the surrogate (the
gestational carrier) has no genetic link to the baby and is not a biological mother. The embryo
transferred into the surrogate would be created using the intended parents sperm and egg or at
times, donor embryos also would be used.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 5
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(ii) Traditional surrogacy:
Traditional surrogacy involves an egg from the surrogate. Fertility treatment, either artificial
insemination or even IVF is used with the intending father's sperm. In traditional surrogacy the
surrogate carries the pregnancy and gives birth to a child that they are genetically related to.
The difference between the two is that, in gestational surrogacy, the baby born, has no genetic link
to the surrogate; in traditional surrogacy, the baby has a genetic link to the surrogate.
10. Surrogacy became popularly known as a 'womb on rent', all over the globe. India had become a
hub of commercial surrogacy, as rent a womb practice, mushroomed in all parts of India, whereby,
plenty of women impoverished, were being exploited by the affluent for taking the womb on rent.
When such cases of exploitation became rampant, the Parliament thought it fit to regulate surrogacy
in India. Therefore, a Bill came to be introduced which prohibits commercial surrogacy, but permits
altruistic surrogacy. The altruistic surrogacy involves no monetary compensation, to the surrogate
mother other than medical expenses and insurance coverage during the said pregnancy. Commercial
surrogacy, in contrast, was undertaken for monetary benefit or reward either in cash or kind
exceeding the basic medical expenses and insurance coverage. The misuse of surrogacy and
exploitation of woman became a heated debate in the Parliament which initially led to a Bill being
introduced in the Parliament called the Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill, 2016. The Bill was debated in
the Parliament. Certain corrections were suggested to the Bill. One such correction was that the
baby need not be genetically related to the intending couple. This was accepted and finally the Act
was promulgated on 25-12-2021. Therefore, Surrogacy is now regulated under the Act.
11. Certain provisions of the Act are germane to be noticed. Section 2 deals with definitions. Certain
definition clauses are significant for consideration of the issue in the lis. I deem it necessary to quote
those clauses of Section 2, they are: Sections 2(1)(a), (b), (e), (g), (i), (n), (r), (s), (v), (x), (zb), (zd),
(zf) and (zh) and they run as follows:
"2. Definitions:
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(a) "abandoned child" means a child born out of surrogacy procedure who has been
deserted by his intending parents or guardians and declared as abandoned by the
appropriate authority after due enquiry;
(b) "altruistic surrogacy" means the surrogacy in which no charges, expenses, fees,
remuneration or monetary incentive of whatever nature, except the medical expenses
and such other prescribed expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance
coverage for the surrogate mother, are given to the surrogate mother or her
dependents or her representative;
... ...
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 6
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(e) "Board" means the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy
Board constituted under Section 17;
... ...
(g) "commercial surrogacy" means commercialisation of surrogacy services or
procedures or its component services or component procedures including selling or
buying of human embryo or trading in the sale or purchase of human embryo or
gametes or selling or buying or trading the services of surrogate motherhood by way
of giving payment, reward, benefit, fees, remuneration or monetary incentive in cash
or kind, to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representative, except the
medical expenses and such other prescribed expenses incurred on the surrogate
mother and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother;
(i) "egg" includes the female gamete;
... ...
(n) "gamete" means sperm and oocyte;
... ...
(r) "intending couple" means a couple who have a medical indication necessitating
gestational surrogacy and who intend to become parents through surrogacy;
(s) "intending woman" means an Indian woman who is a widow or divorcee between
the age of 35 to 45 years and who intends to avail the surrogacy;
... ...
(v) "oocyte" means naturally ovulating oocyte in the female genetic tract;
... ...
(x) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
... ...
(zb) "State Board" means the State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy
Board constituted under Section 26;
... ...
(zd) "surrogacy" means a practice whereby one woman bears and gives birth to a
child for an intending couple with the intention of handing over such child to the
intending couple after the birth;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 7
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
... ...
(zf) "surrogacy procedures" means all gynaecological, obstetrical or medical
procedures, techniques, tests, practices or services involving handling of human
gametes and human embryo in surrogacy;
(zg) "surrogate mother" means a woman who agrees to bear a child (who is
genetically related to the intending couple or intending woman) through surrogacy
from the implantation of embryo in her womb and fulfils the conditions as provided
in sub-
clause (b) of clause (iii) of Section 4;"
(Emphasis supplied) Section 2(1)(b) defines 'altruistic surrogacy' to mean surrogacy
in which no charges, expenses, fees, remuneration or monetary incentive of whatever
nature, except the medical expenses incurred on surrogate mother are given to the
surrogate mother or her dependent or her representative; Section 2(1)(g) defines
'commercial surrogacy' which is completely in contrast with altruistic surrogacy.
Selling or buying of human embryo or trading in sale or purchase of human embryo
or gamete or selling or buying the surrogate motherhood all of which would come
under the umbrella of commercial surrogacy; Section 2(1) (i) defines 'egg' to include a
female gamete; Section 2(1)(n) defines 'gamete' to mean sperm and oocyte; Section
2(1)(s) defines 'intending woman' to mean an Indian woman who is a widow or a
divorcee between the age of 35 to 45 and who intends to avail the surrogacy; Section
2(1)(v) defines 'oocyte' to mean naturally ovulating oocyte in the female genetic tract;
Section 2(1)(zd) defines 'surrogacy' to mean a practice whereby one woman bears and
gives birth to a child for an intending couple after the birth; Section 2(1)(r) defines an
'intending couple' to mean a couple who have a medical indication necessitating
gestational surrogacy and who intend to become parents through surrogacy; Section
2(1)(zg) defines 'surrogate mother' to mean a woman who agrees to bear a child,
which would be genetically related to intending couple through surrogacy from the
implantation of embryo in her womb and fulfills all other conditions; Section 2(1)(zb)
defines 'State Board' to mean the State Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Surrogacy Board. Section 2(1)(e) defines a Board which would mean a National
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board constituted under Section
17. The appropriate authority is notified under Section 35 of the Act and Section 36
prescribes functions of the appropriate authority. The applications filed by the
intending couple are to be placed before the appropriate authority who in terms of
Section 36 has the power to accept or reject it within 90 days. It is further germane to
notice Sections 4, 35 and 36 of the Act and they read as follows:
Section 4 deals with regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures and reads as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 8
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
"4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures.--On and from the date of
commencement of this Act,--
(i) no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or cause to be used by any person for
conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, except for the purposes specified in clause (ii) and
after satisfying all the conditions specified in clause (iii);
(ii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or availed of,
except for the following purposes, namely:--
(a) when an intending couple has a medical indication necessitating gestational
surrogacy:
Provided that a couple of Indian origin or an intending woman who intends to avail
surrogacy, shall obtain a certificate of recommendation from the Board on an
application made by the said persons in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-clause and item (I) of sub-clause (a) of
clause (iii) the expression "gestational surrogacy" means a practice whereby a
surrogate mother carries a child for the intending couple through implantation of
embryo in her womb and the child is not genetically related to the surrogate mother;
(b) when it is only for altruistic surrogacy purposes;
(c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for commercialisation of surrogacy or
surrogacy procedures;
(d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution or any other form of
exploitation; and
(e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by regulations made by the
Board;
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken,
performed or initiated, unless the Director or in-charge of the surrogacy clinic and
the person qualified to do so are satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that
the following conditions have been fulfilled, namely:--
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of essentiality issued by the
appropriate authority, after satisfying itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing,
about the fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:--
(I) a certificate of a medical indication in favour of either or both members of the
intending couple or intending woman necessitating gestational surrogacy from a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 9
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
District Medical Board.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this item, the expression "District Medical Board" means a
medical board under the Chairpersonship of Chief Medical Officer or Chief Civil Surgeon or Joint
Director of Health Services of the district and comprising of at least two other specialists, namely,
the chief gynaecologist or obstetrician and chief paediatrician of the district;
(II) an order concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through surrogacy, has
been passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above on an application made by the
intending couple or the intending woman and the surrogate mother, which shall be the birth
affidavit after the surrogate child is born; and (III) an insurance coverage of such amount and in
such manner as may be prescribed in favour of the surrogate mother for a period of thirty-six
months covering postpartum delivery complications from an insurance company or an agent
recognised by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under the
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999);
(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely:--
(I) no woman, other than an ever married woman having a child of her own and between the age of
25 to 35 years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy by
donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise;
(II) a willing woman shall act as a surrogate mother and be permitted to undergo surrogacy
procedures as per the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the intending couple or the intending woman shall approach the
appropriate authority with a willing woman who agrees to act as a surrogate mother;
(III) no woman shall act as a surrogate mother by providing her own gametes;
(IV) no woman shall act as a surrogate mother more than once in her lifetime:
Provided that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate
mother shall be such as may be prescribed; and (V) a certificate of medical and
psychological fitness for surrogacy and surrogacy procedures from a registered
medical practitioner;
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the
appropriate authority on fulfillment of the following conditions, namely:--
(I) the intending couple are married and between the age of 23 to 50 years in case of
female and between 26 to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 10
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(II) the intending couple have not had any surviving child biologically or through
adoption or through surrogacy earlier:
Provided that nothing contained in this item shall affect the intending couple who
have a child and who is mentally or physically challenged or suffers from life
threatening disorder or fatal illness with no permanent cure and approved by the
appropriate authority with due medical certificate from a District Medical Board; and
(III) such other conditions as may be specified by the regulations."
(Emphasis supplied) "35. Appointment of appropriate authority.--(1) The Central Government shall,
within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint
one or more appropriate authorities for each of the Union territories for the purposes of this Act and
the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act.
(2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of
this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate authorities for the whole or any part of the
State for the purposes of this Act and the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act. (3) The appropriate
authority, under sub-section (1) or sub- section (2), shall,--
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union territory, consist of--
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Secretary of the Health and Family Welfare
Department--Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of the Health and Family Welfare
Department--Vice Chairperson, ex officio;
(iii) an eminent woman representing women's organisation--member;
(iv) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union territory concerned not below the rank of
a Deputy Secretary--member; and
(v) an eminent registered medical practitioner--member:
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the
occurrence of such vacancy;
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union territory, be officers of such
other rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be,
may deem fit.
36. Functions of appropriate authority.--The appropriate authority shall discharge the following
functions, namely:--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 11
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a surrogacy clinic;
(b) to enforce the standards to be fulfilled by the surrogacy clinics;
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this Act, rules and
regulations made thereunder and take legal action as per provision of this Act;
(d) to take appropriate legal action against the use of surrogacy by any person at any
place other than prescribed, suo motu or brought to its notice, and also to initiate
independent investigations in such matter;
(e) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of this Act and rules and
regulations made thereunder;
(f) to recommend to the Board and State Boards about the modifications required in
the rules and regulations in accordance with changes in technology or social
conditions;
(g) to take action after investigation of complaints received by it against the surrogacy
clinics; and
(h) to consider and grant or reject any application under clause
(vi) of Section 3 and sub-clauses (a) to (c) of clause (iii) of Section 4 within a period of
ninety days.
(Emphasis supplied) What is germane to be noticed for the issue in the lis is sub-section
(b)(I) and sub-section (c)(I) of Section 4. Section 4(b) directs that the surrogate mother who is in
possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate authority must fulfill certain
conditions, they are, no woman, other than a married woman having a child of her own and between
the age of 25 to 35 on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother or help in surrogacy by
donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise. Section 4(c) imposes certain conditions for grant an
eligibility certificate. Section 4(c)(I) mandates that the intending couple should be married and the
female should be between the age of 23 to 50 and the male should be between 26 to 55 on the date of
certification. Another Act was notified along with the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, called the Assisted
Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as 'the ART Act' for short).
The ART Act prescribes the reproductive assistance and its regulation. This is the broad frame work
of the Act which deals with the intention and procedure for intending couple to become surrogate
parents. APPLICABILITY OF THE LAW TO THE FACTS:
12. The facts as afore-narrated, though not in dispute, would require reiteration. The
petitioners are a couple who did bear a child who in the year 2021-22 was at the age
of 23 years. The son on a fateful day i.e., 13.12.2022 dies, out of a road traffic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 12
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
accident, leaving the family devastated. The mother unable to bear the shock, agony
and trauma goes into depression. The sudden loss of a son or a daughter, in the prime
of youth, is a terrible blow to the parents. It is said that, one of the most painful
moments of one's life, is to be the pall bearer of a deceased son or a daughter. Even,
medical science finds that a large number of parents tend to go into deep depression
due to sudden loss of their children. This emotional vacuum is what is prayed to be
filled up in the case at hand.
13. The agonizing and depressed condition of the mother drives the 1st
petitioner/husband to all the adoption centers only to be told that there was long
waiting period as adoption has to be done in terms of the provisions of Juvenile
Justice Act. These circumstances lead the couple to scout for a method of having a
child to get over the unbearable agony. This leads to an intention of having a child by
way of surrogacy as the 2nd petitioner/mother whose uterus had been removed could
not bear a child and could not even give egg / gamete. Therefore, the sister-in-law of
the husband comes forward to donate her eggs / gamete. After finding a donor of the
eggs a family friend comes forward to bear the child or become a surrogate mother.
The sperm of the husband would be used to fertile the donated egg of the sister in-law
of the husband. The averment in the petition is that it is purely for altruistic purpose
and notwithstanding this the couple would be unable to bear the child owing of two
provisions under the Act. One being definition in Section 2(1)(zg) supra which
mandates a surrogate mother can only be a women who agrees to bear a child who is
genetically related to the intending couple or intending woman. In the case on hand,
the surrogate mother is not genetically related to the petitioners though the donor of
the egg is related to the couple.
14. The other provision is Section 4(c)(I) which mandates that intending couple
should be married and the woman should not have crossed 50 years of age and the
man should not have crossed 55 years of age. The mother in the case at hand comes
within the provisions of law as she is yet to cross 50 years. The father/1st petitioner
suffers a disability as he has crossed 55 years of age and he is 57 years now. In the
light of these provisions placing an embargo upon the motherhood of the wife, the
petitioners have called these provisions in question. It becomes germane now to
notice the prayer that is sought in the petition and it reads as follows:
"Wherefore, the petitioners pray that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to -
(a) Issue a Writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing Section 4(iii)(c)(I) of the
Surrogacy Regulation Act, 2021 BRO:CG-DL-E-25122021-232118 at Annexure-D
received assent of Hon'ble President on 25-12-2021 insofar as it relates to
disqualifying the petitioner No.1 from becoming an intended father due to his age
and also quash Section 2(1)(zg) at Annexure-D insofar as it mandates that surrogate
mother should be related to the intended couple or the intending woman.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 13
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
(b) Issue a Writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the Respondent No.4 to make
appropriate regulations in view of the facts of this case, as prescribed under Section 4
Clause
(e) of the Act of 2021 or alternatively direct the respondents 3 and 4 to issue the
essentiality and eligibility certificate as prescribed under the Act by relaxing the age
of the petitioner No.1 and by accepting a non-relative of the petitioners as a surrogate
mother.
(c) Pass such other order or further orders as this Hon'ble Court deems fit to grant in
the facts and circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice and equity."
The challenge is to Section 4(iii)(c)(I) and 2(1)(zg) which are extracted hereinabove. I deem it
appropriate to quote them again.
"4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures.--On and from the date of
commencement of this Act,--
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken,
performed or initiated, unless the Director or in-
charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person qualified to do so are satisfied, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, that the following conditions have been fulfilled, namely:--
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the
appropriate authority on fulfillment of the following conditions, namely:--
(I) the intending couple are married and between the age of 23 to 50 years in case of
female and between 26 to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;
(Emphasis supplied) .. .. .. ..
"2. Definitions:
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(zg) "surrogate mother" means a woman who agrees to bear a child (who is
genetically related to the intending couple or intending woman) through surrogacy
from the implantation of embryo in her womb and fulfils the conditions as provided
in sub-clause (b) of clause (iii) of Section 4;"
(Emphasis supplied) What offends the petitioners according to the averment is that the intending
couple, married should be between the age of 23 to 50 in the case of a female and between 26 to 55
in the case of a male. This is as on the date of the certificate being issued for eligibility to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 14
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
intending couple by the appropriate authority. The 1st petitioner/husband is now 57 years old. The
2nd petitioner/wife is 45 years old. In terms of the afore-quoted provision the 1st petitioner loses
eligibility to become a father by way of surrogacy. The wife has no problem. Therefore, the argument
is the age restriction has no rationale behind it and has to be obliterated. According to the counsel, it
should be made age free, both to the husband and the wife who are intending couple.
15. The mother, on account of certain health ailment has undergone hysterectomy. Therefore,
cannot ovulate or donate eggs/ gamete for surrogacy. Sister of the wife has come forward to donate
the eggs. The embryo would be an amalgam of the eggs from the sister-in-law of the husband and
the sperm of the husband. The law prohibits it, as the husband is beyond 55 years as noted above.
The emphatic submission of the petitioner is that, there is no rationale behind the prescription of
the cut off age and there being no rationale, the provision is unconstitutional. I decline to accept the
submission that there is no rationale behind the stipulation of the cut off age of 55 years for the
husband to become an intending father by way of surrogacy, but this Court has to salvage the
situation that is brought before the Court. It is therefore, in the opinion of this Court it is necessary
to iron out the creases in the legislation. Ironing out the creases by the constitutional Courts of the
provisions of law as promulgated without disturbing the content of the statute is permitted exercise
of judicial review, as the law makers at the time of making the law would not have envisaged a
situation of the kind that is generated in the case at hand. Reference being made to the judgment of
the Court of Appeal, England, in the case of SEAFORD ESTATE V. ASHER1, becomes apposite, in
which Lord Denning observes as follows:
"Whenever a statute comes up for consideration it must be remembered that it is not
within human powers to foresee the manifold sets of facts which may arise, and, even
if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in terms free from all ambiguity. The
English language is not an instrument of mathematical precision. Our literature
would be much the poorer if it were. This is where the draftsmen of Acts of
Parliament have often been unfairly criticized. A judge, believing himself to be
fettered by the supposed rule that he must look to the language and nothing else,
laments that the draftsmen have not provided for this or that, or have been guilty of
some or other ambiguity. It would certainly save the judges trouble if Acts of
Parliament were drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity. In the absence of
it, when a defect appears a judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the
draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of
Parliament, and he must do this not only from the language of the statute, but also
from a consideration of the social conditions which gave rise to it, and of the mischief
which it was passed to remedy, 1949(2) ALL.E.R. 155 and then he must supplement
the written word sc as to give "force and life" to the intention of the legislature. That
was clearly laid down by the resolution of the judges in Heydon's case18, and it is the
safest guide to-day. Good practical advice on the subject was given about the same
time by Plowden in his second volume Eyston v. Studd19. Put into homely metaphor
it is this: A judge should ask himself the question: If the makers of the Act had
themselves come across this ruck in the texture of it, how would they have
straightened it out? He must then do as they would have done. A judge must not alter
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 15
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
the material of which it is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases.
Approaching this case in that way, I cannot help feeling that the legislature had not
specifically in mind a contingent burden such as we have here."
(Emphasis supplied) Therefore, on such ironing out, I deem it appropriate to evolve a triple test
theory to permit the petitioners to avail of procedure of surrogacy, in the peculiar facts of this case
by directing conduct of 3 tests. The first petitioner has to cross the wall of the triple tests to become
eligible to become a father by surrogacy. All the tests directed are aspects which are in public
domain. The tests would be:
(i) Genetic Test.
(ii) Physical Test and
(iii) Economic Test.
(i) Genetic Test:
In medical parlance, what is needed for an embryo is a healthy sperm and an egg. Therefore, it is
imperative to test the strength of the sperm as the sperm contains genetic information necessary to
make a new individual. The genetic information is densely packed into the head of the sperm. The
sperm contains 23 chromosomes. These 23 chromosomes will pair up with 23 chromosomes in the
egg to give out 46 chromosomes necessary for a healthy human embryo. It is again medically
determined that men over the age of 35 to 40 typically experience a decrease in sperm health. Since
the petitioner is now aged 57 years, it would become necessary for him to undergo the genetic test
for determination of the health of the sperm, so that the child born out of the embryo of which the
sperm of the petitioner is impregnable part, is not born with any disorder or infirm.
(ii) Physical Test:
The intending couple must be in a position to take care of the child and cannot
abandon the child on the ground that they are themselves infirmed to handle the
child, failing which, it would be bringing a child to life, on the face of the earth, for
making the life of the child miserable. This cannot be countenanced. Therefore, the
couple must have the physical capacity to handle the child, though not physical
capacity stricto senso to carry the child everywhere, but to manage the child.
(iii) Economic Test:
The intending couple must be economically sound and should not lead the child to
penury the moment it is born. Therefore, affidavits of both the intending couple
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 16
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
should be filed before the Board/appropriate authority with regard to their assets and
liabilities which would become helpful for the Board/appropriate authority to decide
the economic capacity of the intending couple.
It may become necessary to protect the child by making future investments on the
child by the intending couple. The procedure and the nuances of seeking such
economic tests is best left open to the Board/appropriate authority to decide, but
such economic test is imperative.
16. The aforesaid observation and direction is owing to the peculiarity of the
circumstances generated in the case at hand. For the law to be corrected, it is for the
legislature to ponder over the issue, as the Act nowhere leaves any discretion to the
Board be it National or the State, to the Appropriate Authority be it Center or the
State to have any play in the joints to salvage any unique situation, to consider and
issue eligibility certificate to the intending couples. As it is trite, when the legislature
enacts a law, it does not say everything on the subject as every conceivable
eventuality of the future would not be present at the time when the law makers make
the law. It is those legislative silences that generate relief of the kind that is sought to
be granted in the case at hand. As observed, this Court is concerned with the case at
hand and intends to iron out the crease, direct conduct of triple test upon the 1st
petitioner and on such tests, direct consideration of the case for grant of eligibility
certificate from the hands of the Authority under Sections 35 and 36 of the Act.
17. The other provision that is under challenge is Section 2(1)(zg) of the Act. Section
2(1)(zg) defines who is a surrogate mother. The women i.e., the surrogate mother has
to be genetically related to the intending couples. Here lies the choke to the
petitioners. The intention behind the provision is, misuse of the method of surrogacy.
Therefore, the surrogate mother who seeks to lend her womb for surrogacy should do
so only in cases of altruistic surrogacy and not commercial surrogacy. What is
permitted under the Act is altruistic surrogacy and not commercial surrogacy.
Therefore, it becomes necessary to notice what is altruism.
18. Altruism, as defined in plethora of dictionaries would mean, when a person acts
to promote someone else's welfare, even at the risk or cost to themselves, if the
provision that is called in question 2(1)(zg) is considered qua altruistic surrogacy, it
would become an object of contradiction, as 2(1)(zg) mandates that the surrogate
mother should be genetically related to the intending couple. If that be so, altruism is
illusory if everything happens within the family. In the considered view of this Court,
Altruistic surrogacy should mean, surrogacy by an outsider. Therefore, the provision
runs counter to the philosophy or principle behind the enactment. The words
"genetically related" appearing in Section 2(1)(zg) can only mean that the child to be
born through surrogacy should be genetically related to the intending couple, failing
which, the words genetically related would not have any meaning if it were to be said
that the surrogate mother should be genetically related to the intending couple. That
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 17
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
defeats both altruism and logic.
19. Though the petitioners have called in question the provisions as afore-quoted in
the prayer. It is brought to the notice of this Court that the entire gamut of challenge
to the provisions of the Act is pending consideration before the Apex Court where the
National Board of Surrogacy has been asked to submit their reply to all the
contentions advanced before the Apex Court. Therefore, striking down the provisions
as sought by the petitioner, at this juncture, is unavailable. They would all remain
subject to, further orders to be passed by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
20. The Government of India in terms of a notification dated 04.05.2022 has
constituted National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board (The
National Board) and subsequently, on 04.08.2022 and 16.12.2022, has composed the
Board with expert members. Likewise, the State Surrogacy Board is also said to be in
place. The Appropriate Authorities are also appointed both in the Center and the
State for consideration of the applications submitted by the intending couple.
Therefore, the State Surrogacy Board / Appropriate Authority / Prescribed Authority
shall consider the application by the petitioners for grant of an eligibility certificate as
is necessary in law for the petitioners to become parents by way of surrogacy, on the
triple tests as indicated hereinabove - genetic; physical and economical. For the
purpose of these tests, the petitioner shall file an affidavit which would contain the
following:
(i) The 1st petitioner/father shall undertake to undergo the genetic test for
determination of the strength of the gamete/sperm and its quality.
(ii) The Economic capacity of the intending couple for the growth of the child and to
place the measures taken to secure the life by creation of property or any fixed
deposit in the name of the child.
(iii) Measures to be taken for the upbringing of the child as the father or the mother,
if are not physically able to bring up the child, this would not mean the petitioners
would abandon the child or leave it at the mercy of anybody else.
The affidavit with the aforesaid details shall be filed before the Appropriate Authority or the Board
as the case would be along with the application seeking eligibility. The application shall contain all
the details including the details of the intending surrogate mother. If such an affidavit is filed before
the Board, the Board shall consider the same bearing in mind the observations made in the course of
this order and draw up appropriate proceedings, in accordance with law. Since the 1st petitioner is
already growing old, as he is now 57 years, it would be imperative to fix a timeline for consideration
by the State Board / Authority.
21. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 18
Sri H Siddaraju vs The Union Of India on 21 April, 2023
ORDER
(i) Writ Petition is allowed in part.
(ii) The challenge to the provisions - Section 2(1)(zg) and Section 4(iii)(c)(I) of the
Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021, at present, is not considered, as they would be
subject to the pendency proceedings before the Apex Court.
(iii) The petitioners are directed to approach the State Surrogacy Board / Appropriate
Authority/ Prescribed Authority with the appropriate application seeking redressal of
their grievance.
(iv) In the event petitioners would approach the Board/Appropriate Authority within
4 weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this order, the State Surrogacy Board /
Appropriate Authority / Prescribed Authority shall consider the application and pass
appropriate orders for issuance of eligibility certificate within 4 weeks thereafter.
While doing so, the Board/Authority shall bear in mind the observations made in the
course of the order.
Accordingly, I.A.No.1 of 2023 also stand disposed.
Sd/-
JUDGE bkp CT:MJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35801265/ 19
