Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11
April, 2022
Author: Pradeep Singh Yerur
Bench: Pradeep Singh Yerur
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 11TH DAY OF APRIL, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP SINGH YERUR
M.F.A. NO.4181/2019(MV)
BETWEEN:
SRI IMRAN PASHA
S/O RAFIQ PASHA
AGED ABOUT 21 YEARS,
R/O NO.164,
MUSLIM BURIAL GROUND
FAROOQIA NAGAR,
PADARAYANAPURA
BENGALURU - 560 026
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI.HARISH N.R., ADV.)
AND:
1. THE UNITED INDIA
INSURANCE CO LTD
REGIONAL OFFICE
NO.1872, 20TH MAIN
MARENAHALLI MAIN ROAD
VIJAYANAGARA
BENGALURU - 560 040.
2. SRI.SHEKAR.K.H
S/O VANNAPPA
AGE MAJOR
R/O KAGGALAHALLI
VILLAGE AND POST
HAROHALLI HOBLI
RAMANAGARA DISTRICT - 562 109
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. MOHAN KUMAR T., ADV. FOR R1:
NOTICE TO R2 IS DISPENSED WITH
V/O DATED: 03.06.2019)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 1
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
2
THIS MFA IS FILED UNDER SECTION 173(1) OF MV
ACT AGAINST THE JUDGMENT AND AWARD DATED
30/03/2019, PASSED IN MVC NO.789/2018, ON THE FILE
OF THE VII ADDITIONAL SMALL CAUSES JUDGE & XXXII
ACMM., MEMBER, MACT-3, BENGALURU, PARTLY
ALLOWING THE CLAIM PETITION FOR COMPENSATION AND
SEEKING ENHANCEMENT OF COMPENSATION.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR ADMISSION, THIS
DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
Though this matter is listed for admission, with the consent of both the learned counsel, the same is
taken up for final disposal.
2. Heard learned counsel Sri Harish N. R., appearing on behalf of the appellant and learned counsel
Sri Mohan Kumar T, appearing on behalf of respondent No.1/Insurance Company.
3. This is an appeal preferred by the claimant being aggrieved by the judgment and award dated
30.03.2019 passed by the VII Additional SCJ & XXXII ACMM, Member, MACT-3, Bengaluru in
MVC No.789/2018. This appeal is premised on the ground of inadequacy of compensation awarded
by the Tribunal and hence seeking for enhancement of the compensation.
4. Brief facts of the case:
On 23.12.2017 at 10.00 P.M. while the claimant was driving an Auto Rickshaw
bearing Registration No.KA-02- AC-6370 along with a passenger slowly and
cautiously on the left side of the road near Pattareddypalya, at that time, a lorry
bearing Registration No.KA-52-6147 came from Kanakapura in a rash and negligent
manner with high speed without following the traffic rules and regulations, dashed
against the Auto Rickshaw which was driven by the claimant. Due to impact of the
accident, Imran Pasha, the claimant herein sustained grievous injuries all over his
body and the passenger, who was traveling in the said Auto Rickshaw also sustained
severe injuries and later succumbed to the injuries. Pursuant to the accident, the
claimant was shifted to NIMHANS Hospital, Bengaluru, wherein he took first aid
treatment and thereafter, he was shifted to ESI Hospital, Bengaluru wherein he took
treatment as an inpatient. It is pleaded that the claimant was hale and healthy aged
about 21 years and working as a Mechanic by profession, earning income of
Rs.20,000/- per month. It is also stated that the jurisdictional police have registered
the criminal case against the driver of the offending lorry for the offences punishable
under Sections 279, 337 and 304(A) of IPC. In view of the serious injures having been
suffered by the claimant due to the accident caused by the driver of the offending
lorry, he claimed compensation from the Tribunal against the respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 2
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
5. On notice being served, respondents appeared before the court and filed their statement of
objections. Respondent No.1/Insurance Company took up the plea that the accident occurred due to
rashness and negligence of the driver of the Auto Rickshaw and not due to any negligence of the
driver of the offending lorry. However, Insurance company admitted the issuance of policy in favour
of the offending vehicle namely lorry. But contended that the driver of the offending lorry did not
possess a valid and effective driving license to drive such class of vehicle and the RC owner has
contravened the terms and conditions of the insurance policy. It further denied the age, avocation
and income of the claimant and sought for dismissal of the claim petition.
6. On consideration of the pleadings, the Tribunal framed relevant issues for consideration.
7. In order to prove and establish his case, the claimant got examined himself as PW1 and got
marked Exs.P.1 to P.10, whereas respondents examined two witnesses as RW1 and RW2, who are
the Administrative Officer and the Doctor and got marked Exs.R.1 to R.3.
8. On the basis of material evidence, both oral and documentary and after hearing the learned
counsel on both sides, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the claimant would be entitled for a
global compensation in a sum of Rs.50,000/- along with interest at 8% per annum to the claimant
and attributed 80% negligence as against the driver of the offending lorry and 20% negligence as
against the claimant herein. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and award passed by the
Tribunal, the claimant is before this Court seeking enhancement of compensation.
9. Leaned counsel for the claimant has vehemently contended that the impugned judgment and
award passed by the Tribunal is illegal, erroneous and arbitrary and the same is contrary to the
material evidence placed on record both oral and documentary. He further contends that the
Tribunal has failed to take into consideration Ex.P.1 to P.10 inclusive of the police records where the
charge sheet laid by the Police after conducting the investigation and enquiry against the driver of
the offending lorry. He further contends that the Tribunal has erred in not appreciating that the
entire criminal prosecution is lodged against the driver of the offending lorry though no case has
been registered against the driver of the Auto Rickshaw, the claimant. He further contends that the
Tribunal has committed serious error in assessing contributory negligence against the driver of the
Auto Rickshaw for the simple reason that the driver of the Auto Rickshaw did not possess valid and
effective driving license as on the date of occurrence of accident.
10. Learned counsel further contends that this finding and conclusion arrived by the Tribunal is not
proper and without any basis as no material is placed by the respondent No.1/Insurer or no
evidence elicited in the cross- examination to show that the driver of the Auto Rickshaw contributed
to the occurrence of the accident. Nothing is also forthcoming in the reasoning and finding arrived
by the Tribunal with regard to the driver of the Auto Rickshaw having contributed to the occurrence
of the accident. Learned counsel further contends that on the other heads, the Tribunal has grossly
erred in awarding a meager compensation without considering the elements of pain and suffering,
loss of amenities and the loss of income during the laid up period and other aspects which the
Tribunal ought to have awarded to the claimant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 3
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
11. It is further contended by the learned counsel for the claimant that the Tribunal has grossly erred
in attributing the contributory negligence against the driver of the Auto Rickshaw namely the
claimant as it is contrary to the material evidence and also the law laid down in catena of decisions
of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as this Court in several judgments which are as follows:
1. DINESH KUMAR J. ALIAS DINESH.J v. NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY
LIMITED AND OTHERS reported in (2018) 1 SCC 750
2. SUDHIR KUMAR RANA v. SURINDER SINGH AND ORS.
reported in AIR 2008 SC 2405
3. MOHAMMED SIDDIQUE AND ANR. v. NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LTD. AND ORS.
reported in AIR 2020 SC 520 Hence, on these grounds, he sought for allowing the appeal,
consequently enhance the compensation by setting at naught the contributory negligence attributed
against the claimant herein.
12. Per contra, learned counsel Sri Mohan Kumar T, for respondent No.2 - Insurer vehemently
contends that the Tribunal has passed the just and reasonable order on the basis of the material
evidence placed on record both oral and documentary and thereby awarded reasonable
compensation, commensurate to the injuries sustained by the claimant in the accident. There is no
requirement of any interference at the hands of this Court as all aspects awarding compensation
under the various heads has been considered by the Tribunal and has rightly attributed 20%
contributory negligence as against the driver of the Auto Rickshaw, the claimant herein in view of
there being, no driving license on the clamant.
13. Learned counsel further contends that the Tribunal has awarded just and reasonable
compensation which does not call for any interference. On these grounds, he seeks for dismissal of
the appeal.
14. Having heard the learned counsel for appellant and respondent No.2-Insurer, the points which
arise for consideration are:
1. Whether the Tribunal has awarded meager compensation ignoring the material
placed on record?
2. Whether the Tribunal is justified in attributing 20% contributory negligence as
against the driver of the Auto Rickshaw?
3. Whether the enhancement is called for in the facts and circumstances of the case?
15. There is no dispute with regard to the occurrence of the accident on 23.12.2017 between Auto
Rickshaw driven by the claimant and offending lorry, in which the passenger traveling in the Auto
Rickshaw succumbed to the injuries and the claimant sustained serious injuries to his body. To
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 4
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
evidence this fact, PW.1 has produced documentary evidence at Ex.P.1 to P.7 being the police
records which are not in dispute and the same establishes the fact that there is a charge sheet laid by
the jurisdictional police after enquiry and investigation and the criminal prosecution is set into
motion against the driver of the offending lorry. Neither the charge sheet has been challenged nor
the criminal prosecution or contra material has been placed before the Tribunal or before this Court
to establish that the criminal prosecution is bad in law. Further, there is no material placed by the
learned counsel for the Insurance Company that the clamant, driver of the Auto Rickshaw has
contributed to the occurrence of the accident apart from merely stating that he did not possess the
valid and effective driving license as on the date of occurrence of the accident.
16. When this being the state of affairs, it is inferred on the basis of the evidentiary value of Exs.P.1
to P.7 that the liability and negligence is apparent as against the driver of the offending lorry by
initiation of the criminal proceedings. In order to establish that the driver of the Auto Rickshaw, the
claimant, was involved or contributed to the occurrence of the accident, the owner or the
respondent/insurer have not proved the fact and neither is the same established by sufficient cogent
material evidence. It is also seen from the impugned judgment and award passed by the Tribunal
that the Tribunal has merely on the premise that the claimant, driver of the Auto Rickshaw did not
possess a valid and effective driving license has attributed 20% contributory negligence against him
without there being any material to show that the driver of the Auto Rickshaw per se contributed to
the occurrence of accident.
17. In a case where the contributory negligence is attributed by the Tribunal on the basis of
allegations made by the respondent, it becomes incumbent for the respondent to prove this fact
before the Court by placing the cogent material evidence either oral or documentary. In the present
case on hand, there being no documents evidencing any criminal prosecution or any complaint
against the driver of the Auto Rickshaw and there being no material evidence oral or any elicitation
in cross- examination with regard to the claimant, the driver of the Auto Rickshaw having
contributed to the occurrence of the accident, I am afraid, the finding arrived at by the Tribunal is
hard to countenance and the same deserves to be set aside out-rightly. Merely for the reason that
there is no driving license, it cannot be assumed or presumed that the driver of the Auto Rickshaw,
the claimant, has contributed to the accident unless there is cogent material evidence pinpointing at
the clamant/driver of the Auto Rickshaw to have contributed in the causation of the accident. In the
present case on hand, no such material is placed before the Court. Hence, I am of the opinion that
the finding arrived at by the Tribunal is erroneous and the same requires to be set aside. Accordingly
it is set aside.
18. Coming to the age, avocation and income of the claimant, though the claimant has stated in his
evidence that he was earning income of Rs.20,000/- per month as Mechanic, no material has been
placed before the Court in proof of same. It is also not the case of the clamant that he sustained
permanent disability affecting his future earning capacity, no material has been placed to that effect
and neither has he examined any doctor to establish the said aspects. However, it is the contention
of the learned counsel for the claimant that the Tribunal has not awarded just and reasonable
compensation on all other heads.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 5
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
19. The Tribunal has however awarded global compensation of Rs.50,000/- to the claimant. I am
afraid that the Tribunal has committed a serious error in not considering the aspect of injuries
sustained by the claimant, the pain and agony and suffering meted out to the claimant in the
occurrence of the accident and post thereafter and the loss of amenities to the claimant. Hence,
there is marginal indulgence required in the global award by the Tribunal for the reasons mentioned
below.
20. The accident having occurred in the year 2017, in view of any absence of proof of income, the
notional income chart prescribed for the relevant year is Rs.11,000/- per month. For awarding
compensation under the head of 'loss of income during laid up period', this amount will have to be
taken for consideration. Accordingly, if Rs.11,000/- is taken as income for the relevant period of
accident i.e. 2017 and the claimant having suffered mild injury to the head and he was inpatient for
a period of 5 days and on diagnosis mild head injury, CT: right temporal specks of contusion.
However, the claimant has not examined any doctor to show that he sustained the disability due to
occurrence of the accident. That being the case of the claimant would not be entitled to any 'loss of
future earning capacity' as no evidence is placed before the Court. However, the claimant would be
entitled for the 'loss of income during laid up period'. Taking into consideration that the clamant
was inpatient for a period of 5 days and the notional income taken at Rs.11,000/-, I deem it
appropriate to award two months as laid up period considering the injuries sustained and towards
recuperation and to get back to the normal work. Accordingly, Rs.22,000/- is taken as 'loss of
income during laid up period. The claimant having been inpatient for a period of 5 days in the
hospital, towards treatment, nourishment, food and transportation charges, I deem it appropriate to
award Rs.15,000/- under the head.
21. Towards 'pain and sufferings', in view of the fact that the claimant was admitted as inpatient and
suffered certain injuries as mentioned, I deem it appropriate to award Rs.35,000/- towards 'pain
and sufferings'.
22. Towards admitted medical bills produced by the claimant, the Tribunal has awarded Rs.1,097/-
which is retained.
23. The Tribunal having attributed 20% contributory negligence as against the claimant, the driver
of the Auto Rickshaw is set at naught, entire compensation is liable to be paid by the respondent /
insurer.
For the reasons aforesaid, the claimant is entitled for enhancement of compensation of Rs.73,097/-
as against Rs.50,000/- awarded by the Tribunal. Accordingly I pass the following order:
a) The appeal is partly allowed.
Consequently, Judgment and Award dated 30.03.2019 passed by the VII Additional SCJ & XXXII
ACMM, Member, MACT-3, Bengaluru in MVC No.789/2018 is modified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 6
Sri Imran Pasha vs The United India Insurance Co Ltd on 11 April, 2022
b) The claimant is entitled to a total compensation of Rs.73,097/- as against Rs.50,000/- awarded
by the Tribunal.
c) The Insurance Company is directed to deposit the compensation amount along with interest from
the date of filing of the claim petition till the date of realization, within a period of four weeks from
the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
d) The enhanced amount shall carry interest
at 6% p.a.
e) All other conditions imposed by the
Tribunal being left intact.
f) The claimant shall not be entitled to
interest for the delayed period.
No order as to costs.
Sd/-
JUDGE
HA/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59776393/ 7
