Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27
March, 2023
Author: K.Natarajan
Bench: K.Natarajan
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 27TH DAY OF MARCH, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE K.NATARAJAN
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.1976 OF 2023
BETWEEN
SRI. K. MADAL VIRUPAKSHAPPA
S/O LATE MALLAPA
AGED ABOUT 74 YEARS,
R/AT CHANNESHPURA VILLAGE,
CHANNAGIRI TALUK
DAVANGERE DISTRICT
DAVANGERE - 577 221
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI K. SUMAN, SENIOR ADVOCATE
FOR SRI SANDEEP S. PATIL, ADVOCATE)
AND
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA POLICE,
BENGALURU DIVISION
THROUGH ITS SPECIAL PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
BENGALURU - 560 001
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI ASHOK HARANAHALLI, SR. ADVOCATE
FOR SRI. B.B. PATIL, SPECIAL COUNSEL)
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 438
OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, PRAYING TO
ENLARGE THE PETITIONER ON BAIL IN THE EVENT OF HIS
ARREST IN CR.NO.13/2023 REGISTERED BY KARNATAKA
LOKAYUKTA POLICE, BENGALURU FOR THE OFFENCES
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 1
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTIONS 7(a)(b), 7(A), 8, 9 AND 10 OF
PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, PENDING ON THE FILE OF
LXXXI ADDITIONAL CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE AND
2
SPECIAL COURT EXCLUSIVELY TO DEAL WITH CRIMINAL CASES
RELATED TO ELECTED MPs/MLAs IN THE STATE OF KARNATAKA,
BENGALURU (CCH-82).
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 17.3.2023, THIS DAY, THE COURT
MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
This petition is filed by the petitioner-accused No.1 under Section 438 of Cr.P.C., for granting
anticipatory bail in Crime No.13/2023 of Lokayukta Police, Bengaluru and for the offences
punishable under Sections 7(a)(b), 7(A), 8, 9 and 10 of Prevention of Corruption Act.
2. Heard the arguments of learned Senior counsel for the petitioner and learned Senior Counsel
appearing for respondent.
3. The case of prosecution is that on the complaint of one Shreyas Kashyap, S/o. B.S. Gururaj, the
police have registered FIR against accused No.1-the present petitioner and his son-accused No.2 and
others. It is alleged by the defacto complainant, in his complaint, that he is the partner of the
company called Chemixil Corporation and his known person T.A.S. Murthy, who is said to be
running a partnership firm in the name of M.S. Delicia Chemicals. They participated in the tender
proceedings for procurement of chemical oil to be supplied to Karnataka Soaps And Detergent
Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'KSDL') and they are the successful bidders. For the smooth
supply of chemicals and chemical oils, they received procurement of raw materials. The accused said
to have demanded Rs.81.00 lakhs as bribe and the petitioner-accused No.1 said to be informed the
complainant to contact his son-accused No.2. The complainant, not willing to pay bribe amount,
lodged a complaint to Lokayukta police. In turn, the said Lokayukta police set up trap and sent
Rs.40.00 lakhs with the complainant. At the time of accepting the bribe amount, accused No.2 was
caught red hand and trapped by the Lokayukta police and they seized the bribe amount and arrested
accused No.2 and arrested accused No.2. It is also alleged in the complaint that, at the time of
incident, some other persons were also present. The police seized Rs.45.00 lakhs each from accused
Nos.3 and 4 under trap panchanama in the presence of panchas. Accused No.2 and other accused
persons were arrested and they were remanded to judicial custody. The name of the petitioner-
accused No.1 has been appeared in the FIR. Hence, he had apprehension of arrest in the hands of
police. Therefore, he approached this Court for the grant of anticipatory bail and he also filed an
interim application under Section 438(1) of Cr.P.C., where this Court granted interim anticipatory
bail on 07.03.2023 until disposal of this petition and this Court called for statement objections and
documents from the Lokayukta police. Accordingly, they have produced the case diary before the
Court in a sealed cover.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 2
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
4. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has contended that there is no demand and acceptance
of bribe by the petitioner-accused No.1 for demanding any bribe from the complainant. There is no
allegation against him even for abetment to pay any bribe. None of the offences are alleged against
the petitioner in the FIR and the remand application will attract against the petitioner. The learned
Senior Counsel further contended that Lokayukta police have trapped accused No.2 and recovered
some amount and there is no connection between the trap of accused No.2 and this petitioner-
accused No.1. There is no work entrustment pending with the petitioner and there is no demand
prior to accepting the tender or placing the procurement order. The learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner further submitted that there was no date mentioned as to on what date the
petitioner-accused No.1 demanded bribe. Even in the trap panchanama, the investigation officer has
stated that there is no material evidence against the petitioner. Immediately, after registering the
FIR, the petitioner resigned from the post of Chairman of KSDL.
5. The learned Senor Counsel for the petitioner further contended that there is a separate
Committee which has floated and accepted the tender and there is no role played the
petitioner-accused No.1 in this regard. The petitioner is a sitting MLA and he is already to
co-operated with the investigation officer and absolutely, there is no material to connect the
petitioner with this crime. The case is registered politically, motivated by the opposite political
parties. If the petitioner is arrested, kept in jail, his reputation will be come down. The arrest of the
petitioner is only an empty formality. The incriminating evidence is already collected by the
Lokayukta police. The petitioner is ready to abide by any condition. Hence, prayed for granting
anticipatory bail.
6. Per contra, the respondent-Lokayukta filed statement of objections and the learned Senior
counsel appearing for the respondent has contended that the petitioner is the Chairman of the KSDL
and the complainant is the successful bidder for supplying the chemical oils to the KSDL. The
petitioner-accused No.1 and his son-accused No.2 having indulged in rigging of the tender process,
have demanded bribe amount of Rs.81.00 lakhs. The complainant contacted him at the request of
accused No.1, then, accused No.2 also had discussion and for sanction of the tender, release of bills
and supply of goods, accused No.2 demanded Rs.1.20 crores from both the companies and after
negotiation, accused No.2 has agreed to receive Rs.81.00 lakhs. Since, the complainant was not
willing to pay the bribe, filed the complaint to the Lokayukta. The learned Senior Counsel for
respondent further submitted that, thereafter, the respondent- Lokayukta prepared a pre-trap
panchanama and requested the complainant to hand over the bribe and accordingly, on 02.03.2023,
when the complainant went to the office of accused No.2 and while paying the amount, accused
No.2 was trapped and during the trap panchanama, some other accused persons were also present.
The respondent- Lokayukta seized Rs.60.00 lakhs from accused No.2 and Rs.90.00 lakhs (i.e.,
Rs.45.00 lakhs each) from two persons i.e., Albert Nicholas and Gangadhar. The total amount that
were seized under the panchanama is Rs.1,62,00,000/- (i.e., Rs.60.00 lakhs + Rs.12.00 lakhs +
Rs.90.00 lakhs). Sbsequently, the Lokayukta also raided the house of accused No.2 and also the
office of accused No.1 and seized Rs.6,10,30,000/-. The learned Senior Counsel further contended
that, the investigation is under progress. If the accused is released on bail, he will hamper the
investigation. Even though this Court has granted interim anticipatory bail, but accused No.1 is not
giving proper answer, he is giving evasive answer and not properly co-operating with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 3
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
Investigating Officer. Therefore, it is contended that the petitioner-accused No.1 is required for
custodial interrogation. The police may get better information from accused No.1. There is serious
allegation against him. The entire tender process has been followed by accused No.2 who is the son
of the petitioner. The Managing Director of KSDL one Mahesh has given his statement under
Sections 161 as well as 164 of Cr.P.C. where it clearly reveals the active participation of accused No.2
in the tender process at the instance of accused No.1. Accused No.2 is not connected to the KSDL
and he is working in BWSSB, but he has received bribe amount in respect of the KSDL. Therefore,
prayed for dismissing the petition. The learned Senior counsel for the respondent also contended
that Rs.6.10 crores has been seized from the bed room of this petitioner-accused No.1 and therefore,
prayed for dismissing the petition
7. In support of his arguments, the learned Sernior Counsel has relied upon the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of P.CHIDAMBARAM vs. DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
reported in (2019) 9 SCC 24.
8. In reply, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has contended that there is no material
against the petitioner for having demanded any bribe and the petitioner is not having bed room in
the house of accused No.2. The said house belongs to other sons who are running a company and
therefore, the petitioner is not required for any custodial interrogation. Hence, prayed for allowing
the petition. In support of his arguments, the learned Senior Counsel has relied upon various
judgments of the Supreme Court including the case of SHRI GURBAKSH SINGH SIBBIA AND
OTHERS Vs. STATE OF PUNJAB reported in (1980) 2 SCC 565.
9. Having heard the arguments of learned Senior counsel for parties and on perusal of the records,
the allegation against the petitioner is that the petitioner being an MLA and the Chairman of the
KSDL, has demanded Rs.1.20 Crores as bribe for accepting the tender and also for smooth payment
on the procurement of raw materials for the purpose of the KSDL and after bargain, agreed for
Rs.81.00 lakhs. The respondent No.2 is the successful bidder in the tender floated by the KSDL
through its Committee constituted for floating the tender and accepting the tender. It is seen from
the records that the KSDL placed an order for procurement of chemical oils for the purpose of
KSDL. As per the allegation in the FIR, the complainant, for the purpose of smooth delivery of the
goods and payment, has approached the present petitioner and he is said to be demanded Rs.1.20
Crores as bribe and later, the petitioner has instructed the complainant to approach his son
Prashanth Madal (accused No.2). Accordingly, one Sri.TVS Murthy and the complainant
approached accused No.2 on 12.01.2023 in the private office of accused No.2, who is said to have
demanded Rs.60.00 lakhs each as commission from both the companies for smooth procurement
and payment. After bargain, accused No.2 agreed to receive Rs.33.00 lakhs from Chemixil
Corporation and Rs.48.00 lakhs from M.S. Delicia Chemicals. Totally, Rs.81.00 lakhs was
demanded for the supply of 29,520 kgs of chemicals and 50 kgs of Abbalide/musk at the rate of
Rs.4349/- per kg. Accused No.2 demanded Rs.81.00 lakhs and later, the purchase order has been
placed on 28.01.2023 and on 30.01.2023. Subsequently on 08.02.2023, accused No.2 contacted the
complainant through whats-app call and asked to come to the office. Though the complainant went
to the office and tried to record the conversation, but the date and time was not recorded.
Subsequently, on 28.02.2023, accused No.2 called the complainant through phone, but the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 4
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
complainant did not lift the phone. Again on, 01.03.2023, accused No.2 called the complainant
through the whatsapp and asked to meet him. Thereafter, the complaint came to be lodged and
accordingly, trap was set up and while handing over Rs.40.00 lakhs to accused No.2, he has been
trapped.
10. It is also seen from the trap Panchanama that Rs.40.00 lakhs has been seized at the time of trap
from accused No.2. The police also arrested accused Nos.3 and 4 and seized Rs.45.00 lakhs each
from them who came to office of accused No.2 and the police also seized Rs.12.00 lakhs from
accused Nos.5 and 6 under the panchanama.
11. Though as per the trap panchanama, the aforesaid amounts were seized by the police,
subsequently, the police also raided the house of the accused No.2, where in the bed room of this
petitioner, they found Rs.6,10,30,000/- and they seized the same under the panchanama. In the
panchanama, it is stated that the house belongs to accused No.2 and the daughter- in-law of
petitioner-accused No.1 was present and she has stated that the said room belongs to this petitioner.
However, the investigation officer, while producing the accused No.2 before the Court, at inner page
No.92 of trap panchanama, has stated that there is no evidence found as against accused no.1 and
they will collect the documents during the investigation. Considering the said observation made by
the investigating officer in the trap panchanama, this Court granted interim anticipatory bail to this
petitioner on 07.03.2023.
12. Subsequently, the learned Senior counsel for respondent, during the course of final argument,
has brought to the notice of this court that there was telephonic conversation between the accused
No.2 and the complainant prior to the trap. It is also an admitted fact that the petitioner was the
Chairman of the KSDL, but accused No.2 nothing to do with the KSDL. In fact, accused No.2 is an
accountant working at BWSSB and he has no business to make any demand and acceptance for
himself except on behalf of the petitioner-accused No.1.
13. This Court, while granting interim anticipatory bail, imposed some conditions to the
petitioner-accused No.1 to cooperate with the investigating officer. In the FIR, there is no direct
evidence against this petitioner, but it was found during the investigation. The materials collected by
the investigating officer and the case diary reveals the statement of one Mahesh, who is the
Managing Director of KSDL, recorded under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. The said Mahesh, Managing
Director of KSDL has categorically stated that there was frequent instructions given by this
petitioner-accused No.1 through accused No.2 in tender floating activities and also at the instance of
instruction of this petitioner, the tender has been finalized. The accused No.2 has actively given all
the instructions to the complainant on behalf of the petitioner-accused No.1. There were whatsapp
messages and telephone instructions given by this petitioner to one said Mahesh, the Managing
Director of KSDL, which clearly reveals, that at the instance of this petitioner-accused No.1 and on
behalf of the petitioner-accused No.1, accused No.2 almost acted on for tender process, procurement
process and demand and acceptance of the alleged bribe amount, pertaining to KSDL.
14. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of SHRI GURBAKSH SINGH SIBBIA AND OTHERS Vs. STATE OF PUNJAB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 5
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
reported in (1980) 2 SCC 565 in respect of granting anticipatory bail and the principles laid down by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. I am aware about the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court and based upon the principles laid down in the said judgment, this Court has granted interim
anticipatory bail to this petitioner when he rushed to the Court on 07.03.2023.
15. On the other hand, lhe learned Senior Counsel for the respondent has relied upon the judgment
of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of P.Chidambaram (supra) and contended that the petitioner
is required for custodial interrogation. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case of P.Chidambaram
(supra), at paragraphs 64, 65, 69, 72 and 74 has held as follows:
64. Investigation into crimes is the prerogative of the police and excepting in rare
cases, the judiciary should keep out all the areas of investigation. In State of Bihar v.
P.P. Sharma [State of Bihar v. P.P. Sharma, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 222 : 1992 SCC (Cri)
192] , it was held that : (SCC p. 258, para 47) "47. ... The investigating officer is an
arm of the law and plays a pivotal role in the dispensation of criminal justice and
maintenance of law and order. ... Enough power is therefore given to the police
officer in the area of investigating process and granting them the court latitude to
exercise its discretionary power to make a successful investigation...."
65. In Dukhishyam Benupani v. Arun Kumar Bajoria [Dukhishyam Benupani v. Arun
Kumar Bajoria, (1998) 1 SCC 52 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 261] , this Court held that :
"7. ... It is not the function of the court to monitor investigation processes so long as
such investigation does not transgress any provision of law. It must be left to the
investigating agency to decide the venue, the timings and the questions and the
manner of putting such questions to persons involved in such offences. A blanket
order fully insulating a person from arrest would make his interrogation a mere
ritual...."
Grant of anticipatory bail in exceptional cases
69. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of procedure of the investigation to secure not only the presence of
the accused but several other purposes. Power under Section 438 CrPC is an extraordinary power
and the same has to be exercised sparingly. The privilege of the pre-arrest bail should be granted
only in exceptional cases. The judicial discretion conferred upon the court has to be properly
exercised after application of mind as to the nature and gravity of the accusation; possibility of the
applicant fleeing justice and other factors to decide whether it is a fit case for grant of anticipatory
bail. Grant of anticipatory bail to some extent interferes in the sphere of investigation of an offence
and hence, the court must be circumspect while exercising such power for grant of anticipatory bail.
Anticipatory bail is not to be granted as a matter of rule and it has to be granted only when the court
is convinced that exceptional circumstances exist to resort to that extraordinary remedy.
72. We are conscious of the fact that the legislative intent behind the introduction of Section 438
CrPC is to safeguard the individual's personal liberty and to protect him from the possibility of being
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 6
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
humiliated and from being subjected to unnecessary police custody. However, the court must also
keep in view that a criminal offence is not just an offence against an individual, rather the larger
societal interest is at stake. Therefore, a delicate balance is required to be established between the
two rights--safeguarding the personal liberty of an individual and the societal interest. It cannot be
said that refusal to grant anticipatory bail would amount to denial of the rights conferred upon the
appellant under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
74. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of the investigation intended to secure several
purposes. There may be circumstances in which the accused may provide information leading to
discovery of material facts and relevant information. Grant of anticipatory bail may hamper the
investigation. Pre-arrest bail is to strike a balance between the individual's right to personal freedom
and the right of the investigating agency to interrogate the accused as to the material so far collected
and to collect more information which may lead to recovery of relevant information. In State v. Anil
Sharma [State v. Anil Sharma, (1997) 7 SCC 187 :
1997 SCC (Cri) 1039] , the Supreme Court held as under : (SCC p. 189, para 6) "6. We
find force in the submission of CBI that custodial interrogation is qualitatively more
elicitation-oriented than questioning a suspect who is well-ensconced with a
favourable order under Section 438 of the Code. In a case like this, effective
interrogation of a suspected person is of tremendous advantage in disinterring many
useful informations and also materials which would have been concealed. Success in
such interrogation would elude if the suspected person knows that he is well
protected and insulated by a pre-arrest bail order during the time he is interrogated.
Very often interrogation in such a condition would reduce to a mere ritual. The
argument that the custodial interrogation is fraught with the danger of the person
being subjected to third-degree methods need not be countenanced, for, such an
argument can be advanced by all accused in all criminal cases. The Court has to
presume that responsible police officers would conduct themselves in a responsible
manner and that those entrusted with the task of disinterring offences would not
conduct themselves as offenders."
16. Learned Senior Counsel for the respondent has contended that the petitioner is
not co-operating with the investigation officer, he is not giving any proper answer to
the queries made by the respondent and that, he is giving evasive answers. Since the
petitioner is not co-operating with the investigation officer and he is not giving
proper answers, he is required for custodial interrogation, otherwise, it would not
possible for the Lokayukta police to conduct proper investigation.
17. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Chidambaram's case, (supra), the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the police is required to investigate the matter
for custodial interrogation in economic offences.
Though the alleged offence is not directly on the economic offence against the State, but the KSDL is
a public limited company belongs to the State Government, it has floated the tender process for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 7
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
purchasing the chemicals or raw materials for production of Mysore Sandal Soaps. If the company
pays more than crores of rupees as commission or bribe, one cannot expect the good quality of raw
materials will be supplied by the said company and the very tender process followed by the tender
accepting Committee and accepting the lowest price and good quality of raw materials will be
frustrated. The public auction process through online would remain as an empty formality and eye
wash to the public as they are following the KTPP Act and they are giving the tender to a person who
is bribing the Committee or the head of the Committee who is holding the higher position in the
tender procuring process. If at all respondent No.2 and his company has legally participated in the
tender process activities, the question of paying the bribe does not arise. However, it is the matter of
investigation by the police and further action will be taken by the KSDL for reconsidering the tender
process and accepting the tender from respondent No.2 is doubtful about following the KTPP Act.
18. The fact remains that the complainant himself says that, for the purpose of tender, procurement
and smooth payment, he approached the petitioner-accused No.1 and therefore, without the
instruction of the petitioner-accused No.1, the question of accused No.2 consulting the complainant,
demanding bribe and accepting the bribe does not arise. The police are yet to collect the statement
of so many witnesses from the KSDL and the other officials without any hindrance. The statement of
the family members of petitioner-accused No.1 has been recorded by the investigation officer and
the amount has been seized from the bedroom of this petitioner. The investigation officer was not
able to collect the call records, whatsapp messages from the mobile of the petitioner. Therefore, the
matter requires detailed investigation and without the custodial interrogation, it is not possible for
the police to collect the proper evidence against the petitioner. If the petitioner is on bail, there is
every possibility of apprehension by the witnesses and they may not come forward to give evidence
or statement against him without fear.
19. Therefore, I am of the view that the custodial interrogation of the petitioner-accused No.1 is very
much necessary for the Lokayukta police. Though this Court granted the interim anticipatory bail
until disposal of the case, because there was no material found in FIR at that time, but now, there is
sufficient evidence to show the involvement of the petitioner in the commission of offence as per the
case diary of the police and statement of Mohan under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. Therefore, the custody
of the petitioner is imminent for the Lokayukta police to interrogate him in the matter. Therefore, at
this stage, this Court feels that the interim anticipatory bail, requires to be cancelled as the
petitioner-accused No.1 has not properly co-operated with the investigation officer. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of SUNITA DEVI AND ANOTHER Vs STATE OF HARYANA reported in
(2023) 1 SCC 178 has held that if the accused refused to co- operate with the investigation agency,
the State can file an application for cancellation of bail. Therefore, considering the facts and
circumstances of the case, I am of the view that the petitioner-accused No.1 is not entitled for
anticipatory bail as he is required for custodial interrogation.
20. The interim anticipatory bail granted by this Court on 07.03.2023 is hereby cancelled.
Accordingly, this petition for anticipatory bail filed under Section 438 of Cr.P.C., by the
petitioner-accused No.1 is hereby dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 8
Sri. K. Madal Virupakshappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 March, 2023
Pending I.As., if any, do not survive for consideration. They are accordingly disposed of.
Sd/-
JUDGE CS/AKV/GBB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6756936/ 9
