Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 2280, 2021 (1) AKR 507
Author: H.P.Sandesh
Bench: H.P.Sandesh
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU R
DATED THIS THE 20TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.P.SANDESH
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.140/2011
BETWEEN:
SRI MURALIDHAR RAO
S/O LATE M. VARDHARAJA RAO
HINDU
RESIDING AT NO.121, 4TH CROSS
VIDHYAPEETA MAIN ROAD
BENGALURU-560 085. ...APPELLANT
(BY SRI S. RAVISHANKAR, ADVOCATE)
AND:
SRI P. NAGESH RAO
S/O LATE P. NARAYANA RAO
AGED ABOUT 53 YEARS
PANAYAR HOUSE, YELLUR VILLAGE
NANDIKOOR POST
VIA. PADUBEDARI
UDUPI DISTRICT. ...RESPONDENT
(BY SRI A.N. RADHAKRISHNA, ADVOCATE)
THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 378(4)
OF CR.P.C PRAYING THIS COURT TO SET ASIDE THE ORDER
DATED 29.12.2010 PASSED BY THE XVIII ACMM, AND XX ASCJ,
BANGALORE IN C.C.NO.3336/2006 - ACQUITTING THE
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 1
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
RESPONDENT/ACCUSED FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER
SECTION 138 OF N.I. ACT.
THIS APPEAL HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED ON
TH
5 NOVEMBER 2020 FOR HEARING AND COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT, THIS DAY, H.P.SANDESH J.,
DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
This appeal is filed challenging judgment of acquittal passed in C.C.No.3336/2006 dated
29.12.2010, on the file of XVIII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and XX ASCJ, Bangalore
City for the offence punishable under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act (hereafter for short
' N.I. Act').
2. For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to as they are referred to in the original suit
before the Trial Court.
3. Brief facts of the case:
Complainant filed complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. against the accused under
Section 138 of the N.I. Act and made an allegation that accused being a close relative
of the complainant, on 7.12.2003, borrowed hand loan of Rs.6,00,000/- from the
complainant, promising to repay the said loan amount within one month and in
respect of the above said transaction, complainant demanded the accused for
repayment of loan amount, for which, accused had issued a cheque bearing
No.085571 dated 31.08.2005, drawn on Syndicate Bank, Nandikoor branch. When
the said cheque was presented by the complainant for clearance on 31.08.2005 with
his banker, the same was returned unpaid with an endorsement 'funds insufficient on
05.09.2005.
4. The complainant issued legal notice against the accused which was duly served on him. The
accused did not comply the demand and hence complaint was filed against the accused.
5. Accused was secured before the Trial Court and he has pleaded not guilty. Hence, the complainant
examined himself as P.W.1 and got marked documents Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.14 and on the other hand
accused examined himself as D.W.1 and got examined two witnesses as DWs. 2 and 3 and got
marked documents Exs.D.1 and D.2.
6. The Trial Court after perusing both oral and documentary evidence has acquitted the accused.
Hence, the present appeal is before this Court.
7. The complainant in the present appeal who contended that the Trial Court has committed error in
not appreciating both oral and documentary evidence and it has erred in casting the burden on the
complainant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 2
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
8. Nature of the presumption under Section 139 is subject to three conditions specified relating to
presentation, giving of the notice and the non-payment after receipt of notice by the drawer of the
cheque. All three conditions referred to supra have not been denied by the accused in this case. The
Trial Court unnecessarily embarked upon the evidence of the complainant with out raising
presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act. The Trial Court even not bothered about to discuss the
evidence of the accused-respondent though it is undisputed fact that the accused-respondent has
issued the cheque in question. The Trial Court erred in not appreciating the evidence properly and it
is not been disputed the fact that the cheque was issued in favour of the complainant and as such it
is mandatory on the part of the Trial Court to raise the presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act.
9. The Trial court dismissed the complaint on the ground that the complainant had no financial
capacity to pay the loan amount and he has not complied Section 269 of Income Tax Act and failed
to prove the existence of legally recoverable debt. The Trial Court has not appreciated Exs.P.8 to 14
which are admitted by the accused-respondent, Exbit D1 was in confronting the same marked in the
Cross-examination of PW1, in proper perceptive. It is also contented that the statutory notice was
issued and the same was acknowledged and no reply was given and the only defense taken by the
accused is that he has issued cheque as security purpose and the same has not been substantiated in
his evidence and no cogent evidence has been led by the accused in respect of the same, inspite of
the Trial Court has committed an error.
10. The learned counsel appearing for the appellant/complainant in his argument has vehemently
contended that the witness who has been examined on behalf of the accused as D.W.3 has
categorically admitted with regard to the capacity of the complainant to advance the loan amount.
The accused in the cross-examination, admitted that he has not given any reply and admits that
there is no difficulty for him to give any reply. Accused/DW1 has also admitted that the complainant
was having a car and also his brothers are settled in abroad and also admitted in the cross
examination that he was having bank account in different banks, in spite of the same the Trial Court
has committed an error in coming to the conclusion that Complainant was not having the capacity
to advance the loan amount. Defense was taken in the cross-examination that the cheque was given
for security purpose to avail loan by the complainant from other financiers and the same has not
been proved. The notice was served on him and only during the cross-examination the said defense
was taken and not given any reply. The counsel also submitted that the trial Court has committed an
error in not invoking presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act and without invoking presumption
proceeded to discuss the case of the complainant and not considered the evidence of the accused
and also his witnesses evidence. Hence, it is clear that the Trial Court has not considered both oral
and documentary evidence of both complainant and the accused while coming to the conclusion that
the complainant has not proved the case.
11. The counsel appearing for the appellant in support of his contention relied upon the judgment of
the Apex Court reported in 2010 (4) Supreme 169, Rangappa vs. Sri Mohan and referring this
judgment the learned counsel brought to the notice of this Court, paragraphs 14 and 15 with regard
to invoking presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act and the accused had failed to reply to the
statutory notice issued under Section 138 of the N.I. Act and contended that inference can be drawn
in favour of the complainant's version since no reply was given.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 3
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
12. Learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Bir Singh Vs. Mukesh
Kumar dated 14.09.2020 referred at paragraphs 15, 16 and 36 to 43. Referring to the relevant
paragraphs, counsel for the accused did not dispute the issuance of the cheque and admitted the
issuance of the cheque and in this judgment the Apex Court held that even a blank cheque
voluntarily signed and hand over by the accused which is towards some payment, would attract
presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act, in the absence of any cogent evidence to show that the
cheque was not issued in discharge of a debt.
13. The counsel also relied upon the judgment dated 14.09.2020 of the Apex Court in the case of
Rohitbhai Jivanlal Patel Vs. State of Gujarat and Another and referring this judgment the learned
counsel brought to the notice of this Court, paragraphs 12 to 23 and would submit that non
examination of two witnesses from whom the amount was borrowed to advance the amount need
not be necessary to examine these witnesses. In paragraph No.17, the Apex Court has observed that
even after purportedly drawing the presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. Act, the Trial Court
proceeded to question the want of evidence on the part of the complainant as regards the source of
funds for advancing loan to the accused and want of examination of relevant witnesses who
allegedly extended him money for advancing it to the accused. The Apex Court held that said
approach of the Trial Court had been at variance with the principles of presumption in law. After
such presumption, the onus shifted to the accused and unless the accused had discharged the onus
by bringing on record such facts and circumstances as to show the preponderance of probabilities
tilting in his favour, any doubt on the complainant's case could not have been raised for want of
evidence regarding the source of funds for advancing loan to the accused-appellant.
14. The learned counsel relied upon the judgment dated 14.09.2020 in the case of Uttam Ram Vs.
Devinder Singh Hudan and Another and referring to paragraphs 18 to 33 of this judgment the
counsel appearing for the appellant would submit that Sections 20, 87 and 139, makes it amply clear
that a person who signs a cheque and makes it over to the payee remains liable unless he adduces
evidence to rebut the presumption that the cheque had been issued for payment of a debt or in
discharge of a liability. The Court drawn as presumption that the cheques in question were drawn
for consideration and the holder of the cheques i.e. the appellant- complainant received the same in
discharge of an existing debt. The onus, therefore, shifts on the accused to establish a probable
defense so as to rebut such a presumption and the same has not been done in the present case for
adducing the defense evidence.
15. The counsel also relied upon this Court's judgment reported in 2019 ACD 1037 or 2019 STPL
13612 Karnataka in the case of Lokesh N. Reddy vs. K.V. Nagaraja and brought to the notice of this
Court paragraph 10 of the judgment and in this judgment the Court mandates that the Court has to
draw a presumption that there exists a legally recoverable debt or liability, then under such
circumstances, other discussions held by the Court below that the complainant has not produced
any documents to show about the said transaction and that he is a income tax assessee and said
amount has not been shown in the income tax return are not the criteria to come to different
conclusion and until and unless the said presumption has been rebutted by the accused by cogent
and acceptable evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 4
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
16. Counsel referring to the above judgments would submit that judgments referred supra are
answers to the findings of the Trial Court with regard to the source of income and non disclosure of
advance of loan amount in the income tax returns and the trial Court has not drawn any
presumption in favour of the complainant and proceeded erroneously that the complainant had not
proved the case. Hence, it requires interference of this Court.
17. Learned counsel appearing for the accused/respondent would submits that in the
cross-examination of the complainant has categorically admitted that he had borrowed
Rs.3,00,000/- from two persons and the same is not forthcoming in the complaint. Learned counsel
also submits that Ex.P.14 which was marked by the complainant himself would goes to show that the
complainant has received the money from other persons and father-in-law of the complainant has
written a letter to the complainant that he has paid the interest on his behalf and hence it shows that
he was not having the source of income to pay the money in favour of the accused. The counsel also
brought to my notice that the said letter was written immediately in the month of February 2004
and the loan transaction was in the year 2003 December.
18. The other contention of the counsel is that though he deposed that he has received the amount of
Rs.3,00,000/- from two different persons in order to advance the said amount to the accused he has
not examined those two persons before the Court and hence the case of the complainant cannot be
accepted for the above two reasons. In respect of his contentions, the learned counsel has relied
upon the judgment reported in (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 571 in the case of Basalingappa vs. Mudibasappa
and referring to this judgment the counsel would contend that dispute is with regard to financial
capacity of the complainant to pay the amount and leading evidence to prove the same, the accused
had led probable defense in this case and hence burden would be on the complainant to establish his
financial capacity. Further the counsel referring to the judgment would submit that principles relied
upon in the judgment is aptly applicable to the case on hand. The Counsel also relied upon the
judgment of the Apex Court reported in (2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 200 in the case of K. Prakashan vs. P.K.
Surenderan, the counsel referring to this judgment would contend that in order to prove his source
of income, burden is on the complainant to prove beyond reasonable doubt. The burden of proof
lying on accused required to be discharged by preponderance of probability. The Accused need not
step into witness box to discharge his burden. The Trial Court on detailed analysis of evidence found
that accused discharged the burden of proof which lay upon him but High Court reversed the
judgment of Trial Court holding that accused had not adduced any evidence to establish the specific
case set up by him. The counsel would submits that the Apex Court in coming to the conclusion that
judgment of Trial Court being neither perverse nor legally infirm set aside the order of the High
Court. The Counsel also brought to the notice of this Court that when two views are possible,
appellate court should not reverse the judgment of acquittal merely because the other view was
possible when the judgment of the Trial Court was neither perverse, nor suffered from any legal
infirmity or non-consideration/mis-appreciation of evidence on record, reversal thereof by High
Court was not justified.
19. The counsel also relied upon the judgment of Apex Court reported in (2015) 1 SCC (Cri) 576 in
the case of K. Subramani Vs. K. Damodara Naidu. The counsel referring to this judgment would
submit that the complainant has to prove the source. In this Judgment, Trial Court acquitted the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 5
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
appellant for want of proof of legally recoverable debt payable by accused and trial Court rightly
comes to the conclusion that complainant had no source of income to lend a sum of Rs.14 lakhs to
the accused and he failed to prove that there was any legally recoverable debt. Counsel referring to
the above judgment would contend that principles relied upon in the above referred judgment supra
are aptly applicable to the case on hand with regard to the source of income of the complainant and
also with regard to the presumption. In the case on hand the accused examined himself as D.W.1
and examined two witnesses to rebut the case of the complainant and hence the judgment of the
trial Court is legally sustainable and the same cannot be reversed by this Court.
20. The counsel in reply to the arguments of the accused counsel would submit that the Apex Court
in the judgment decided on 14.02.2020 in the case of APS FOREX SERVICES PVT. LTD. VS.
SHAKTHI INTERNATIONAL FASHION LINKERS & ORS has categorically held that issuance of
cheque and signature thereon not disputed by accused and transaction between the parties also not
disputed. There is a Presumption of a legally enforceable debt or liability under Section 139 of NI
ACT. The accused after dishonor of earlier cheques, again issued consolidated cheque and thereafter
the cheque was dishonoured for 'Stop Payment'. It is held Courts wrongly acquitted the
accused/respondent. In the case on hand also notice was given and no reply was given and the trial
Court has not invoked Section 139 of N.I. Act and there is no evidence against the rebuttal
complainant evidence. The learned counsel brought to the notice of paragraph No.7 of the judgment
and would contend that to rebut the presumption the accused was required to lead the evidence. The
counsel would submit that the Apex Court held that the story put forward by the accused that the
cheques were given by way of security is not believable in the absence of rebuttal evidence to rebut
the presumption and more particularly the cheque in question was issued for second time, after the
earlier cheques were dishonoured. Therefore, presumption under Section 139 of N.I. Act ought to
have been invoked and Section 139 of the N.I. Act is an example of reverse onus clause and therefore
once the issuance of the cheque has been admitted and even the signature on the cheque has been
admitted, there is always a presumption in favour of the complainant that there exists legally
enforceable debt or liability and thereafter it is for the accused to rebut such presumption by leading
evidence.
21. Counsel referring these judgments would submit that even though the defense evidence has been
adduced, evidence of P.W.2 and 3 helps evidence of the complainant. Though the accused has been
examined and in his defense though says the cheque was given for security it has not been
substantiated by leading cogent evidence and hence the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside.
22. Having heard the arguments addressed by the learned counsel appearing for the complainant
and also learned counsel appearing for the accused and also on perusal of the material available on
record the question that arises for consideration of this Court are;
"1. Whether the Trial Court committed an error in acquitting the accused in coming
to the conclusion that the complainant has not proved legally recoverable debt?
2. Whether the trial Court has committed an error in not invoking the presumption
under Section 139 of N.I Act ?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 6
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
3. What order?
23. Point No.(ii):
Having considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel appearing for
both the parties and also on perusal of the Judgment of the Trial Court, the Trial
Court while passing the order on acquittal, considering point No.1 discussed the
Judgment of the Apex Court in Rangappa's case (supra), and extracted the said
judgment of the Apex Court with regard to the presumption under Section 139 of the
NI Act and comes to the conclusion that the observations made by the Division Bench
in the case of Krishna Janardhana Bhat v. Datatreya G. Hegde reported in 2008 AIR
SCW 738, may not be correct. It is also discussed that however, the full Bench of Apex
Court in the said Judgment held that this does not in any way cast doubt on the
correctness of the other observations made by their Lordship of Division Bench in
Krishna Janardhana Bhat's case. The Trial Court also discussed the Judgment of
Krishna Janardhana Bhat's case and extracted the principles laid down in the
Judgment regarding prosecution must prove the guilt of the accused beyond all
reasonable doubt, the standard of proof, so as to prove a defense on the part of an
accused is 'preponderance of probabilities'. The Trial Court after extracting the
Judgment of Rangappa's case and Krishna Janardhana Bhat's case has come to the
conclusion that the burden of proof on the accused is preponderance of probabilities
and the probabilities can be drawn not only from the material brought on record by
the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which they relied upon.
24. Thereafter, the Trial Court has discussed the evidence of P.W.1 and in detail dealt with, with
regard to the source of income of the complainant to advance the amount of Rs.6 lakhs. It is rightly
pointed out by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that the trial Judge no where
discussed the evidence of DWs.1 to 3, who have been examined on behalf of the accused. The trial
Judge while appreciating the material before the Court, consider the evidence of both the
complainant as well as the accused, there is no single word discussing the evidence of the accused,
who has led the evidence and also examined two witnesses. It is rightly pointed out by the learned
counsel for the appellant/complainant that the trial Judge has failed to consider both oral and
documentary evidence available on record inclusive of complainant as well as the accused and no
where given any finding with regard to the presumptions to be invoked under Section 139 of the NI
Act, except discussing the case of Krishna Janardhana Bhat's case and also Rangappa's case.
25. Learned Counsel for the appellant/complainant also relied upon the Judgment of the Apex Court
in Rangappa v. Mohan (AIR 2010 SC 1898) and brought to my notice at paragraph Nos.14 and 15
with regard to invoke the presumption under Section 139 of NI Act. On perusal of the Judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of Rangappa v. Mohan, the Apex Court regarding presumption is
concerned, it is observed that there can be no doubt that there is an initial presumption, which
favours the complainant. Section 139 of the Act is an example of a reverse onus clause that has been
included in furtherance of the legislative objective of improving the credibility of negotiable
instruments. While Section 138 of the Act specifies a strong criminal remedy in relation to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 7
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
dishoour of cheques, the rebuttable presumption under Section 139 is a device to prevent undue
delay in the course of litigation. It is further observed that the bouncing of a cheque is largely in the
nature of a civil wrong whose impact is usually confined to the private parties involved in
commercial transactions. It is further observed that, in such a scenario, the test of proportionality
should guide the construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the accused cannot be
expected to discharge an unduly high standard or proof. In the absence of compelling justifications,
reverse onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden. Keeping
this in view, it is a settled position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section
139, the standard of proof for doing so is that of 'preponderance of probabilities'. Therefore, if the
accused is able to raise a probable defense which creates doubts about the existence of a legally
enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail.
26. In view of the principles laid down in the Judgments referred supra, it is clear that the accused
has to raise the defense and to rebut the presumption; he has to lead the 'preponderance of
probabilities'. The Trial Judge has failed to consider particularly, the evidence of DWs.1 to 3 and
even not discussed anything in the Judgment.
27. In the case on hand, it has to be noted that there is no dispute with regard to the issuance of the
cheque and the same is also not denied by the accused and also has not given any reply notice when
the notice was served on him and the defense was set up during the cross-examination that the said
cheque was for security purpose to avail the loan by the complainant from the other financier and
the same is not proved. It is also important to note that in the cross- examination, DW.1 has
categorically admitted that he has not given any reply and further admits that there is no difficulty
for him to give any reply. When such being the circumstances, as held in the Judgment of
Rangappa's case, the Trial Court ought to have invoked the presumption under Section 139 of the NI
Act. No doubt, the said presumption is rebuttable presumption and the Court has to take note of the
fact that whether he has raised the plausible defense and the defense raised is acceptable. No doubt,
there is no dispute with regard to the fact that the primary burden is on the complainant to prove
with regard to the transaction and presumption has to be drawn if the cheque is admitted and no
reply was given. Whether the probable defense was raised by the accused has to be considered. In
the case on hand, the Trial Court has not at all invoked the presumption in favour of the
complainant and also not discussed the evidence of the defense, particularly, the evidence of the
accused, who has been examined as D.W.1 and also two witnesses, who have been examined as
D.Ws.2 and 3 on behalf of the accused. Hence, I am of the view that the Trial Court has committed
an error in not invoking the presumption in favour of the complainant. Hence, I answer point No.2
as 'affirmative'.
28. Point No.(i):
Now, the question before this Court is, whether the Trial Court has committed an
error in acquitting the accused in coming to the conclusion that the complainant has
not proved legally recoverable debt. On perusal of the entire Judgment of the Trial
Court, the Trial Court mainly discussed with regard to the capacity of the
complainant in advancing the money of Rs.6 lakhs. In keeping the grounds urged in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 8
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
the appeal memo, this Court has to re-consider the evidence available on record both
complainant as well as the accused and also the documentary evidence. On perusal of
the documentary evidence of P.W.1, he reiterated the averments of complaint with
regard to the accused approaching the complainant and advancing the amount in
favour of the accused. The defense of the accused in the cross- examination that the
complainant had approached him for blank Cheque in order to get the loan from the
financiers to start a Hotel business at Bengaluru. Hence, he gave the cheque in favour
of the complainant. The complainant was subjected to cross-examination. He
categorically admits that the accused is his maternal uncle. It is suggested that there
was no occasion arisen to avail the loan from him and the said suggestion was denied.
It is elicited that he gave the money of Rs.6 Lakhs in his house on 07.12.2003 and at
that time, no other persons were present. He also admits that when he advance the
money, he did not obtain any receipt, pro-note or any agreement and also not given
any cheque. The accused gave Ex.P1-Cheque on 31.08.2005. It is also his evidence
that the cheque - Ex.P1 contains the handwriting of the accused. It is suggested that
the accused gave the cheque in order to commence the Hotel to the Complainant in
the year 2002 and the said suggestion was denied. He also admits that his wife took
the loan on 28.1.2005 in Udupi Mahalakshmi Bank by pledging the gold ornaments
and the said loan is not yet cleared. It is suggested that he was involved in kidnapping
the daughter of the complainant and the same was denied. However, he admits that
in the said kidnapping case his Maruti Omni Car belongs to him was involved. He
also admits that in order to advance the amount, he has borrowed an amount of Rs.1
Lakh from Madhusudan Pejaathhaya @ Kesari and also an amount of Rs.2 Lakhs
from his relative U.B.Venkatesh. He also admits that in kidnapping case, the
complainant is his mother. Ex.P8 was confronted to him and a suggestion was made
that an amount of Rs.6,000/- was sent by his brother to take care of his parents and
the same was denied. He also admits that he has not produced any document to show
that he was having Rs.6 lakhs to advance the money but he volunteers that he was
having the said amount and no entry in the Income Tax Returns. He also admits that,
the loan taken and reference made in Ex.P14 is not yet cleared.
29. DW.1 also filed an affidavit reiterating his defense that he gave the cheque as security in order to
avail the loan by the complainant to start his business. DW.1 was subjected to cross-examination. In
the cross-examination, he admits that the complainant and his family members spent more than an
amount of Rs.3 Lakhs when their father passed away. He also admits that Sri K.Nagesh Bhat and
brother of the complainant constructed 'Krishnaprasad Apartment' and the complainant himself is
taking care of the construction. He also admits that the Maruti Omni Car bearing registration
No.KA-04 M-8402 belongs to the complainant. He also admits that he was running a Municipal
Canteen at Shidlaghatta and he has suffered the loss. It is suggested that when he was suffered the
loss, he went and settled in his village, the same was denied. However, he admits that his house was
brought for sale when they did not pay the Hotel Sales Tax. He admits that in the year 1990, he
returned to his village and started the agriculture work and he is having 6½ acres of land and he
himself taking care of the said land. The said land is also the ancestral property. It is suggested that
the complainant was having Rs.3 lakhs in his account and taking the amount from U.B.Venkatesh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 9
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
and other relatives he paid the amount of Rs.6 Lakhs and the said suggestion was denied.
30. In the further cross-examination, he admits that the complainant was having the Hotel at
Bengaluru, but he does not know when the same was started. But he says the same was started in
the year 2001. He did not attend the opening ceremony of the said Hotel and also he does not know
how much amount he spent to start the Hotel, but he claims that after commencing the Hotel, the
complainant came to his house and he cannot tell the date and the month. He also admits that he
did not visit the said Hotel even once after the commencement of the said Hotel and also he had not
seen the said Hotel and also not visited the house of the complainant at Bengaluru and except
meeting the complainant when he came to his house, he never met him. However, he claims the
complainant had visited his house twice after the commencement of his Hotel and again he cannot
tell the date. He also cannot tell at what date, he had met the complainant.
31. Regarding the receipt of notice, he says after receipt of notice, he met his Advocate Balakrishna,
but he did not show the said notice to him, but he told about issuance of legal notice and discussed
with regard to the same. He categorically admits the cheque - Ex.P1 and also the signature.
However, he admits the address mentioned in Ex.P6 and also admits the signature on Ex.P6 and
there was no difficulty to reply to the notice. He also admits that there was no impediment to give
complaint against the complainant when the said cheque was misused. The other witness is DW.2,
who is the younger brother of the complainant and this witness reiterates the defense of the accused
in his affidavit regarding handing over the cheque and he also says the complainant is not having
any capacity to lend the money and the cheque was given for security. He was subjected to cross-
examination. In the cross-examination, he admits that the accused called him to come to the Court
stating that there is a blank cheque and to give evidence. He admits that the said cheque was not
given in his presence. It is suggested that a criminal case was registered against him and the same
was denied. However, he admits Crime No.146/2000 but he claims that his mother gave the
complaint against him by mistake. He also admits that he does not know the avocation of the
accused and also to whom he gave the cheque. He admits that at the instance of the accused without
the summons from the Court, he came to give evidence before the Court. He also does not know how
much amount the complainant has spent for starting a Hotel at Bengaluru, but he commenced the
Hotel in the year 2003. He also admits that he did not give any suggestions to his maternal uncle to
proceed against the complainant in accordance with law.
32. DW.3, in his evidence, he says the complainant is the nephew of the accused. During the year
2001-02, the complainant visited the accused house and at that time, he himself and one Varadaraj
Rao were present in the house of the accused and accused has issued duly a signed blank cheque to
the complainant in their presence. He was subjected to cross- examination. In the
cross-examination, he admits that the mother of the accused used to take care of him. In the house
of the accused, he himself and his mother were working in the garden land of the accused, he was
not getting any salary, but he was getting the food. He also admits that he used to get the money
from the accused whenever he was in need of the same. He also admits that he is giving evidence on
the say of the accused. He also does not know who are all he gave the money. But he knows about
the issuance of cheque of this case. He also admits they came and stayed in the lodge and the
accused had taken care of lodge facility and he made the food arrangement and he does not know
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 10
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
anything about the complainant's transaction. He admits that the complainant was having a big
Hotel, he was earning and his financial capacity was sound. He also admits that the accused was
having the Hotel in different places but he does not know about the loss occurred to him, but he
admits that after he suffered loss he came and settled in the village. A suggestion was made that the
accused gave a cheque for a sum Rs.6 Lakhs and witness admits the issuance of the said cheque, but
he does not know anything.
33. Having considered the evidence of the complainant and also the accused - DW.1 and other two
witnesses, the contention of the complainant is that he gave the money in the year 2003 in favour of
the accused. It is the contention of the accused that the complainant has approached him that he is
in need of a blank cheque to get the amount from the financiers. It has to be noted that, it is
emerged in the evidence of the witnesses, the Hotel was started in the year 2001 and the witness,
who is also the relative of the complainant and accused, who has been examined as DW.2 claims
that the complainant has started the Hotel business in the year 2003. The evidence of DW.2 is
contrary to the evidence of the accused. It has to be noted that the main defense of the accused is
that the complainant had approached to issue a blank cheque and DW.3 claims that he was present
at the time of issuing the cheque in favour of the complainant. In the evidence of DW.3, it has
categorically elicited that he came and gave evidence on behalf of the accused at his request and the
accused only taken care of him when he came to Bengaluru along with him. The evidence of DW.2 is
clear that the complainant was having a big hotel at Bengaluru and his financial capacity was good
and this evidence has not been discussed by the Trial Court. It appears that, if this evidence is
discussed by the Trial Court, the same goes against the accused. DW.3 also admits that the accused
has suffered loss in the hotel which he was running in different places and after that he came and
settled in the village. DW.2 categorically in his evidence admits that in the year 1990 itself, the
accused came and settled at his village after he has suffered loss.
34. DW.2 also categorically admits that the accused only called him to come and give evidence and
he categorically admits the said cheque was not given in his presence and no summons was received
from the Court. A case was registered against him based on the complaint of his mother. He did not
advice his maternal uncle to initiate complaint against his brother. Having taken note of
particularly, the evidence of DWs.2 and 3 regarding financial capacity of the complainant, he was
having the business at Bengaluru and also his financial status was good. The financial status of the
accused was not sound and the house of the accused was also brought for sale when the sales tax was
not paid in respect of the hotel which he was running. These are the materials are not discussed by
the Trial Court. The Trial Court kept 'mum' with regard to the evidence of accused as well as the
evidence of DWs.2 and 3. DW.1-accused also in his cross-examination, he categorically admits that
the complainant is having a Car and spent an amount of Rs.3 lakhs when the father of the
complainant was passed away for funeral and obsequies. DW.1 also admits that his house was
brought for sale when he did not pay the Hotel Sales Tax and he is having only 6½ acres of land. It
is the case of the accused that the complainant has started the hotel business at Bengaluru in the
year 2001 and immediately after starting the hotel business he came and took the cheque. DW.1
categorically admits that he did not visit Bengaluru when the Hotel was commenced and he never
visited the said Hotel and complainant only came to his house twice. Though he claims that, he
helped the complainant in giving a blank cheque in order to get the finance from the financiers in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 11
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
favour of the complainant, he never participated in the Hotel inauguration and also on subsequent
dates. It is also important to note that he categorically admits in the cross-examination that the
cheque belongs to him and it contains his signature and also he admits the receipt of legal notice.
There was no difficulty for him to give reply to the notice. He also categorically admits that there
was no impediment for him to give any complaint against the complainant when the said cheque
was mis-used. First of all, the accused did not dispute the issuance of the cheque and the same bears
his signature and also did not dispute the fact that he has received the notice and he has not given
any reply and there was no difficulty to give reply and also there was no impediment to give
complaint against the complainant when the cheque was mis-used. No doubt, PW.1 in the
cross-examination, he admits that he has borrowed an amount of Rs.2 lakhs from other two persons
and other two persons were not examined before the Trial Court and also admits that on
28.01.2005, by pledging the gold ornaments of his wife, the loan was taken. It has to be noted that
the transaction between the accused and the complainant was of the year 2003. The accused mainly
relies upon the document-Ex.P14. No doubt, on perusal of Ex.P14, it clearly discloses that
father-in-law of the complainant wrote a letter stating that he has paid the interest of Rs.8,000/- in
respect of the loan transaction of the complainant.
35. The learned counsel appearing for the accused brought to the notice of this Court to see the date
of letter. No doubt, the said letter was written on 21.02.2004 i.e., immediately, after the transaction
i.e., in the year 2003. The Trial Court also mainly relied upon the document Ex.P14. It has to be
noted that the complainant himself has relied upon the said document and it is also his case that he
has advanced the amount in the year 2003. The fact that the Hotel was started in the year 2001 itself
is not in dispute and DW.1 himself admits the same. DW.2 claims that the Hotel was started in the
year 2003 and the same is contrary to the evidence of the accused. Only basing on Ex.P14, the Trial
Court has come to the conclusion that he was not having the financial source to lend the money in
favour of the accused.
36. Having considered the material available on record, only based on Ex.P14, the Court cannot
come to a conclusion and first of all the Trial Court has not considered the evidence of the accused
and also the evidence of DWs.2 and 3. DW.3's evidence is contrary to the defense of the accused.
DW.3 categorically admits the financial soundness of the complainant. The complainant also relied
upon the document - Ex.P9 to show that the Car is standing in the name of the complainant and the
documents - Exs.P8 to 11 are confronted to DW.1 in the cross- examination. There is no explanation
on the part of the accused even though he has received the legal notice he has not given a reply and
there was no difficulty for him to give reply and also he has not given any complaint for mis-using of
the said cheque. No doubt, the Complainant as well as the accused persons are relatives and the
evidence of DWs.2 and 3 instead of helping the accused, the same helps the complainant. First of all,
no reply was given and there was no difficulty in giving reply and no complaint was given and the
accused did not dispute the signature available on the cheque and no plausible defense was set up by
the accused except stating that the said cheque was given as security. The defense of the accused
that the said blank cheque was given to avail the financial assistance from the financiers and it is not
the case of the accused from whom the complainant has borrowed the money to start the business.
It is also an admitted fact that the Hotel Business was commenced in the year 2001 itself and this
cheque pertains to the year 2005. When the accused admits his signature available on cheque -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 12
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
Ex.P1 and also on Ex.P6 notice served on him, the accused did not setup any defense immediately
and during the course of cross-examination after thought set up a defense that the said cheque was
given as security. The Trial Judge failed to consider the evidence in toto both the evidence of
complainant and DWs.1 to 3 and not considered the documentary evidence available on record and
mainly considered the evidence of P.W.1 and particularly, Ex.P14 - the letter and the said letter is
not disputed by the complainant himself, he only got marked the document and the trial Court only
concentrated on the source of the complainant.
37. Learned Counsel appearing for the appellant relied upon the Judgment of the Apex Court
reported in (2019) 4 SCC 197 in the case of Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar. In this judgment, the Apex
Court held that, when the accused did not dispute the issuance of cheque and admitted the issuance
of cheque and even a blank cheque voluntarily signing and handed over by the accused towards
some person, it would attract presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act. The Apex Court also in
the case of Rohitbhai Jivanlal Patel v. State of Gujarat and Anr. reported in 2019 SCCONLINE SC
662, held that, non-examination of two witnesses from whom the amount was borrowed to advance
the amount need not be necessarily examined these witnesses. The Trial Judge has mainly
concentrated the case of the accused on the ground that from whom he has borrowed an amount of
Rs.3 lakhs, were not examined. The Apex Court in the Judgment has observed in paragraph No.17
that, even after purportedly drawing the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act, the Trial
Court proceeded to question the want of evidence on the part of the complainant as regards the
source of funds for advancing loan to the accused and want of examination of relevant witnesses
who allegedly extended him and the very said approach of the Trial Court is against the principles of
presumption in law. After such presumption, the onus shifted to the accused and unless the accused
had discharged the onus by bringing on record such facts and circumstances as to show the
preponderance of probabilities tilting in his favour, any doubt on the complainant's case could not
have been raised for want of evidence regarding the source of funds.
38. Both the judgments are aptly applicable to the case on hand regarding the presumption as well
as non-examination of the witnesses. The Apex Court also in the judgment reported in (2019) 10
SCC 287 in the case of Uttam Ram v. Devinder Singh Hudan and Another, held that, a person who
signs a cheque and make it over to the Payee remains liable unless he adduces the evidence and
rebut the presumption that the cheque had been issued for payment of a debt or in discharge of a
liability the ownership on the accused to establish a probable defense. There is no any plausible
evidence to come to the conclusion that the accused has rebutted the evidence of the complainant
and even failed to bring his case within the 'preponderance of probabilities'.
39. Having considered the material available on record both oral and documentary evidence, first of
all, the Trial Judge did not consider the evidence available on record in toto and failed to discuss the
evidence of DWs.1 to 3 and only considered the evidence of PW.1. It is a settled law that the
complainant has to prove his case and in the case on hand, the accused also did not dispute the
cheque as well as his signature and also he has not given any reply and no complaint was given when
the notice was given. If really the said cheque was mis-used he would have given the complaint and
categorically admits that he is not having any impediment to give complaint and also no difficulty to
give any reply. When such being the case, the presumption is available in favour of the complainant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 13
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
and no doubt the said presumption is rebuttable presumption and the question before this Court is
whether the accused rebutted the presumption and I have already discussed in detail, the evidence
of DWs.1 to 3, it is clear that the accused himself has suffered the loss in Hotel business and his
house was also brought for sale when the Sales Tax of the Hotel was not paid. DW.3 categorically
admitted the financial condition of the complainant was sound and he was running a big hotel in
Bengaluru and in order to substantiate the defense of the accused also, no material is placed before
the Court that he gave the cheque in favour of the complainant as security to get the financial
assistance. DWs.2 and 3 have categorically admitted that they were not having any knowledge of
issuance of cheque by the accused and in their presence no transaction was taken place and though
DW.3 claims that in his presence the said cheque was given and the evidence of DWs.2 and 3 is very
clear that on the instance of the accused only they came and gave the evidence before the Court and
the accused only taken care of the Hotel and Food expenses and they had given evidence at the
instance of the accused. When such being the case, the accused though led the defense evidence to
rebut the case of the complainant and in the absence of cogent rebuttal evidence this Court has to
accept the evidence of the complainant and the presumption is also in favour of complainant and in
the cross- examination of P.W.1, nothing is elicited to come to the conclusion that the cheque was
not given for legally recoverable debt and the Trial Court mainly concentrated with regard to the
source and the evidence of the defense itself shows the complainant was having the source and
financial status of the complainant is also not disputed except the suggestions. The principles laid
down supra are clear that when the presumption was drawn, the Trial Judge ought not to have come
to the conclusion that the source has not been proved and non- examination of two witnesses from
whom the complainant has received the money to advance the same in favour of the accused is not
fatal. Hence, I am of the opinion that the Trial Court has committed an error in acquitting the
accused and not drawn the presumption in favour of the complainant and therefore, it requires an
interference of this Court.
40. In view of the discussions made above, I proceed to pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The appeal is allowed.
(ii) The impugned Judgment and order passed in C.C.No.3336/2006 dated
29.12.2010 by the XVIII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and XX ASCJ,
Bengaluru, is hereby set-aside.
(iii) The accused is convicted for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the NI
Act and directed to pay the amount of Rs.10 lakhs in favour of the complainant within
eight weeks from today. If the accused fails to pay the amount he shall undergo
simple imprisonment for a period of one year.
(iv) The Registry is directed to transmit the Trial Court Records, forthwith.
Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 14
Sri Muralidhar Rao vs Sri P Nagesh Rao on 20 November, 2020
JUDGE HR/cp*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166865584/ 15
