Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
Author: H.P. Sandesh
Bench: H.P. Sandesh
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 22ND DAY OF APRIL, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.P. SANDESH
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO.1200/2012
BETWEEN:
SRI M.S. SATHYA NARAYANA,
AGED ABOUT 54 YEARS,
S/O LATE SUBBAKRISHNA,
EMPLOYED AT ACCOUNTS SECTION,
B.E.M.L., BELAVADI POST,
MYSURU-570009. ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI K.P. BHUVAN, ADVOCATE)
AND:
SRI LINGARAJE URS,
S/O LATE SIDDARAJE URS,
AGED ABOUT 58 YEARS,
RESIDING AT NO.113, 8TH MAIN,
JAYALAKSHMIPURAM,
MYSURU-570009. ... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI M. VEERABHADRAIAH, ADVOCATE)
THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION IS FILED UNDER
SECTIONS 397 READ WITH 401 OF CR.P.C PRAYING TO SET
ASIDE THE CONVICTION AND SENTENCE DATED 25.08.2012
PASSED BY THE I ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE, MYSURU IN
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.62/2012 IN CONFIRMING THE JUDGMENT
AND SENTENCE DATED 03.03.2012 PASSED BY THE I
ADDITIONAL I CIVIL JUDGE (JR. DN.) & JMFC, MYSURU IN
C.C.NO.1123/2009.
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 1
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD
AND RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 08.04.2022, THIS DAY, THE
COURT PRONOUNCED THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
This petition is filed praying this Court to set aside the order of conviction and sentence dated
03.03.2012 passed in C.C.No.1123/2009 on the file of the I Additional Civil Judge and JMFC,
Mysuru and also to set aside the order of confirmation of the conviction and sentence dated
25.08.2012 passed in Crl.A.No.62/2012 on the file of the I Additional Sessions Judge at Mysuru and
acquit the petitioner.
2. The factual matrix of the case of the complainant/respondent before the Trial Court is that this
petitioner/accused had approached the complainant in the month of June, July and August 2008 in
order to fulfill his family commitments and to clear hand loans and for such other legal necessities.
The complainant has paid Rs.8,00,000/- on different dates. The accused agreed to repay the said
amount with 1% interest per month. When the complainant demanded to pay the money, the
accused issued the subject matter of the cheque and the same was dishonoured and notice was
issued and no reply was given and hence the complaint was filed and the Trial Court took the
cognizance and thereafter the complainant examined himself as P.W.1 and got marked the
documents at Exs.P.1 to 8(a). On the other hand, the accused also examined himself as D.W.1 and
examined another witness as D.W.2 and got marked the documents at Exs.D.1 to 3. The Trial Court
after considering both oral and documentary evidence placed on record, convicted the petitioner
and directed to pay an amount of Rs.8,25,000/- as fine. In default of payment of fine to undergo
simple imprisonment for a period of six months. Being aggrieved by the judgment of conviction and
sentence, the petitioner filed Crl.A.No.62/2012. The Appellate Court on re-appreciation of both oral
and documentary evidence placed on record, dismissed the appeal. Hence, the present revision
petition is filed before this Court.
3. The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner before this Court is that both the
Courts have committed an error in not appreciating the defence set out by the petitioner herein and
specific date is not mentioned when the respondent has paid the amount to the petitioner and in
whose presence the same has been paid and whether the amount was paid in cash or in different
mode. The learned counsel would contend that the petitioner effectively cross-examined the witness
with regard to source of income is concerned to advance the amount of Rs.8,00,000/- and the same
is not substantiated and even the payment of amount of Rs.8,00,000/- was not declared in the
income declaration. The learned counsel submits that there was no any relationship between the
parties and categorically admitted that one Devraj Urs is the relative of the complainant. It is the
specific case that the said Devraj Urs had taken the cheques and the same was misused and he had
also filed one more case against the petitioner herein and the cheque which had been taken by
Devraj Urs was misused. The learned counsel submits that the complaint was given by the wife of
the petitioner stating that cheque was stolen in terms of Ex.D.3 in the year 2007 itself and this
aspect has not been considered by both the Courts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 2
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his arguments relied upon the judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of KRISHNA JANARDHAN BHAT v. DATTATRAYA G. HEGDE reported
in AIR 2008 SC 1325, wherein an observation is made that the accused for discharging the burden of
proof placed upon him under a statute need not examine himself.
5. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of KUMAR
EXPORTS v. SHARMA CARPETS reported in (2009) 2 SCC 513. The learned counsel referring this
judgment would contend that presumption meaning and purpose is explained in the said judgment.
6. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of M.S.
NARAYANA MENON ALIAS MANI v. STATE OF KERALA AND ANOTHER reported in (2006) 6
SCC 39, wherein regarding onus of proof on accused, held, that it is not as heavy as that of the
prosecution. Such onus compared with that of a defendant in civil proceedings.
7. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
BASALINGAPPA v.
MUDIBASAPPA reported in (2019) 5 SCC 418, wherein it is held that the prosecution must establish
its case beyond reasonable doubt, accused to prove a defence must only meet standard of
preponderance of probabilities. The learned counsel also brought to the notice of this Court
paragraph No.12 regarding presumption and the same is rebuttable presumption. The learned
counsel also brought to the notice of this Court paragraph No.19 of the judgment.
8. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of S. TIMMAPPA v.
L.S. PRAKASH reported in 2015 (5) KCCR 3397, wherein discussed with regard to the presumption
has been rebutted. The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of this Court in the case of
SMT. THREJA v. SMT. JAYALAXMI reported in 2016 (5) KCCR 1341, wherein discussed with
regard to Sections 138, 139 and 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. The Courts below attaching
much importance to presumption under Sections 118 and 139 without looking into categorical
admission elicited from the complainant.
9. Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent in his argument would vehemently contend
that the Trial Court in paragraph Nos.12 to 15 discussed in detail and given the reasoning with
regard to the contentions raised by the petitioner herein and detailed order has been passed. The
learned counsel would contend that the Appellate Court, on re-appreciation of the material available
on record, taken note of each and every contentions raised by the petitioner herein and defence of
the petitioner also discussed in paragraph No.15, 16, 17, 18 and 25 and taken note of the inconsistent
defence taken in the cross- examination and also taken note of the answers elicited from the mouth
of P.W.1 and P.W.2, which are contradictory to each other and hence there are no grounds to
interfere with the findings of the Trial Court and the Appellate Court.
10. Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondent
and also on perusal of the material available on record, the points that arise for the consideration of
this Court are:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 3
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
(i) Whether the Trial Court has committed an
error in convicting and sentencing the
petitioner for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act and whether the Appellate
Court has committed an error in confirming the same and whether it requires interference of this
Court by invoking the revisional jurisdiction?
(ii) What order?
Point No.(i):
11. Having heard the respective learned counsel, this Court has to consider the material available on
record and examine whether any perverse order has been passed by the Trial Court in order to
exercise the revisional jurisdiction and orders passed by the Trial Court as well as the Appellate
Court suffers from any legality and its correctness. Keeping in view the contentions, this Court has
to examine the material and first and foremost contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
that in the complaint not stated the specific date of payment. But on perusal of the complaint, in
paragraph No.2, it is specific that the accused had approached the complainant in the intermittent
intervals i.e., during the months of June, July and August 2008 by putting forth his financial
constraints in order to fulfill his family commitments, for clearing some of his hand loans and for
such other legal necessities and agreed to repay the same within 3-4 months with 1% interest per
month. No doubt, specific date is not mentioned with regard to the advancing of the amount. In the
cross-examination of P.W.1, he categorically stated that he made the payment of Rs.3,00,000/- in
the month of June, Rs.2,00,000/- in the month of July and Rs.3,00,000/- in the month of August.
In the cross- examination, it is elicited that there were 10 to 12 transactions between them. With
regard to obtaining of the document is concerned, he categorically says that prior to this transaction
also, he had paid 2-3 lakhs and by that time also he has not collected any documents. It is also
elicited that he gave the money in his house and when the question was put to him whether there
was any difficulty to get any document from him, the witness categorically says that there was no
such necessity. It is suggested that the accused was getting salary and there was no need to get the
loan and the witness categorically says that he was doing other transactions in the name of his wife
and hence he was in need of money. No doubt, in the cross- examination, it is elicited that Devraj
Urs is his relative, but suggestion was made that the cheque which was given to Devraj Urs was
misused by filing the present case and the same was denied. It is also suggested that Devraj Urs
owed money to him and hence he had collected cheque from him and filed the case and the same
was denied.
12. On the contrary, the petitioner was also examined before the Trial Court as D.W.1 and in his
chief evidence, he has stated that Devraj Urs had taken several cheques belonging to him and the
said cheque was misused. In the cross- examination, he admits that he has not given any cheques in
favour of Devraj Urs, but he lost the cheques. He also admits that he gave the complaint to the police
for having lost the cheque and he can produce the documents for having given the complaint. He
cannot tell the numbers of the cheque and he has got the documents to show that he has given
intimation to the bank not to honour the cheques and he is not having any difficulty to produce the
same. He also admits that several cases are filed against him for dishonour of the cheques and he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 4
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
denied the signature on the cheque and vakalath signature was also confronted to him and he
admits the same. He admits that incharge officer of his office had obtained the notice and given the
same to him and also admits the signature of the incharge officer.
13. The other witness D.W.2 is examined regarding loss of cheques. He admits that the accused has
not given any complaint regarding loss of cheque, but his wife has given the complaint and there
was no difficulty to the accused to give the complaint.
14. Having considered the material available on record, it is clear that though the accused disputed
the signature in the cross-examination that signature not belongs to him, the signature available in
the vakalath was confronted and he admits the same. It is important to note that though he
contends that the notice was not served on him personally, but he categorically admits that notice
was taken by his office incharge officer and handed over the notice to him and the same also bears
the signature of incharge officer. When such being the case, the petitioner ought to have given the
reply to the notice and no such reply was given. In the cross-examination of P.W.1, specific defence
was taken that one Devraj Urs, who is the relative of P.W.1 had given the cheque in favour of the
complainant and the same has been misused since Devraj Urs handed over the said cheque and got
filed this case and the same has been denied. But in the chief evidence also, the petitioner has stated
that Devraj Urs had taken the cheques belonging to him. Why he took the cheque is not stated and
how the cheque had gone to the hands of Devraj Urs is not stated by the petitioner. In paragraph
No.4 he says that Devraj Urs had taken away several cheques belonging to him and not stated
anything about he lost the cheque. But in the cross- examination he claims that the cheques have
been lost and contra question put in the cross-examination and admittedly he has not given any
complaint and also not produced any documents for having given the complaint, but relies upon the
documents Exs.D.1 to 3. Ex.D.1 is the provident fund statement and Ex.D.2 is the endorsement
issued by the police for having given the complaint by the wife of the accused on 07.07.2007 and
Ex.D.3 is the affidavit of the wife and what made to sworn to an affidavit in terms of Ex.D.3, nothing
is explained. When such being the material available on record, the very first contention that no
payment dates are given, cannot be accepted and specific months are mentioned for having
advanced the loan amount in the complaint as well as in his evidence.
15. No doubt, in the income tax declaration, P.W.1 has not declared for having paid the money. But
in the cross- examination, P.W.1 admits that he has not produced any documents to show that he is
paying income tax. But he admits that he is an income tax assessee. But non-filing of the document
for having paid income tax will not take away the case of the complainant and the petitioner has to
explain how the subject matter of cheque had gone to the hands of the said Devraj Urs and what
made him to give the said cheque. Contra defence was taken in one breath that cheque was stolen
and in another breath the said Devraj Urs had given the said cheque in favour of this petitioner. No
reply was given when the notice was issued to the petitioner and he would have given the reply, if no
such transaction was taken place between the petitioner and the complainant and afterthought only
in the cross- examination inconsistent defence was taken and nothing is averred in the chief
evidence regarding loss of cheque. It is only stated that Devraj Urs had taken away several cheques
belonging to him and no doubt, the wife of the petitioner had given the complaint in terms of
Ex.D.2, but she has not been examined before the Trial Court and both the Courts have taken note of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 5
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
that if she had been examined before the Trial Court, an opportunity was given to the complainant
to testify the document of Ex.D.2.
16. The other contention of the petitioner is that P.W.1 has admitted the relationship with Devraj
Urs and mere admission that Devraj Urs is the relative of the complainant does not mean that
Devraj Urs had given the cheque in favour of the complainant. I have already pointed out that contra
defence was taken in the chief examination and cross-examination and even the petitioner had gone
to the extent of denying his signature available in Ex.P.1 and it is not his case that the signature not
belongs to him and nowhere in the affidavit he has stated that the said signature not belongs to him,
but only in the cross-examination he says the same. All these materials falsify the very contention of
the petitioner. No doubt, the principles laid down in the judgments referred supra by the learned
counsel for the petitioner regarding the presumption as well as transaction is concerned, the
accused has to probabalize his case. But in the case on hand, though the petitioner examined himself
as D.W.1 and got marked the documents at Exs.D.1 to 3, those documents will not help the
petitioner. Apart from that, the defence has not been probabalised and inconsistent defence was
taken, in one breath says that said Devraj Urs had taken the cheque, but this petitioner has not given
any complaint and relies upon the endorsement given by the police with regard to the complaint
given by his wife. D.W.2 categorically admitted that the petitioner has not given any complaint and
there was no any difficulty for him to give the complaint when the cheque belonging to the petitioner
was lost. Hence, I do not find any force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner to
accept the argument that the petitioner has probabalised his case.
17. Regarding loss of cheque and also rebuttal of the presumption is concerned, the Apex Court in
the judgment in the case UTTAM RAM v. DEVINDER SINGH HUDAN AND ANOTHER reported in
(2019) 10 SCC 287, held that inconsistencies regarding the amount due, not made out, as amount
due stood crystallized in written document against which cheque in question was issued. The
defence that the cheque book was lost/stolen or that cheque was misused was completely without
basis.
18. The Apex Court in the judgment in the case of BIR SINGH v. MUKESH KUMAR reported in
(2019) 4 SCC 197 held that presumption is rebuttable and onus lies on drawer to rebut it by
adducing cogent evidence to the contrary.
19. The Apex Court in the case of APS FOREX SERVICES PVT. LTD. v. SHAKTI INTERNATIONAL
FASHION LINKERS AND OTHERS reported in AIR 2020 SC 945 held regarding presumption is
concerned that when the accused admits issuance of cheque, his signature on cheque and that
cheque in question was issued for discharging the liability, there is always a presumption in favour
of the complainant that there exists legally recoverable debt or liability.
20. The Apex Court in the judgment in the case of ROHITBHAI JIVANLAL PATEL v. STATE OF
GUJARAT AND ANOTHER reported in AIR 2019 SC 1876 held that it is required to be presumed
that cheques in question were drawn for consideration and the complainant received it in discharge
of an existing debt and onus is shifted on the accused to rebut it. Unless onus is discharged by
accused that preponderance of probabilities are tilting in his faovur, doubt on case of complainant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 6
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
cannot be raised for want of evidence regarding source of funds for advancing the loan to the
accused. This judgment is delivered in 2019 subsequent to the judgment in the case of Basalingappa
(supra) and further observed that failure of accused to show reasonable probability of existence of
transaction with his friend. The evidence of friend not supporting his case.
21. Having considered the principles laid down in the judgments referred supra, the contention of
the petitioner cannot be accepted regarding source of income and non- production of income tax
declaration regarding payment and the very defence that cheque was stolen was not proved. Apart
from that, when the notice was served, no reply was given and he kept quiet and during the course of
trial afterthought inconsistent defence was taken and hence I do not find any merit in the petition.
Both the Courts have given anxious consideration with regard to defence which have been taken.
The Trial Court in paragraph Nos.12 to 15 in detail discussed regarding the evidence of witnesses
and particularly cross- examination was extracted and taken note of contradictions and also taken
note of that the petitioner had gone to the extent of denying his signature on the cheque, but he
admitted that he has received the notice sent by the complainant, but not given any reply. D.W.2
also categorically admitted the cheques were lost from the business concern being run by the wife of
the accused and also elicited that accused did not choose to examine his wife.
22. The Appellate Court in paragraph No.15 taken note of the defence taken by the petitioner and
comes to the conclusion that there is no explanation from the accused for having lodged the
complaint to the police and informing the bank about the loss of cheque though he claims that he
gave complaint and information to the bank. Taking note of Exs.D.2 and 3, discussed in paragraph
No.16 and also taken note of the evidence of D.W.2 in paragraph No.18 and in paragraph No.23
taken note of the admission given by the P.W.1 regarding income tax assessee is concerned. Merely
because the complainant did not produce his income tax document, held that it cannot be said that
the complainant did not lend an amount of Rs.8,00,000/-. Taking note of all the grounds, which
have been urged in the appeal, definite finding was given in paragraph No.25 that there was a
transaction between the complainant and the accused and earlier to this transaction, several
transactions were taken place and the same has not been denied in the cross-examination of P.W.1.
23. Having considered the material available on record and findings of both the Courts, I do not find
any error committed by both the Courts. In order to invoke the revisional jurisdiction, there must be
an error in the finding of the Trial Court and the Appellate Court and if any perverse order is passed
against the cogent evidence available on record, then this Court can exercise the revisional
jurisdiction. I have already pointed out that though the petitioner examined himself as D.W.1 and
also examined D.W.2 and relied upon the documents at Exs.D.1 to 3, his case has not been
probabalised and preponderance of probabilities also not lies in favour of the petitioner herein and
hence I do not find any force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that both the
Courts have committed an error and findings of the Trial Court does not warrant interference of this
Court. Hence, I answer point No.(i) as negative.
Point No.(ii):
24. In view of the discussions made above, I pass the following:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 7
Sri M S Sathya Narayana vs Sri Lingaraje Urs on 22 April, 2022
ORDER The petition is dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE MD
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21995151/ 8
