Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November,
2018
Author: H.B.Prabhakara Sastry
Bench: H.B.Prabhakara Sastry
®
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 20TH DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2018
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE H.B.PRABHAKARA SASTRY
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.467 OF 2010
BETWEEN:
Sri.Yogesh Poojary,
S/o Dhinakara Poojary,
Aged 44 years,
R/o Kadthila House,
Mogru Village & Post,
Belthangadi Taluk,
Dakshina Kannada.
.. Appellant
(By Sri.Datta Prasad.G, Advocate for
Sri.Manmohan, Advocate)
AND:
Sri.K.Shankara Bhat,
S/o Thimmanna Bhat,
Aged about 65 years,
Kodiyadka House,
Thannirupantha Post,
Belthangadi Taluk,
Dakshina Kannada.
.. Respondent
(By Sri. A.Keshava Bhat, Advocate)
This Criminal Appeal is filed under Section 378(4) of
Cr.P.C, praying to set aside the judgment and order dated
18.02.2010, passed in C.C.No.365/2005 by the Court of
Crl.A.No.467/2010
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 1
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
the C.J.(Jr.Dn) and JMFC, Sullia, D.K. - acquitting the
respondent/accused for the offence punishable under
Section 138 of the N.I. Act and consequently allow
C.C.No.365/2005 as prayed for.
This Criminal Appeal having been heard and reserved
for Judgment on 15.11.2018, this day the Court delivered
the following:
JUDGMENT
In the complaint filed by the appellant under Section 200 of Code of Criminal Procedure
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as 'Cr.P.C'), against the present respondent for the offence
punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter for brevity
referred to as 'N.I. Act'), the learned Civil Judge (Jr. Dn) & JMFC, Sullia, Dakshina Kannada
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as the 'trial Court') in C.C.No.365/2005, pronounced the
judgment of acquittal on 18.02.2010. It is against the said judgment of acquittal, the
appellant/complainant has preferred this appeal.
2. The summary of the case of the complainant in the trial Court is that the respondent/accused
towards the repayment of the debt issued a cheque bearing No.0380 dated 10.12.2004, drawn on
Thannirupantha Service Co- operative Bank Limited in favour of the complainant for `1,50,000/-.
When the cheque was presented for realization by the complainant, the same was dishonoured and
returned through his banker on 23.12.2004 with an endorsement 'payment stopped by drawer'. The
complainant issued a legal notice to the accused demanding the repayment of the cheque amount
within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice. However, the said notice returned unserved
with a postal endorsement as the addressee was out of station and did not claim the letter. Since the
demand made in the legal notice was not met by the accused, the complainant was constrained to
file a complaint against the accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
3. To prove his case, the complainant got himself examined as PW-1 and got marked documents
from Exs.P-1 to P-10. No witnesses were examined from the accused side. However, documents at
Exs.D-1 to D-12 were marked from his side. After hearing both side, the trial Court by its impugned
judgment dated 18.02.2010, acquitted the accused for the alleged offence. It is against the said
judgment, the appellant has preferred this appeal.
4. For the sake of convenience, the parties would be referred to as per their ranks before the trial
Court.
5. It is the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant/complainant that the trial Court
committed an error by holding that there is no service of demand notice upon the accused. It is the
contention of learned counsel that once there is tendering of the notice, which was sent to the
accused at his correct and complete address even if, the addressee has not received the said letter,
there will be a deemed service of notice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 2
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
Secondly, it was also the argument of learned counsel for the appellant/complainant that the finding
of the Court below that it was a burden on the complainant to prove the existence of legally
enforceable debt was also against the statutory presumption operating in favour of the complainant
under Section 139 of the N.I. Act. In this regard, learned counsel relied upon two judgments of the
Hon'ble Apex Court, which will be referred to at the relevant place hereafterwards.
6. Learned counsel for the respondent, in his arguments fairly, submitted that in view of the settled
principle of law that once a letter is sent to correct address under a registered post, unless and until
the contrary is proved, the service is deemed to have been effected, he would not press the point of
alleged non-service of notice upon the accused. However, he submitted that finding of the trial
Court, on the merits of the case, does not warrant any interference at the hands of this Court. He
also submitted that when the alleged earlier loan is said to have been remained unpaid by the
accused then, how come the very same complainant could grant huge sum of loan again to the same
accused? He also submitted that the complainant is in the habit of money lending to different people
without any license for money lending and that he is also filing criminal cases for the offence
punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act against those alleged drawers of the cheques at
different places intentionally. With these, he submitted that the appeal does not deserve to be
allowed.
7. It is the complainant's averment as well the evidence of PW-1 that the statutory notice sent to the
accused after the dishonour of the cheque and demanding him to make good the amount demanded
in the notice, came to be returned unserved with the postal endorsement that the addressee was out
of station and not claimed the article. It is not the case of the accused that the address to which the
legal notice was sent under 'Registered Post Acknowledgment Due' was incorrect, as such, the legal
notice was sent by the complainant to the correct address of the accused under registered post. In a
similar circumstance, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ajeet Seeds Limited vs. K.Gopala
Krishnaiah reported in (2014) 12 SCC 685, was pleased to hold that there shall be presumption as to
service of notice. Therefore, in the light of the said judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court and also in
view of the fact that learned counsel for respondent/accused has also fairly submitted that he would
not press on the aspect of the alleged non- service of notice upon the accused, it has to be held that
the finding of the Court below holding that there was no service of statutory notice upon the accused
is an erroneous finding. As such, it is established that there is compliance of service of statutory
notice by the complainant upon the accused as required under Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
8. The complainant in his complaint as well in his evidence as PW-1 has stated that the cheque
under question which is for a sum of `1,50,000/- was issued to him by the accused towards the
discharge of his existing debt. However, the defendant in his defence has taken a contention that
complainant was running a finance called Baby Finance Corporation at Madanthyaru, Belthangadi
Taluk from whom he had availed a loan of `20,000/- and `10,000/-. At the time of availing those
loans, the complainant had collected blank cheques as security. However, inspite of repayment of
the said loan, the complainant has not returned those blank cheques but he has misused those
cheques and filed a criminal case in question.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 3
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
It is considering the said defence put forth by the accused in the form of suggestion to PW-1, in his
cross-examination, the trial Court proceeded to analise the entire evidence placed before it with a
notion that the existence of legally recoverable debt was not a matter of presumption under Section
139 of the N.I. Act. In that regard, it also relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of Krishna Janardhan Bhat vs. Dattatraya G. Hegde reported in (2008) 4 SCC 54. However, the
said observation of the Hon'ble Apex Court that the existence of legally recoverable debt was a
matter of presumption was not accepted by a Full Bench of Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Rangappa vs. Sri Mohan reported in (2010) 11 SCC 441, wherein at paragraph No.26 of the
judgment, the Hon'ble Apex Court was pleased to observe that the presumption mandated by
Section 139 of N.I. Act does indeed include the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability. As
such, to that extent, the impugned observations in the case of Krishna Janardhan Bhat (supra) may
not be correct. Therefore, the principle which hold the ground as of now is that the presumption
mandated by Section 139 of the N.I. Act includes the presumption that there existed a legally
enforceable debt or liability. However, such presumption is rebuttable in nature.
9. In the instant case, the issuance of cheque in question by the accused to the complainant is not in
dispute. It is the accused, who himself has in the form of suggestions made to PW-1 in his
cross-examination has specifically stated that the cheque in question was issued by him to the
complainant, however, as a security towards his alleged previous loan of a sum of `20,000/- and
`10,000/-. But the said suggestion was not admitted as true by PW-1. Therefore, merely by making a
suggestion which has remained unacceptable by the complainant cannot be taken as proof of the
defence of the accused, who has made such suggestion. In such a situation, a corroborative evidence
either oral or documentary may require to be placed before the Court. However, the accused except
making such a suggestion, as observed above, to PW- 1 in his cross-examination has not placed any
material corroborating his defence. Therefore, as observed by the Hon'ble apex Court in the case of
T.Vasanthakumar vs. Vijayakumari reported in (2015) 8 SCC 378, wherein also in a similar
circumstance of the case, the Hon'ble Apex Court held that the defence of the accused that the
cheque in question was given to the complainant as a security was not held as acceptable, it has to be
held that the accused was not able to convincingly rebut the presumption existing in favour of the
complainant under Section 139 of the N.I. Act.
10. The trial Court, as already observed above, proceeded in the matter on the basic notion that the
burden of proving the existence of legally enforceable debt was primarily on the shoulder of the
complainant. It is in that process, it has observed that the statement of the complainant that despite
the accused being earlier defaulter of two hand loans of `20,000/- and `10,000/- respectively was
again granted with a loan of `1.5 lakhs was unbelievable. However, while coming to such a
conclusion, the trial Court ignored the reason given by PW-1 in his cross- examination that since the
accused is known to him, and is not only close to him but also the wife of the accused being his
(complainant's) neighbour, he has extended further loan to accused. The said reasoning find no
reason to disbelieve it.
11. It is also the argument of the learned counsel for the respondent/accused that the complainant is
a money lender and he has instituted several similar cases against different persons in different
Courts at different places. He has also relied upon Exs.D1 to D6 in that regard. No doubt Exs.D1 to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 4
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
D6 are the certified copies of three different private complaints and three different cheques which go
to show that the complainant has instituted similar cases against other persons at different places
but by the said Act itself, it cannot be said that the complainant had no right to institute the present
complaint against the accused for the alleged cause of action or that his case is doubtful. As such, the
said argument of the learned counsel for the respondent/accused is also not acceptable. However,
the trial Court without confining its reasons to materials available in the form of oral and
documentary evidence placed before it, proceeded to assume certain things on its own. Some of
them being that as to non-preparing any documentation for the loan of `1.5 lakhs by the
complainant and also about the alleged non-disclosure of alleged loan transaction in the Income Tax
Returns of the complainant.
When the accused in the process of rebutting the presumption existing in favour of the complainant
under Section 139 of the N.I. Act apart from making a mere suggestion as to absence of any
documentation about the alleged loan transaction and absence of non-disclosure of the loan
transaction in the Income Tax Returns is also required to place more material either in the form of
favorable replies elicited in the cross-examination of the complainant or in the form of documents
or atleast bringing to the notice of the Court and convincing it that the circumstances of the case
warrants for drawing such a conclusion, particularly, mere making a suggestion to the complainant
that he has not disclosed the alleged loan transaction in his Income Tax Returns or eliciting the
statement from the complainant that he has not disclosed the alleged loan transaction in his Income
Tax Returns by itself is not sufficient. It is also required for the accused to establish that the
complainant is an income tax assessee or required to be an assessee and that the nature of his
income tax assessment and the Income Tax Return which he files, requires him to disclose the
alleged transaction or the liability in question. In the absence of eliciting those details, by merely
making a suggestion that the alleged debt or liability, has not been reflected in the income tax
returns would not by itself suffice to draw an adverse inference and to hold that there was no legally
enforceable debt or the presumption standing in favour of the complainant as successfully rebutted
by the accused.
The trial Court in the instant case, merely considered a suggestion made from the accused side in
the cross-examination of PW-1 that the complainant was an income tax assessee and that he has not
declared the alleged loan transaction in his returns and disbelieved the case of the complainant that
too, ignoring that legal presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. Act, was operating in favour of the
complainant. For these reasons, it has to be held that the complainant has beyond reasonable doubt
proved the guilt of the accused punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act. As such, the impugned
judgment of acquittal passed by the trial Court deserves to be set aside and respondent/accused is
liable to be convicted for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act.
12. Accordingly, the Appeal stands allowed. The judgment of acquittal dated 18.02.2010, passed by
the learned Civil Judge (Jr.Dn) and JMFC, Sullia, Dakshina Kannada, in C.C.No.365/2005, is set
aside. The respondent/accused by name - K.Shankara Bhat, S/o Thimmanna Bhat, residing at
Kodiyadka House, Thannirupantha Post, Belthangadi Taluk, Dakshina Kannada, is convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I.Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 5
Sri Yogesh Poojary vs Sri K Shankara Bhat on 20 November, 2018
To hear on the sentence and for pronouncement of order on sentence, call the matter at 2.30 p.m.
Sd/-
JUDGE dn/-
ORDER ON SENTENCE Heard the learned counsel from both side on sentence part.
While the learned counsel for the appellant/ complainant submits for awarding maximum sentence
for the offence for which the respondent/accused is convicted, the learned counsel for the
respondent/accused submitting that accused is a family holder and a respectable person in society,
prays for taking a lenient view.
It is the sentencing policy that the sentence ordered should not be either exorbitant nor for name
sake for the proven guilt. It must be proportionate to the guilt for which the accused is found guilty
of.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the accused is sentenced to pay a fine of
`1,60,000/- (Rupees One Lakh Sixty thousand) within three weeks from today, and in case of
default of payment of fine, to undergo a simple imprisonment for a period of six months. In case of
payment of fine amount, a sum of `1,50,000/- be paid to the complainant - Yogesh Poojary, and
remaining sum of `10,000/- be taken to the account of the State.
The Registry is directed to transmit a copy of this judgment to the trial Court forthwith, which Court
to proceed further in the matter for issuance of warrant of conviction, if necessary and proceed in
accordance with law.
The entire copy of this judgment also be delivered to the respondent, immediately free of cost.
Sd/-
JUDGE dn/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191322461/ 6
