Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O
Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
Author: Pradeep Singh Yerur
Bench: Pradeep Singh Yerur
IN THE HIGH COU RT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD B ENCH
DAT ED THIS THE 13 T H DAY OF OCT OBER, 2020
B EFORE
THE HON'B LE MR. JU ST ICE PRADEEP SINGH YERU R
CRIMINAL REVIS ION PET ITION NO.2284/2011
CRL. RP No.2285/ 2011, CRL. RP No.2286/ 2011,
CRL. RP No.2287/ 2011, CRL. RP No.2288/ 2011,
CRL. RP No.2289/ 2011 & CRL. RP No.2290/ 201 1
BET WEEN:
SRI SADASH IV,S/ O B AB U RAO B HOVI,
AGE : MAJOR, OCC: CONTRACTOR,
R/O OPP. CHANNAGIRI CEMENT FACTORY
FARM HOUSE AT POST:YADWAD,
TALUK GOKAK DISTRICT B ELGAUM
... PET ITIONER
COMMON IN ALL THE CASES
(B Y SRI VITTHAL S.TELI, ADVOCAT E )
AND:
SMT SHU SHILABAI, W/O RAYAPPA
DODDANNAVAR @ DODDAMANI, AGE: MAJOR,
OCC: HOU SEHOLD WORK,R/O LOKAP UR, TALUK
MU DHOL,DIST RICT B AGALKOT
... RESPONDENT
COMMON IN ALL THE CASES
(B Y SRI GIRISH A . YADWAD, ADVOCAT E FOR SRI
V.P.KULKARNI, ADVOCATE)
***
THESE CRIM INAL REVISION PETIT IONS ARE FILED
UNDER SECTION 397 READ WITH SECTION 401 O F
CR.P.C., PRAYING TO SET AS IDE THE COMO N
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 1
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
JUDGMENT DATED 30.0 7.201 1 IN CRIMINAL APPEAL
NOS. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 AND 10/2011 B Y T HE FAST TRACK
COURT, JAMKHANDI B Y CONFIRMING THE JU DMENT
DATED 09.1 2.201 0 IN CC NO. 36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46
2
and 677/2008 PA SSED B Y T HE PR L. JMFC, MUDHOL
AND THEREB Y ACQU ITT ED THE PETIT ION ER, ETC.,
THESE PET IT IONS ARE COM ING ON FOR HEAR ING
THIS DAY, THE COU RT MADE T HE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
These revision petitions arise out of a common judgment dated 30 t h July 2011 passed by the Court
of Fast Track, Jamkhandi, in Crl. A. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of 2011, wherein the Appellate Court
has dismissed all the seven appeals and confirmed the judgment and order of conviction and
sentence dated 8 t h December 2010 and 9 t h December 2010 passed by the Principal JMFC,
Mudhol in CC No.36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46 and 677 of 2008, wherein the learned trial Judge convicted
the accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (for
short 'NI Act') and sentenced him to under go simple imprisonment for five months and to pay fine
of Rs.1,95,000/- in default to pay fine to undergo simple imprisonment for three months and out of
the fine amount of Rs.1,95,000/-, a sum of Rs.1,90,000/- is ordered to be payable to the
complainant as compensation and remaining Rs.5,000/- is ordered to be transmitted to the account
of the State after appeal period is over.
2. Heard Sri Vitthal S. Teli, learned counsel for petitioners and Sri Girish A. Yadwad, Advocate for
Sri V.P. Kulkarni, learned counsel for respondents.
3. Revision petitioner and respondent in all these cases are one and the same. Transaction between
the parties is one for which seven cheques were issued by revision petitioner to respondent. The
learned counsel for petitioner and respondent have addressed their arguments of all the cases
together. The learned counsel on both side have addressed common arguments even before the
Appellate Court. Since common question is involved, all the petitions are taken up together for
disposal.
4. Parties herein shall be referred to as per their ranking before the trial Court.
5. Brief facts leading to filing of these revision petitions are as under:
5.1. It is the case of complainant that she is resident of Lokapur. While accused was
doing Contract work at Lokapura, he stayed in her house as tenant. There is close
relationship between the family of complainant and accused. The husband of
complainant was working as Social Welfare Officer and due to his death complainant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 2
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
received about Rs.12 lakhs as terminal benefits by way of PF and Gratuity. Having
come to know about the fact that complainant has received terminal benefits, accused
taking advantage of the close relationship and confidence reposed by complainant,
accused requested complainant for a sum of Rs.11 lakhs as he was under certain
financial difficulties.
Considering the financial difficulties complainant gave Rs.11 lakhs to accused.
6. When the complainant demanded refund of the said amount, in discharge of the said legally
recoverable debt accused issued number of cheques on different dates towards discharge of said
legally recoverable debt. The details of which are as follows:
SL. CHEQUE CHEQUE AMOUNT CC NO CRL.A. NO DATE NO NO.
02. 388131 13.10.07 1,90,000 677/08 05/11
7. It is the case of complainant that when the aforesaid cheques were presented for encashment by
the complainant on different dates mentioned in the above tabular column, the same were returned
with an endorsement 'no sufficient funds'. Thereafter, the complainant got issued legal notice calling
upon the accused to make payment within 15 days from the date of receipt of notice. Since
complainant did not receive any payment from accused and the notice was returned as 'not claimed'
by accused, complainant got issued second notice to accused and subsequently, the present
complaints came to be filed for the offence punishable under Section 138 of NI Act. After complaint
was filed and issuance of the notice to the accused, the accused appeared through his counsel and
the plea came to be recorded wherein accused pleaded 'not guilty' and claimed to be tried and
accordingly he was tried.
8. In order to prove the guilt of the accused the complainant got herself examined as PW1 and also
examined two other witnesses on her behalf as PW2 & PW3 being the Bank Managers of State Bank
of India and State Bank of Hyderabad and got marked documents at Ex.P1 to P6. Thereafter
statement of accused under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. was recorded, wherein accused denied all the
incriminating evidence and he choose to defend his case by examining himself as DW1 and also got
marked Ex.D1 to D8 as documents in support of his case.
9. After hearing the parties, trial Court framed the relevant points for consideration and came to the
conclusion that complainant has made out all the ingredients to attract the offence punishable
under Section 138 of NI Act and convicted accused for the said offence and sentenced him to under
go simple imprisonment for five months and to pay fine of Rs.1,95,000/- in default to pay fine to
undergo simple imprisonment for three months and out of the fine amount of Rs.1,95,000/-, a sum
of Rs.1,90,000/- was ordered to be payable to complainant as compensation and remaining
Rs.5,000/- was ordered to be transmitted to the account of the State after appeal period is over in
CC No.36, 38, 40, 42, 44, 46 and 677 of 2008, which were challenged in Crl. A. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
and 10 of 2011 before the first Appellate Court and the same came to be dismissed confirming the
order of trial Court, which is challenged before this Court in these revision petitions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 3
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
10. Heard Sri Vitthal S.Teli, learned counsel appearing on behalf of accused and Sri Girish A.
Yadwad, appearing on behalf of Sri V.P. Kulkarni, learned counsel for complainant, in all these
cases.
11. The learned counsel for accused vehemently contended that the judgment and order of
conviction and sentence passed by trial Court as well as Appellate Court is opposed to law and facts
and circumstance of the case and hence the same is erroneous thereby requires interference at the
hands of this Court.
12. Learned counsel further contends that the very fundamental aspect of fulfillment of ingredients
of Section 138 of NI Act has not been complied by the complainant as the complainant has not
pleaded specific requirement about when the amount was paid to accused and when accused has
received the amount from complainant. Therefore, the complainant has failed to discharge the
essential burden of proof as provided under the proviso to Section 138 of NI Act.
13. The learned counsel further contends that complainant has miserably failed to prove the
financial capacity and source of income and has not produced any material on record by way of any
books of accounts or any such documents to substantiate the aspect of source of income thereby
complainant has failed to prove the loan alleged to have been parted to accused. It is further
contended by the learned counsel for accused that in non furnishing of such proof with regard to
financial capacity of complainant needs to be disbelieved in the statement made by complainant as
to the existence of legally recoverable debt, which leads to probable inference and doubtful version
putforth by complainant.
14. The learned counsel further contends that complainant has not produced any material with
regard to receipt of terminal benefits received due to the death of her husband, which would show
her financial capacity and non production of the same leads to inference that complainant has not
shown the source of funds for having given the loan amount to accused.
15. It is further contended by the learned counsel that on rebuttal of presumption of the theory put
forth by complainant it becomes incumbent upon complainant to prove her case by producing the
necessary documents with regard to financial capacity and source of income. With holding of such
documents by complainant leads to adverse inference and in the present case, complainant has not
produced any material to show that she had financial capacity and source of income.
16. Learned counsel for accused further contends that the onus is heavy on complainant to prove the
existence of legally recoverable debt and it cannot be not presumed that the holder of the cheque has
established the issuance of cheque is in discharge of debt, which will have to be necessarily proved
by the complainant either through oral or documentary evidence, but it has not been done in this
case.
17. It is further contended by the learned counsel that the trial Court and the Appellate Court have
failed to consider the admission made by complainant with regard to execution of the 'Oppige Patra'
and withholding of such 'Oppige Patra' by complainant is fatal to the case of complainant and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 4
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
Courts below ought to have taken adverse inference against complainant for non-production of the
said documents.
18. The learned counsel for accused further contended that the Courts below have failed to consider
that the amount so paid was not paid as a Partner or as loan to accused, but it was paid to the
workers / coolie for hire on contract and it does not amount to passing of consideration.
19. It is further contended by the learned counsel that in all these cases the complainant has not
proved the existence of legally subsisting recoverable debt and accused has placed probable defence
and has rebutted the presumption as contemplated under Section 118 and 139 of NI Act. Therefore,
the onus shifts on complainant to prove beyond reasonable doubt the existence of legally subsisting
recoverable debt, which has not been done in these cases and accused herein has rebutted the
presumption cast on him.
20. Therefore, he seeks that all these revision petitions deserve to be allowed and the judgment and
order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court and confirmed by the Appellate Court
requires to be set aside and accused deserves to be acquitted of the charges. On these submissions
the learned counsel for the accused sought to allow all the revision petitions.
21. The learned counsel for accused places reliance on the following judgments in support of his
case:
(1) M.S.NARAYANA MENON ALIAS MANI vs STATE OF KERALA AND ANOTHER
reported in (2006) 6 SCC 39;
(2) REVEREND MOTHER MARYKUTTY vs RENI
CKOTTARAM AND ANOTHER reported in
(2013) 1 SCC 327;
(3) VIJAY vs LAXMAN AND ANOTHER reported in (2013) 3 SCC 86;
(4) BASALINGAPPA vs MUDIB ASAPPA reported in (2019) 5 SCC 418;
(5) S.KAMAKOTI vs I.SARFARAZ NAWAZ reported in 2019 SCC ONLINE KAR 518;
(6) KUNDAN LAL R ALLAR AM vs CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE PROPERTY, BOMB AY
reported in AIR 1961 SC 1316;
(7) SMT AKHTARI BI vs STATE OF M.P. reported in AIR 1961 SC 1316;
22. Per contra, the learned counsel for complainant contended that the judgment and order of
conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court and confirmed by the Appellate Court is in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 5
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
conformity with the provisions of Section 138 NI Act and does not call for interference by this Court.
Learned counsel further contends that in all these seven cases the transaction is one and the same,
accused had issued in all seven cheques towards the fulfillment of legally recoverable debt.
23. According to the learned counsel for complainant accused in all has received Rs.11 lakhs from
the complainant and to repay the said amount he has got issued seven cheques, which are
mentioned above, on different dates for different amounts. Learned counsel contends that signature
on the cheque and the account of the accused having been maintained in the said bank has not been
denied and the same is admitted by accused.
24. The learned counsel further contends that out of seven cheques, three cheques which were
issued by accused bearing No.388131 for a sum of Rs.1,90,000; No.388130 for a sum of
Rs.2,00,000/- and No.388129 for a sum of Rs.2,00,000/-, has been admitted and in the reply
notice sent by accused to complainant he categorically admitted to repay the said amount. Thereby,
it is contended by the learned counsel for complainant that once there is admission with regard to
payment having been received and issuance of cheque and readiness to make good the cheque
amount, complainant has fulfilled the ingredients of Section 138 of NI Act, thereby the accused
deserves to be convicted for the offence punishable under Section 138 of NI Act.
25. Learned counsel for the complainant further contends that the main defence taken by accused is
that complainant had not produced material document to prove financial capacity and payment of
amount to the accused. It is further contended that the defence taken by accused in the reply notice
is contrary to the defence taken the accused in his evidence while adducing the evidence as DW1. At
one stretch accused admits that there was a Partnership and he owes the three cheque amount
totally a sum of Rs.5,90,000/- to complainant and fairly disputes the amount mentioned in other
four cheques to complainant. Whereas, in the cross examination it is stated that accused was
working as a Contractor and the amount was not paid to accused and it was paid as salary to the
workers and accordingly accused has issued three cheques to complainant.
26. It is contended by the learned counsel for complainant that by taking totally 360 degree turn,
accused in his evidence has stated that his nephew owned a truck and he wanted to sell the truck to
the son of complainant, due to which money was paid to accused and for that purpose three cheques
were issued to complainant. The value of contract is Rs.7 lakhs and due to non payment he got
issued the cheques to complainant. The learned counsel for complainant further contends that these
divergent and inconsistent plea and defence taken by accused, is detrimental to the case of accused
because they are contradicting each theory and does not instill any confidence with regard to the
statements made by accused.
27. It is further contended that the plea with regard to separate and distinct trials have been
conducted by trial Court providing sufficient opportunity to accused to adduce his evidence and
cross examine the witness no right of the accused was curbed and the common judgment
pronounced by first Appellate Court, does not render the judgment invalid and illegal. It is further
contended that both the counsels addressed common arguments in view of the fact that question of
law involved in the appeals before the Appellate Court were same and parties and transaction are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 6
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
one and the same. He further contended that first Appellate Court has considered each of the
complaints separately and distinctly and has given finding to that effect in its judgment most
specifically from Para-17 to 22 of the judgment. Therefore, the common judgment passed by first
Appellate Court after consideration of the material and the distinct case of accused, by providing
sufficient opportunity to address arguments of each of the case has in no way infringed the
opportunity or right of accused. Therefore it is not an illegal and perverse order.
28. Learned counsel for the complainant has further contended that the judgments relied on by
learned counsel for accused, are not applicable to the facts and circumstance of the present case
though the ratio laid down in those judgments may be right. Hence, on these grounds he seeks for
dismissal of these revision petitions and for confirmation of the judgment and order of conviction
and sentence of both the Courts below.
29. The learned counsel for complainant has also relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of AMIT KAPOOR vs RAMESH CHANDER AND ANOTHER reported in (2012) 9
SCC 460, to canvas his arguments with regard to powers of this Court under Section 397 of Cr.P.C.
30. Having heard the learned counsel for complainant and accused the point that arise for
consideration before this Court are as under:
"(a) Whether the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial
Court is in accordance with law?
(b) Whether confirmation of the judgment of the trial Court by the first Appellate
Court requires any interference by this Court?"
31. It is seen from the records of all these cases that there is no dispute with regard to the friendship
and acquaintance of complainant and accused. It is also not in dispute that accused had got issued
three cheques as mentioned above and for the sake of clarity three cheques which were issued by the
accused are bearing No.388131 for a sum of Rs.1,90,000; No.388130 for a sum of Rs.2,00,000/-
and No.388129 for a sum of Rs.2,00,000/-, in favour of complainant. This fact is clearly admitted
by accused that he is liable to pay the amount as these amounts was paid by complainant as salary to
the workers of accused.
32. This admission of accused emanates from reply notice as well as in the cross examination of PW1
and 2 and his evidence as DW1. It is the defence of accused with regard to remaining four cheques
that at no point of time these cheques were issued to complainant and that the amounts mentioned
in these four cheques are not borrowed by accused and the complaint against these four cheques
ought to have been dismissed by the trial Court.
33. It is the further case of accused that these cheques may have been given to complainant during
the Partnership while the accused was working as Contractor and in such business transaction
complainant has got possession of these cheques. Strangely, it is noticed from the records and
evidence, accused has taken a totally different contention and defence in his own evidence where he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 7
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
has stated that these cheques were issued to the complainant in the sale of truck owned by his
nephew, which was to be sold to the son of complainant, for which money was given by complainant
to the accused. Since the value of the truck was Rs.7 lakhs which complainant had paid, accused got
issued the cheques.
34. This stand taken by the accused is totally different which is contrary to his own reply notice and
cross examination, casts a doubt in the minds of this Court and does not infuse confidence on the
veracity of the statement made by accused.
35. It is further case of accused that complainant had admitted the execution of 'Oppige Patra',
which according to accused complainant has admitted in the cross examination and that affidavit
with regard to 'Oppige Patra' is marked as Ex.D1. It is relevant to notice here that the said 'Oppige
Patra' has not been produced and so also the consent letter of accused. It is the case of accused that
original of 'Oppige Patra' is in the custody and possession of the complainant and complainant
ought to have produced the said 'Oppige Patra' to prove her case. When accused is trying to rebut
the presumption which is heavily cast on him under the Act, it becomes the duty of accused to
produce all such material before the Court and to secure all such material documents or produce
oral evidence, to establish such material facts and to confront the said documents only then the onus
of proof shifts on the complainant.
36. In this aspect, It is necessary to extract the provisions of Section 138 of NI Act, which reads thus
:
"DISHONOUR OF CHEQUE FOR INSUFFICIENCY, ETC., OF FUNDS IN THE ACCOUNT. --Where
any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any
amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part,
of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of money
standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the
amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person
shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provisions
of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for 19 [a term which may be extended to two years], or
with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or with both: Provided that nothing
contained in this section shall apply unless--
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the
date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a
demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to
the drawer of the cheque, 20 [within thirty days] of the receipt of information by him
from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money
to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 8
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable
debt or other liability.".
37. It is seen that once the proviso to Section 138 of NI Act is fulfilled the offence under Section 138
of NI Act is made out. Once the offence under Section 138 of NI Act is made out, duty is cast upon
the accused to rebut the presumption under Section 139 & 118 of NI Act. It is relevant to refer to
these two provisions. Section 139 of NI Act reads thus:
"PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF HOLDER.-
It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque
received the cheque of the nature referred to in section 138 for the discharge, in
whole or in part, of any debt or other liability."
38. It is important to refer to Section 118 of NI Act, which reads thus:
"PRESUMPTIONS AS TO NEGOTIABLE
INSTRUMENTS.
Until the contrary is proved, the following presumptions shall be made:-
(a) of consideration:- that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for
consideration, and that every such instrument, when it has been accepted, indorsed,
negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for
consideration;
(b) as to date:- that every negotiable instrument bearing a date was made or drawn
on such date;
(c) as to time of acceptance: that every accepted bill of exchange was accepted within
a reasonable time after its date and before its maturity;
(d) as to time of transfer:- that every transfer of a negotiable instrument was made
before its naturity;
(e) as to order of indorsements:- that the indorsements appearing upon a negotiable
instrument were made in the order in which they appear thereon;
(f) as to stamp:- that a lost promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque was duly
stamped;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 9
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
(g) that holder is a holder in due course:-
that the holder of a negotiable instrument is a holder in due course : provided that,
where the instrutment has been obtained from its lawful owner, or from any person
in lawful custody thereof, by means of an offence or fraud, or has been obtained from
the maker or acceptor thereof by means of an offence or fraud, or for unlawful
consideration, the burden of proving that the holder is a holder in due course lies
upon him."
39. Presumption under Section 139 and 118 of NI Act, is cast on accused to rebut the same to the
contrary. Accused will have to do something more than just mere denial. Suggestion to merely say
that there is no financial capacity, that the cheque was not drawn for any legal consideration and
that there is no legally subsisting debt or liability, are not the rebuttal of presumption as
contemplated under law. It is also to be seen that Section 138 of NI Act, does not say any where with
regard to the mention of date and time of drawing of the cheque or issuance of the loan. That is why
under the enactment the presumption is provided once the cheque is drawn unless contrary is
proved that it is presumed that holder of the cheque has received cheque for the purpose of
discharge of whole or any part of debt or other liability.
40. Section 118 of NI Act has clearly stipulated that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn
for consideration and made on the date, drawn on such date and that holder of negotiable
instrument is an holder in due course. When such heavy presumption is existing under these
provisions, the duty and burden that is cast on the accused is heavy to prove contrary to the
presumption. It is not that the said presumption cannot be rebutted. When accused raises the
probable defence and the facts and circumstance of the case is able to make out that no such amount
was ever due to the complainant and on satisfaction of such aspect, defence raised is worthy of
scrutiny and verification, then the burden shifts on the complainant to prove or counter such
rebuttal.
41. In the present case on hand, accused has admitted issuance of three cheques and categorically
made a statement that he is ready and willing to pay the said amount. With regard to other four
cheques accused has not laid down the defence as to how these cheques were taken and could have
gone into the hands of complainant during the business transaction between him and complainant.
On the contrary, it is the case of accused in his evidence that there was no business transaction, it
was due to the selling of a truck belonging to his nephew, these cheques were given to complainant.
These contrary stands taken by accused does not lay down a straight line of theory of argument of
accused.
42. On the other hand it is the case of complainant that she has secured the amount pursuant to the
death of her husband by way of terminal benefits from PF and Gratuity from the Government and
being widow and having acquaintance with accused has given the amount to accused and taking
advantage of the situation of complainant, accused has defaulted on the payment despite issuance of
cheque, after having admitted to pay the three cheques mentioned above.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 10
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
43. The arguments of learned counsel with regard to common judgment passed by first Appellate
Court, does not prove any serious lacuna or infirmity in the power exercised by the Appellate Court
while considering all the case together. However, the Appellate Court has separately and distinctly
laid down the facts and circumstance of each of the cases and common judgment has been passed, in
view of filing of seven cases, which arise of one transaction between the same parties. Learned
counsel has not pointed out any law which bars the appellate Court to pass common judgment in all
the cases, It is not the case of accused that no separate trial was conducted as contemplated under
Section 218 of Cr.P.C.
44. With regard to other serious contentions of the learned counsel for accused that the complainant
has not the date of issuance of the cheques there is no serious infirmity in not stating specific date
on which loan amount was paid by complainant, but it is stated to have been given that pursuant to
the receipt of Rs.12 lakhs from the Government towards PF and Gratuity on account of death of her
husband, she has parted with the amount of Rs.11 lakhs on different period of time and the accused
has accordingly issued different cheques over period of time bearing different dates.
45. In the facts and circumstance of present case, it is not disputed by accused that the cheques have
been issued to complainant. When there is a clear admission by accused with regard to issuance of
cheques and signature on cheques and payment of amount being admitted in the reply notice as well
as in the evidence and in the course of arguments before this Court, the question of shifting onus of
proof to the complainant to prove the financial capacity and source of income, does not arise at all.
46. Further, the aspect which is important in the present set of cases is that accused has not
established before this Court as to what is palpable error, non-compliance of law, whether the
decision is completely erroneous and the orders of the Courts below are capricious and illegal. The
accused has not been able to pin point anything material that is illegal or perverse in the order
passed by the Courts below. Therefore, in my considered opinion, accused has failed to make out a
ground for interference by this Court under the revisional jurisdiction to correct any perversity,
illegality or propriety in the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the Courts
below.
47. With regard to judgments relied on by the learned counsel for accused as stated earlier, the
principles and the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court is not in dispute, but the said cases
relied on by the learned counsel for accused is not applicable to the facts and circumstance of the
present case, as the onus of proving would shift to the complainant at the cost of repetition, only
when the accused makes out a case and raises probable defence to dislodge the case of complainant
thereby making the complainant to place before this Court further material to satisfy the rebuttal of
the case.
48. In the present case accused has not made out any such rebuttal to shift the onus of proving on
the complainant. Further, once the defence taken by the learned counsel for accused with regard to
'Oppige Patra', which has been admitted in one of the affidavit filed by accused and marked as
Ex.D1, would be of no assistance to accused as the said 'Oppige Patra' is not produced before the
trial Court and when such document is not before Court, it cannot be said that it has been accepted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 11
Sri. Sadashiv S/O Baburao Bhovi, vs Smt. Shushilabai W/O Rayappa ... on 13 October, 2020
and admitted by complainant.
49. Therefore, under the facts and circumstance of the case and the reasons stated above, I do not
find any reason to interfere with the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed by the
trial Court and up held by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Accordingly Point No.1 is answered in the
affirmative and Point No.2 is also answered in the affirmative as no grounds are made out for any
interference of the orders of Court below. Accordingly, I pass the following order:
ORDER (1) The revision petitions are dismissed.; (2) The judgment and order of
conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court and confirmed by the first
Appellate Court in all these cases are up held.;
(3) With regard to Crl.R P No.2284/2011, wherein the judgment of the trial Court is
modified to the effect that the accused is sentenced to pay fine of Rs.1,95,000/- in
default to pay fine to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of three months.
Out of the said fine amount, a sum of
Rs.1,90,000/- shall be paid to the
complainant as compensation and
remaining R s.5,000/- shall be remitted to the account of the State.
(4) The only modification made hereinabove is with effect to simple imprisonment of
five months, which was imposed on the accused by the trial Court is set aside. This
modification is made in view of the mitigating fact that the accused is aged more than
65 years and it is submitted that he is getting treatment for Cancer and under such
circumstance in view of the sentencing policy, the above modification is made;
(5) It is further made clear that any amount in deposit either before this Court or first
Appellate Court or trial Court, the complainant shall be entitled to withdraw the
same;
(6) Considering the fact that these revision petitions are of the year 2011 and the
complaint having been filed in the year 2008, accused - revision petitioners are
directed to pay the remaining balance amount within a period of two months from
today.
Sd/-
JUDGE VK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42338959/ 12
