St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School
Education on 4 December, 2020
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
W.P.(MD).No.10334 of 2012
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 04.12.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
W.P.(MD).No.10334 of 2012
St.Mary's Boys Higher Secondary School,
Rep. by its Correspondent Br.S.Amalraj,
Millarpuram,
Tuticorin-628 008. ... Petitioner
-Vs-
1.Director of School Education,
Chennai-6.
2.Chief Educational Officer,
Tuticorin, Tuticorin District.
3.The District Educational Officer,
Tuticorin, Tuticorin District. ... Respondents
Prayer: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to call for the records
pertaining to the order passed by the first respondent in his proceedings
Mu.Mu.No.93492/W5/E2/2011, dated 26.06.2012 and quash the same
and direct the respondents to upgrade one post of physical Director
Grade-II as Physical Director Grade-I with effect from 02.06.2005 so as
to enable the petitioner to upgrade Mr.S.Kulanthai as Physical Director
Grade-I to the petitioner school.
http://www.judis.nic.in
1/13
(cid:12) W.P.(MD).No.10334 of 2012
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 1
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
For Petitioner : Mr.V.Panneer Selvam
M/s.C.S.Associates
For Respondents : Mr.J.Gunaseelanmuthiah
Additional Government Pleader
ORDER
The writ petition is filed by the correspondent of the school to quash the order of rejection, dated
26.06.2012 and direct the respondents to upgrade one post of Physical Director Grade-II as Physical
Director Grade-I with effect from 02.06.2005 so as to enable the petitioner to upgrade
Mr.S.Kulanthai as Physical Director Grade-I to the petitioner school.
2.The learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the petitioner school was started in the year
1969 as High School and thereafter, upgraded as Higher Secondary School in 1979. Two posts of
Physical Education Teacher were sanctioned for the petitioner school. On 13.12.1980, one Physical
Education Teacher post was upgraded as Physical Director Grade-II. In the said post one
Mr.S.Kulanthai is working. The grievance of the petitioner is that the petitioner is entitled for
sanctioning of three posts of Physical Education Teacher and in the http://www.judis.nic.in event of
having three posts of Physical Education Teacher, then, one post is to be upgraded as Physical
Director Grade-I. The learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that the said Mr.Kulanthai is
working as Physical Director Grade-II and considering the students strength of the petitioner
school, the post must be upgraded as Physical Director Grade-I with effect from 02.06.2005. The
petitioner school earlier filed W.P.(MD)No.11807 of 2011 and this Court passed an order directing
the authorities to consider the representation. Based on the directions of this Court, the impugned
order has been passed by the respondents rejecting the claim of the petitioner for upgrading the post
of Physical Director Grade-II as Physical Director Grade-I with effect from 02.06.2005 on the
ground that the school is sanctioned with one post of Physical Education Teacher and one post of
Physical Director Grade-II. As per the Government Order issued in G.O.Ms.No.73, School Education
Department, dated 19.03.2010, if three Physical Education Teacher posts are sanctioned in a school,
then, one post shall be upgraded as Physical Director Grade-II and therefore, the upgradation of the
post of Physical Director Grade-II from Physical Director Grade-I cannot be granted.
3.The learned counsel for the petitioner referred G.O.Ms.525, http://www.judis.nic.in School
Education (D1) Department, dated 29.12.1997 issued by the Government regarding the revision of
norms for assessment of grant for teaching posts. As per the Government Order “when the strength
in classes VI to X in the High Schools exceeds 250, one post of Physical Education Teacher will be
sanctioned and for every additional strength of 300, one additional post of Physical Education
Teacher will be sanctioned subject to a maximum of 3”. Therefore, the petitioner school is entitled
for three posts of Physical Education Teacher. If three posts of Physical Education Teacher is
sanctioned, then, the upgradation is to be given from Physical Director Grade-II to Grade-I as per
G.O.Ms.No.73 and accordingly, the petitioner school is eligible to get upgradation as per the relief
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 2
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
sought for in the present writ petition.
4.The learned counsel for the petitioner referred the Judgment of the Hon’ble Division Bench of this
Court in the case of Director of School Education, Chennai Vs. K.Uma reported in 2010 (2) MLJ 277
and the relevant paragraph Nos.23 and 24 are extracted hereunder:-
“..23.As stated above, the normal understanding of the above government order with
regard to Physical Education Teachers is that the High Schools would have maximum
number of three Physical Education Teachers and Higher Secondary
http://www.judis.nic.in School would be added one more Physical Education
Director in the name of Physical Education Director. However, there cannot be any
ceiling with regard to the strength of teachers as the same is bound to vary/increase
as per the strength of the student's. When the student strength is increased, the
ceiling has to be removed and required more Physical Education Teachers are to be
appointed, otherwise the students would suffer irreparably and the government order
would go against the very scheme of education.
24.Hence G.O.Ms.No.525 needs to be given a liberal interpretation and the
government is at liberty to reconsider the matter and issue reasonable viable and
appropriate norms with regard to appointment of physical education teachers in the
schools as per the strength of students, considering the observations made by this
Court expeditiously..”
5.Relying on the said Judgment, the learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that the
importance of the Physical Education Teacher in the school is emphasized by the Hon’ble Division
Bench and therefore, there cannot be any restriction for sanctioning of Physical Education Teacher
in a school where adequate post is available. The principles of restriction of the post of Physical
Education Teacher is not appreciated by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court and therefore, the
writ petition is to be allowed.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6.The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the respondents opposed the
contentions by stating that the petitioner school is not entitled for the relief as such sought for in the
present writ petition. The petitioner school is sanctioned with two posts of Physical Education
Teacher alone. Out of the two sanctioned posts, one post is already upgraded as Physical Director
Grade-II and the said Mr.Kulanthai is working now in the said post. As per the Government Order
issued in G.O.Ms.No.73, dated 19.03.2010, only in case of availability of three sanctioned posts of
Physical Education Teacher, then, alone one post of Physical Director Grade-I can be sanctioned and
not otherwise. When the petitioner school is having only two sanctioned posts of Physical Education
Teacher, they are not eligible to seek upgradation as per the Government Order issued in
G.O.Ms.No.73.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 3
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
7.Considering the arguments, this Court is of the considered opinion that sanctioning of the post is
the Government policy, which is issued in G.O.Ms.No.525, School Education (D1) Department,
dated 29.12.1997. Thus, fixation of staff strength in Elementary/High/Higher Secondary Schools for
the purpose of State Aid is to be considered based on the said Government Order. The said
Government Order as stated in http://www.judis.nic.in the aforementioned paragraph stipulates
that “when the strength in classes VI to X in High Schools exceeds 250, one post of Physical
Education Teacher will be sanctioned and for every additional strength of 300, one additional post
of Physical Education Teacher will be sanctioned subject to a maximum of 3”. The Government
Order unambiguously states that one post of Physical Education Teacher will be sanctioned in the
students strength exceeds 250, and for every additional strength of 300, another post of Physical
Education Teacher will be sanctioned. However, the maximum post of three alone is the ceiling
limit. Thus, any other school is not entitled to have more than three physical Education Teachers.
8.With reference to G.O.Ms.No.73, dated 19.03.2010, which was issued regarding upgradation to the
post of Physical Education Teacher as Physical Director Grade-II and Physical Director Grade-I. The
said Government Order is passed enabling the Director to consider the students strength and
accordingly, issue order in accordance with the Government policy issued in G.O.Ms.No.525.
Paragraph No.2 of the Government Order clearly states that in a Government Aided Higher
Secondary School, if three posts of Physical Education Teacher is http://www.judis.nic.in
sanctioned as per the students strength and as per G.O.Ms.No.525, actions may be taken by the
Director for upgradation to the post of Physical Director. The Government Order does not speak
about the manner in which, such upgradation is to be given. However, it is made clear that only in
the event of sanctioning three posts of Physical Education Teacher, upgradation shall be given to the
post of Physical Director.
9.In the present writ petition, the petitioner admittedly is having two sanctioned post of Physical
Education Teacher, out of which, one post is already upgraded as Physical Director Grade-II. As per
the Government policy issued in G.O.Ms.No.525, dated 29.12.1997 only if three posts of Physical
Education Teacher is sanctioned, then alone the upgradation is to be considered based on the
Government order issued in G.O.Ms.No.73, dated 19.03.2010.
10.The counter affidavit filed by the second respondent/Chief Educational Officer reveals that as per
G.O.Ms.No.73, School Education Department, dated 19.03.2010 and G.O.Ms.No.525, School
Education Department, dated 29.12.1997, if a school had two Physical Education
http://www.judis.nic.in Teacher and one Physical Education Teacher Grade-II, the post may be
upgraded as Physical Director Grade-I. Contrarily, the petitioner school has only one Physical
Education Teacher and one Physical Director Grade-II and therefore, the post of Physical Director
Grade-II could not be upgraded as Grade-I.
11.The post of Physical Director Grade-II could be upgraded as Grade-I, if the school had two
Physical Education Teacher and Physical Director Grade-II as per the G.O.Ms.No.525, dated
29.12.1997. Under these circumstances, the claim of the writ petitioner for upgradation to the post
of Physical Director Grade-II as Physical Director Grade-I was rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 4
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
12.This Court is of the considered opinion that the Government policy issued in G.O.Ms.No.525,
dated 29.12.1997 cannot be deviated for the purpose of sanctioning of post or for grant of
upgradation. Sanctioning of post or for grant of upgradation, involve payment of Government salary
to the teachers. Thus, whenever a school submits proposal for sanctioning of post or for grant of
upgradation, the http://www.judis.nic.in competent educational authorities must conduct a
thorough enquiry with reference to the students strength and the other criterias with reference to
the Government policy and accordingly, pass appropriate orders. In the present case, the writ
petitioner school is sanctioned with two posts of Physical Education Teacher, out of which, one post
was upgraded as Physical Director Grade-II and for further upgradation, there must be three
sanctioned post in the petitioner school. Admittedly, the three posts are not sanctioned and two post
of Physical Education Teacher alone is sanctioned.
13.This being the factum established, this Court has no hesitation in arriving a conclusion that the
petitioner has not established any acceptable ground for the purpose of grant of upgradation as such
sought for in the writ petition. However, it is made clear that the petitioner school is at liberty to
approach the competent educational authorities, if there is any increase in the students strength and
if they are otherwise eligible for additional sanctioning of post. In the event of submitting any such
proposal, the competent educational authorities are bound to consider with reference to the
inspection report of the competent educational authorities and take a decision and pass
http://www.judis.nic.in appropriate orders in accordance with the Government policy.
14.With these directions, the writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.
04.12.2020
Index : Yes/No
Internet : Yes/No
sji
To
1.Director of School Education,
Chennai-6.
2.Chief Educational Officer,
Tuticorin, Tuticorin District.
3.The District Educational Officer,
Tuticorin, Tuticorin District.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 5
St.Mary'S Boys Higher Secondary School vs Director Of School Education on 4 December, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
S.M.SUBRAMANIAM,J.
sji
http://www.judis.nic.in
04.12.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161911081/ 6
