State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on
30 July, 2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRAA No.12/2006 IA No.07/2010[46/2010]
Reserved on:10.07.2025
Pronounced on:30.07.2025
State of J&K through SSP Anantnag ... Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, Sr. AAG with
Mr. Mohd Younis Hafiz, Assisting Counsel.
Vs.
1. Sabzar Ahmad Sofi
2. Tanveer Ahmad Sofi
(Sons of Mohd Yousuf Sofi)
3. Mohd Yousuf Sofi
4. Gull Sofi
(Sons of Ama Sofi)
All residents of Jablipora Tehsil Kulgam,
District Anantnag.
...Respondent(s)
ent(s)
Through: Mr. H. Furrahi, Advocate
Mr. S. T. Hussain, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Nida Nazir, Advocate for Complainant.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJAY PARIHAR, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
'Sanjay Parihar (J).
1. This Acquittal Appeal is laid against the judgement dated 05.03.2005 (for short the 'impugned
judgement') passed by the learned Sessions Judge Anantnag, (for short the 'trial court') in Criminal
Challan No. 1B/60 Sessions, arising out of case FIR No.149/2001, under Sections 302/34 RPC of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 1
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
Police Station Bijbehera, in terms whereof the respondents stood acquitted of the charge of offences
under Sections 302/201/34 RPC, which judgement is questioned on the premise that the trial court
finding is erroneous, as it has wrongly appreciated evidence examined during the trial and has given
benefit of doubt to the respondents only on the ground that there were contradictions which,
however, were of minor in nature and did not prove fatal for the prosecution. That the trial court has
failed in appreciating the evidence of the prosecution particularly of PW-2 Sher Ali Khan, PW-3
Akbar Ahmed Khan, and PW Gh. Qadir, who clearly had established that it was respondent No.2
(Tanveer Ahmad) who had given a spade blow to the deceased on his head, whereas, respondent No.
1 (Sabzar Sofi) gave spade blow to the deceased on his back. All the witnesses have unanimously
corroborated the incident, but the trial court has misdirected itself while holding that there was no
corroboration in the deposition of the witness. The trial court has also failed to consider testimonies
of the independent witnesses i.e. PW-7 Mohd Ibrahim and PW-6 Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit, who had
established the involvement of the respondents in the crime which occurred on 18.06.2001. That,
the judgement is erroneous because all the circumstances relevant to the prosecution are sufficient
enough to fasten liability on respondents, as they have not been considered and appreciated.
2. Briefly stating facts giving rise to the filing of present Appeal have got its genesis in the incident
dated 18.06.2001, when deceased Ghulam Hassan Khan had gone to his paddy fields where he
started blocking water channel leading to the paddy fields of the respondents, which process of
blocking of water channel lead to an altercation, whereby it is alleged that the accused who were
armed with agricultural appliances i.e. shovel (Liven/ Belcha and Dandas) beat the deceased with
intention to kill him, and because of that beating, the deceased suffered fatal injuries who was first
taken to home, thereafter to nearby Hospital at Bijbehera, from there to SKIMS Srinagar, where on
19.06.2001 he succumbs to the injuries.
3. Initially FIR under Section 307 RPC was registered and on his demise, same was converted into
Section 302 RPC. The autopsy was conducted by a team of doctors and the report was laid against
the respondents. On the strength of complaint lodged by PW-1 Ama Khan (father of deceased), it
was alleged that the incident was perpetuated by accused Sabzar Ahmad Sofi, Tanveer Ahmad Sofi,
Yousuf Sofi and Gul Sofi, who were arrested on 26.06.2001, and during investigation, it was found
that all the accused, with a common intention to commit killing of the deceased, had given him
beating in the manner that accused Sabzar Ahmad Sofi gave blow of spade (Liven) over the head of
the deceased causing grievous injuries and because of that impact he fell down, thereafter the other
accused beat him with other agricultural appliances (Belcha and Dandas), later on, the'Liven' was
recovered at the behest of the accused. During autopsy it was revealed, that the deceased had died
because of head injury caused by hard object (not sharp edged) which had led to the fracture of skull
bone and also led to collection of blood in the brain leading to damage of vital parts.
4. The formal charges were laid against the respondents for offences under Sections 302/34/201
RPC to which they pleaded not guilty.
5. The prosecution examined complainant (father of the deceased), PW-2 Sher Ali Khan, PW-3
Akbar Ahmad Khan, (both sons of the deceased) PW Gh. Qadir Zargar (brother-in-law of the
deceased), PW-5 Gh. Qadir Parray, PW-6 Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit, PW-7 Mohd Ibrahim Bhat, PW-9
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 2
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
Gh. Mohi ud din Wagay, PW-11 Ashiq Iqbal, PW-12 Mohd Khalil Sofi, PW-16 Constable Mohd
Younis, PW-17 Dr. Manzoor Hussain Wani, PW-19 Dr. Nissar Ahmad, besides, Inspector Farooq
Ahmad Reshi.
6. After recording of evidence and in terms of Section 342 Cr.PC, the incriminating evidence was put
to the respondents, to which they replied that the prosecution has produced only interested
witnesses, whereas, the other independent witnesses have not corroborated the version of interested
witnesses. They are innocent and have been falsely implicated. In defence, the respondents
examined DW-1 Mohd Sultan Bhat, DW-2 Gh. Hassan Sofi and DW-3 Hassan Parray.
7. The trial Court, after examining the evidence and the law cited at bar, returned the finding of
acquittal holding that PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 all were interested witnesses, whose presence at the scene of
crime was doubtful, inasmuch as, these witnesses had made exaggeration which is contrary to the
medical record. They have also shown partisan character thus, their testimony is full of doubt, even
testimonies of independent witnesses were also doubtful. Similarly, narration of PW-9 Gh. Mohi ud
din Wagay is also contrary to the charge sheet.
8. Insofar as the evidence relating to discovery of weapon of offence was concerned, there too the
trial court found that identity of weapon of offence has not been clarified and the nature of weapon
of offence being ordinary agricultural appliances which were commonly available, and, therefore, it
was difficult to hold or presume that any weapon was used by the respondents in commission of the
incident. It therefore, found that the prosecution case is full of discrepancies and improvement and
it has failed to clear the doubt, whereas, the defence witness had clearly qualified that the deceased
was a short tempered person who had an altercation with the respondents but was stopped by his
two sons, and that no quarrel or fight took place between the deceased and the accused. Accordingly,
the trial Court has proceeded to record finding of acquittal in favour of the respondents.
9. The main limb on which the finding of acquittal is questioned by the appellants relates to, that the
trial court has misdirected itself by not properly appreciating the testimonies of PW-2 Sher Ali
Khan, PW-3 Akbar Ahmed Khan and PW Gh. Qadir. It had made mountain out of minor
contradictions which led to rendering a finding which on the face of it is perverse, its findings being
erroneous does not sustain in the eyes of law.
10. It is relevant to state here that the complainant had also engaged a counsel who too had
submitted arguments in rebuttal to the acquittal earned by the respondents/accused. It was argued
that even from the defence version the incident dated 18.06.2001 is proved and once there was
presence of four respondents at the scene of crime and where altercation took place resulted into
death of deceased, there was no reason to disbelieve the prosecution case merely because PWs 1 to 4
happen to be close relatives of the deceased, would not have made their testimonies unreliable when
all the four withstood the cross examination and defence had not been able to impeach their
testimonies. The trial court has led importance to discrepancy in the weapon of offence of spade and
lathi which were immaterial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 3
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
11. On the other hand, supporting the findings returned by the trial court, the learned counsel for the
respondents contended that, even if there was altercation on spot but, there is not any clenching
evidence that the respondents have committed any act of inflicting fatal injury on the deceased. The
testimonies of witnesses are full of exaggeration. Had there been the incident, then the deceased
would not have received a single blow as is stated by the Medical Officer which belies the
prosecution version of four respondents who were able bodied persons of having inflicted any
murderous assault. It was further argued that the trial court has minutely gone through the evidence
thus, the finding returned by it does not call for any interference.
12. We have learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the original record of the trial
court.
13. Before proceeding ahead, we would like to give brief description of testimonies of Prosecution
Witnesses: -
PW-1 Ama Khan, happens to be the father of the deceased, who is found narrating
that he saw the incident when accused Mohd Yousuf Sofi gave a 'Liven' (agricultural
appliance) blow on the head of the deceased, whereas, co-accused Sabzar Sofi gave
another blow with that very nature of weapon on the waist of the deceased. He
claimed to have reached on spot after hearing noise. He further admitted that Mst.
Fatima, Mst. Zeba, and Mst. Zaitooni were also accompanying the deceased when he
went towards fields for agricultural work. Witness claimed to have been told by one
child about the incident and thereafter he rushed to the spot. On 19.06.2001 he
presented an application to the Police. This witness when confronted with the
statement given under Section 161 CrPC had found narrating that he did not divulge
to the police that he was the first to reach on spot. When asked had he himself
witnessed the occurrence, he avoided the answer. He is further found stating that he
saw blood oozing from the head and waist of the deceased, and the clothes of the
deceased got blood stains. He further has narrated that after being hit by 'Liven' the
deceased fell down and other accused, armed with sticks beat the deceased damaging
arms and legs. PW-2 Sher Ali Khan, happens to be son of the deceased, claimed that
he was present at the scene of crime when his father was planting paddy saplings,
when the accused came and beat his father in the manner Yousuf Sofi gave spade hit
on his head, whereas other gave hit on waist and thereafter beat him with sticks. He
and his brother Akbar Ali Khan were not allowed to come forward in defence of their
father. On cross examination, he had admitted that he was at Bijbehera in connection
with some work and at 8:15 PM he had come back from Bijbehera. PW-3 Akbar
Ahmed Khan, happens to be another son of the deceased, claimed that his father was
working in the agriculture field and while closing the water channel, the accused
objected to it, which gave rise to some altercation with Yousuf Sofi, who gave spade
hit on the head of the deceased with the result deceased fell down there. PW-6
Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit came and caught hold of the spade which resulted into blade
of the spade felling on one side whereas, the handle remained in the hands of said
witness. Sabzar Sofi also gave blow with spade. On cross examination, has stated that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 4
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
though on that day he was with his father in the morning but admitted that while he
was playing with boys at Jablipora, when in evening he heard the noise from the land
side where his father had gone for closing water channel.
PW Gh. Qadir Zargar (Brother-in-law of the deceased) claimed that his sister had
gone with her husband to the paddy fields, whereas the son of deceased was at home,
when he went towards the field of deceased there he saw accused assaulting the
deceased. On cross examination, he said that he was working in PHE department and
left office at 4:15 PM reached at the occurrence at 5:30 PM. He further claimed that
at the scene of crime, around 30 to 40 farmers were working in their respective fields.
He further stated that in the incident Mushtaq Ahmad tried to snatch shovel (Belcha)
from the hands of Yousuf Sofi. PW-5 Gh. Qadir Parray is found narrating that in the
morning deceased and the accused had some altercation, both the parties were armed
with sticks. He did not allow the parties to fight and asked them to leave. In the
evening he came to be know that the deceased had been given beating.
PW-6 Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit is found narrating that he was working in his field
when he saw accused Yousuf and deceased quarrelling with each other. He
intervened, Yousuf was having a Belcha with him, he attacked deceased but the blow
was intercepted by witness, as a result Belcha was thrown away and its handle
remained in the hands of Yousuf. It was at that time appellant Sabzar came who gave
a blow of 'Liven' at the back of head of the deceased. The deceased fell down in the
mud thereafter was taken to home. He claimed to have witnessed that occurrence in
evening time and admitted that when he snatched shovel (Belcha) from accused
Yousuf Sofi, its blade was thrown away, whereas its handle (wooden part) remained
in the hands of Yousuf Sofi.
PW-7 Mohd Ibrahim is found narrating that at about 8 PM while he was on his shop,
one person came informing that deceased had been beaten by someone and was lying
unconscious at home. He therefore went to house of deceased. There he told the
former of deceased that he should be taken to the Hospital. He saw swelling of head
and was told that deceased had been beaten. The deceased was first taken to his shop
and since his condition did not improve he was taken to Hospital. PW-11 Ashiq Iqbal,
is found narrating that police came along with accused Sabzar Sofi and took him to
his courtyard, where he identified the place where underneath branches he had kept
spade Liven' which was recovered regarding, which seizure memo was prepared,
which is in the nature of EXPW1/1. Three days after the occurrence he went to the
place where weapon of offence was recovered in his presence. The recovery was
signed by Khalil Sofi. Whether the recovery was Liven or Belcha, he did not
remember but admitted that at the time of recovery of weapon of offence Sabzar Sofi
along with villagers was present. PW-12 Mohd Khalil Sofi too is found narrating that
Sabzar gave recovery of 'Liven' kept underneath a heap of branches from his
courtyard. He too corroborated EXPW1/1. He says that 'Liven' and 'Belcha' are
commonly used agricultural appliances, that are kept at almost in every home,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 5
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
nobody can say with certainty whether 'liven or Belcha' was the one that had been
used for the commission of offence.
PW-16 Constable Mohd Younis says that during investigation, police recovered
identity card of accused Sabzar Sofi regarding which seizure was prepared as
EXPW/8/1 and it was during investigation that Sabzar Sofi gave clue about
spade/liven with which he had given blow to the deceased and kept the same under
the heap of branches of trees in his compound. The recovery is exhibited as
EXPW/16/1.
PW-Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Wani, happens to be a Medical expert who found only one
injury on the head of the deceased which could be caused by blunt weapon, however,
he did not remember whether weapon of offence was shown. Injury found over head
of the deceased could also be caused if the victim had a fall upon a hard object with
considerable force. That because of the injury there was subdural hemorrhage leading
to collection of blood and Haematoma because there was fracture of skull bone.
Deceased was brought in semiconscious position with swelling on right parieto
occipital region.
Defence Evidence:
DW-1 Mohd Sultan Bhat claims that there was quarrel between the deceased and
accused party. On 18.06.2001 at 5 PM when Sabzar Sofi was working in his land, the
deceased came there and went to close the water channel leading towards the land of
the accused; which led to altercation, then children of the deceased came who took
him home. But, again at 6 PM deceased came on spot and again started altercation, at
about 8 PM when the witness was working in field at that time he came to know that
the deceased had become unconscious who was taken to shop of Mohd Ibrahim and
then to the Hospital, he claims that he Isaq Hameed Bhat heard that deceased
became unconscious because of fall.
DW-2 Gh. Hassan Sofi claims that he was collecting paddy saplings, when at 6 PM
there was quarrel between the accused and deceased because the latter had blocked
the water channel of the accused party which led to altercation. The deceased was
short tempered and annoying everybody. His sister, daughter and sister in law were
also accompanying him when his two sons came to took him back home, nobody gave
any blow to the deceased.
DW-3 Hassan Parray too has reported on the similar lines.
This in nutshell is the evidence of the prosecution
14. Before considering the case setup by the appellants in reversal of the judgement of the trial court,
it is apt to first have in view as to what are the principles that ought to be considered by the appellate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 6
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
court while hearing the appeal against acquittal. The Apex Court in "Subramanya Vs. State of
Karnataka" 2023 (11) SCC 255 after considering the case law on the subject observed in para 41 and
42 as under:-
41. In Ajit Savant Majagvai v. State of Karnataka, para 16, this Court set out the
following principles that would regulate and govern the hearing of an appeal by the
High Court against an order of acquittal passed by the trial court:
"16. This Court has thus explicitly and clearly laid down the principles which would
govern and regulate the hearing of appeal by the High Court against an order of
acquittal passed by the trial court. These principles have been set out in innumerable
cases and may be reiterated as under:-
(1) In an appeal against an order of acquittal, the High Court possesses all the
powers, and nothing less than the powers it possesses while hearing an appeal
against an order of conviction.
(2) The High Court has the power to reconsider the whole issue, reappraise the
evidence and come to its own conclusion and findings in place of the findings
recorded by the trial court, if the said findings are against the weight of the evidence
on record, or in other words, perverse.
(3) Before reversing the finding of acquittal, the High Court has to consider each
ground on which the order of acquittal was based and to record its own reasons for
not accepting those grounds and not subscribing to the view expressed by the trial
court that the accused is entitled to acquittal.
(4) In reversing the finding of acquittal, the High Court has to keep in view the fact
that the presumption of innocence is still available in favour of the accused and the
same stands fortified and strengthened by the order of acquittal passed in his favour
by the trial court.
(5) If the High Court, on a fresh scrutiny and reappraisal of the evidence and other
material on record, is of the opinion that there is another view which can be
reasonably taken, then the view which favours the accused should be adopted.
(6) The High Court has also to keep in mind that the trial court had the advantage of
looking at the demeanour of witnesses and observing their conduct in the Court
especially in the witness box.
(7) The High Court has also to keep in mind that even at that stage, the accused was
entitled to benefit of doubt. The doubt should be such as a reasonable person would
honestly and conscientiously entertain as to the guilt of the accused."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 7
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
42. This Court in Chandrappa highlighted that there is one significant difference in exercising power
while hearing an appeal against acquittal by the appellate court. The appellate court would not
interfere where the judgment impugned is based on evidence and the view taken was reasonable and
plausible. This is because the appellate court will determine the fact that there is presumption in
favour of the accused and the accused is entitled to get the benefit of doubt but if it decides to
interfere it should assign reasons for differing with the decision of acquittal. After referring to a
catena of judgments, this Court culled out the following general principles regarding the powers of
the Appellate Court while dealing with an appeal against an order of acquittal in the following
words:
"42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general
principles regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal
against an order of acquittal emerge:
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach
its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling reasons", "good and
sufficient grounds", "very strong circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring
mistakes", etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an
appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of
language" to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal
than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own
conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused.
Firstly, the presumption of innocence is available to him under the fundamental principle of
criminal jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty
by a competent court of law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of
his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate
court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."
15. In view of the aforesaid legal proposition we are required to ponder over the evidence, so as to
examine whether the findings returned by the trial court was only conclusion that could have been
reached out on the strength of evidence before it. We understand that since the respondents have
earned acquittal there is double presumption in their favour but we have to examine as to whether
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 8
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
the conclusion reached at by the trial court was the only which could have been possible.
PW-1 Ama Khan, PW-2 Sher Ali Khan, PW-3 Akbar Ahmad Khan and PW-Gh. Qadir Zargar, happen
to be close relatives of the deceased. The question would arise as to whether the trial court was right
in discarding their evidence because the defence had argued that not only they were interested
witnesses but had been introduced by the prosecution when the fact remains that they were not even
the witnesses.
16. PW Ama Khan who happens to be the father of the deceased is admitting that he reached at the
crime scene after he was told that there was scuffle between the deceased and the accused which
itself negates his position of being an eye witness. PW Sher Ali Khan was working at Bijbhera,
though he claims to be eye witness but on thorough examination of his testimony we concur with the
trial court that this witness too had no acquaintance as to what happened at the scene of the crime.
Similarly, PW Akbar Ahmed Khan was playing with his friends when the incident took place. He was
at Jablipora, which is at some distance from the scene of the crime, so there is stronger probability
that he too has been introduced by the prosecution only to lend credibility which in a way amounts
to padding of evidence. PW Gh. Qadir Zargar is brother in law of the deceased. He was at home
when the incident has happened rather he claims that his sister (wife of the deceased) was
accompanying the later and that he reached the scene of the crime when the assault was either
taking place or had already happened. His testimony too becomes doubtful.
17. Once that is the case then the only witnesses whose statements inspire confidence is the
narration of PW-6 Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit and PW Mohd Ibrahim. The former is categorically
found narrating that while he was working in his field he saw accused Yousuf quarrelling with the
deceased because the later had diverted the water that was leading to the fields of the accused by
blocking it which made Yousuf furious who was carrying a Belcha with which he tried to hit the
deceased but that blow was intercepted by witness. In the meantime, co-accused was also present
there who was carrying a Liven with that he gave a blow over the head of the deceased and
accordingly he fell down. When the testimony of this witness is examined in the light of the cross
examination, we have reasons to hold that this witness is giving true statement of account. Because
the medical examination of deceased done by Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Wani, Dr. Farooq Ahmad Reshi
goes on to show that the deceased had Hematoma over head which was caused by blunt object that
led to fracture of skull bone. There was no oozing of blood rather the medical expert found swelling
of brain. This fact is also strengthened from the statement of PW Mohd Ibrahim who was a
pharmacist and who was called by near relatives of the deceased to examine the deceased after he
was brought back home unconscious from the incident site. There PW Mohd Ibrahim is found
stating to have examined the deceased who was unconscious, had swelling of brain which exhibited
being hit by a hard object. This witness too found that except head injury there was no other injury
on the body of the deceased and to the same effect is the medical report as well.
18. The aforesaid discussion, thus lead us to believe that PW Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit and PW Mohd
Ibrahim were the natural witnesses and their testimony had also not been impeached by way of
cross examination rather they get strength from deposition of DW Mohd Sultan Bhat who is
categorically found narrating that it was Sabzar Sofi who along with his brother was working in their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 9
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
land when the deceased came there and went to close the water channel leading to the land of the
accused which led to an altercation. This evidence is strong enough to prove the presence of accused
Sabzar Sofi and Mohd Yousuf at the scene of crime. Almost all the witnesses are stating that it was
paddy season, the accused as well as the deceased were busy in cultivation of paddy so it was but
natural consequences that the parties would clamor for usage of sufficient water for irrigation of
their respective enclosures. So when the deceased obstructed the water channel leading to the land
of the accused, it was but natural that the accused would respond and PW Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit is
categorically found narrating that when the deceased tried to block water channel, accused Yousuf
Sofi was carrying a Belcha and with that he tried to hit the deceased but the blow was intercepted by
the witness and because of that interception, the iron part of the Belcha got separated and fell on
ground whereas, the wooden part remained in the hands of the accused. However, he fairly is
describing that accused Yousuf Sofi did not hit the deceased with wooden part which was left with
his hands. Witness further would say that it was Sabzar Sofi who was carrying a Leven with that, he
gave blow with the blunt part of the weapon on the head of the deceased which was corroborated by
the medical report and testimony given by Dr. Manzoor Ahmad Wani and Dr. Farooq Ahmad Reshi.
There is clenching evidence on record that the deceased had received blunt injury over head which
led to swelling and was in the nature of Haematoma, because of accumulation of blood due to hitting
by a hard object, which object has been subsequently recovered from the possession of accused
Sabzar Ahmad Sofi.
PW Mohd Khalil Sofi, PW Mohd Younis and PW Ashiq Iqbal are the three police personnel are
found narrating that after Sabzar was arrested he gave recovery of 'Liven' kept underneath the heap
of branches of his courtyard which is an agricultural appliance.
19. The trial court though had taken a view of recovery being shrouded with suspicion; however,
when we examine the testimonies of these three police personnel we do not subscribe to the trial
court's view rather we find that the witnesses were posted in that very police station and while
accused Sabzar Sofi was arrested he made disclosure leading to recovery of Liven which seizure is
recorded as EXPW8/1 and EXPW1/1. Not only the recovery but its seizure subsequently along with
the place from where the recovery was affected has been fully corroborated by said three witnesses.
20. The learned trial court was of the view that since the deceased was hyper, so there was every
likelihood that the injury sustained by him might have been by fall which conclusion the trial judge
appears to have arrived on an erroneous appreciation of facts on record. This is because PW
Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit is categorically found narrating that after the deceased was hit with the
Liven on his head, he fell with face down in the water channel which was muddy and later on his
family came in and took him home. PW Mohd Ibrahim corroborates this aspect that he was called at
the house of the deceased to examine him as former was in unconscious position. So the question of
injury having been sustained by deceased because of fall was not clearly made out and the only
conclusion that gets strengthened from the evidence on record is that the deceased received head
injury with blunt object due to assault made by A-1 (Sabzar Ahmad Sofi).
The prosecution therefore, had successfully discharged the onus of proving incident dated
18.06.2001, where it was accused Sabzar Ahamd Sofi who gave blow with the blunt side of Liven
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 10
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
over the head of the deceased when the later tried to block water channel leading to the land of the
accused. There was enough material before the trial court to hold out that it was a case of single
blow with no further attempt made by the accused to pounce upon the deceased and inflict further
injuries on him.
21. Secondly, it is also proved from the evidence that the incident happened in a spur of moment
because while the accused Sabzar Ahmad Sofi along with his brother was cultivating their land in
which paddy had been sown, the deceased came and stopped the water channel leading to the land
of the accused which made the accused furious. It is but natural that the accused would have
responded to the actions of the deceased. However, because of said actions of the deceased that
should not have promoted the accused to inflict an assault of the nature to have resulted in a grave
injury on the head of the deceased. It has come to fore that the incident happened because of the
scuffle between the accused and the deceased which naturally points out that the accused did not
intend to inflict murderous assault however, in case the deceased would not have blocked water
channel there was no question of accused inflicting a murderous assault on the deceased. There is
absolutely no evidence to show that the accused had any kind of enmity with the deceased, it was an
incident which happened on the issue of sharing of water; that too in the paddy season wherein
demand of the water is high and everybody would like to take much of water for irrigating his
portion of land. In that background the prosecution had not been able to prove that the accused had
made any preparation to inflict a murderous assault on deceased.
22. The aforesaid discussion would thus, go on to show that the presence of respondents Sabzar
Ahmad Sofi and Yousuf Sofi is proved beyond any doubt, however, insofar as later respondent is
concerned the evidence against him is completely lacking, though he did made an attempt to assault
the deceased with Belcha, however, that was obstructed by PW Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit. So even if
the said accused intended to aim a blow on the deceased that was obstructed by intervention of the
aforesaid witness and given the fact that except head injury, no other injury had been shown to have
been caused to the person of the deceased, the trial court was right in acquitting accused Mohd
Yousuf Sofi. Similarly, the presence of accused Tanveer Sofi and Gull Sofi (now deceased) is doubtful
and we concur with the findings returned by the trial court to that extent.
23. Insofar as the culpability of appellant Sabzar Ahmad Sofi is concerned, his presence is clearly
established from the evidence on record, who was carrying Liven (agricultural appliance) by which
he gave one blow to the deceased which he received on his head and because of that blow the
deceased fell in the water channel and as per the witness he became unconscious. He was first taken
to his house, later on to the shop of PW Mohd Ibrahim and thereafter to the Hospital where he is
stated to have breathed last. So the death has taken place because of assault aimed towards him by
the respondent Sabzar Ahmad Sofi. Now the question would arise, whether there is material against
him to hold him guilty of offence of culpable homicide amounting to murder or otherwise. Before
leading to that discussion, it is profitable to take into consideration the precedence in this regard. In
case "Nanak Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan" 2014 (12) SCC 297, there was a dispute over the possession
of land wherein the accused was duly armed who entered into compound and started dismantling
the fence of the complainant, on being questioned the accused persons in a heat of passion attacked
the deceased and inflicted him with Barchhi blow on head which proved fatal. The High Court had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 11
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
convicted him for the offences under Sections 304 part II, read with 149 IPC. It was held in para 20
to 22 as under: -
"20. Looking at the nature of injuries sustained by the deceased and the
circumstances as enumerated above the conclusion is irresistible that the death was
caused by the acts of the accused done with the intention of causing such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death and therefore the offence would squarely come
within the first part of Section 304 IPC and the appellants would be liable to be
convicted for the said offence. The conviction of the appellants/accused under
Section 304 Part II read with Section 149 IPC by the High Court is liable to be set
aside.
21. We are of the considered view that imposition of 7 years rigorous imprisonment
on each of the appellants for the conviction under Section 304 Part I IPC would meet
the ends of justice. We sustain the other conviction and sentences imposed on the
appellants. We are also of the view that the appellants are not entitled for release on
probation.
22. In the result Criminal Appeal No.1990-92 of 2010 preferred by the State of
Rajasthan against the accused persons Nanak Ram, Mohan Ram and Surja Ram are
partly allowed and their conviction for the offence under Section 304 Part II IPC read
with Section 149 IPC and the sentences of 5 years' rigorous imprisonment each are
set aside and instead they are convicted for the offence under Section 304 Part I read
with Section 149 IPC and sentenced to undergo seven years' rigorous imprisonment
each. All other convictions and sentences imposed on them by the High Court are
maintained. Criminal Appeal No.1985 of 2010 and 342 of 2011 are dismissed."
24. In case titled "Jagrup Singh V. State of Haryana", 1981 (3) SCC 616, in that case the accused
armed with a Gandhala, along with others made a joint assault on deceased who was taken to the
Hospital and found to have suffered a lacerated wound 9 cm x 11/2 cm bone deep on the right
parietal region, 9 cm away from the tip of right pinna; margins of wound were red, irregular and
were bleeding on touch; the deceased had succumbed to injuries. The trial court had convicted him
of murder which was affirmed by the superior court and when the matter reached to the Apex court
it was held at para 14 as under: -
"14.... In our judgment, the High Court having held that it was more probable that the
appellant Jagrup Singh had also attended the marriage as the collateral, but
something happened on the spur of the moment which resulted in the infliction of the
injury by Jagrup Singh on the person of the deceased Chanan Singh which resulted in
his death, manifestly erred in applying Clause Thirdly of Section 300 of the Code. On
the finding that the appellant when he struck the deceased with the blunt side of the
gandhala in the heat of the moment, without pre-meditation and in a sudden fight,
the case was covered by Exception 4 to Section 300. It is not suggested that the
appellant had taken undue advantage of the situation or had acted in a cruel or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 12
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
unusual manner. Thus, all the requirements of Exception 4 are clearly met. That
being so, the conviction of the appellant Jagrup Singh, under Section 302 of the Code
cannot be sustained."
Further in case titled as "Anbazhagan Vs. State Represented by the Inspector of Police" 2023 SCC
Online SC 857, the Apex Court while dealing with difference between part I and part II of Section
304 of the Penal Code laid various principles for alteration of conviction and held in para 66 as
under: -
"66. Few important principles of law discernible from the aforesaid discussion may
be summed up thus:--
(1) When the court is confronted with the question, what offence the accused could be
said to have committed, the true test is to find out the intention or knowledge of the
accused in doing the act. If the intention or knowledge was such as is described in
Clauses (1) to (4) of Section 300 of the IPC, the act will be murder even though only a
single injury was caused. To illustrate 'A' is bound hand and foot. 'B' comes and
placing his revolver against the head of 'A', shoots 'A' in his head killing him
instantaneously. Here, there will be no difficulty in holding that the intention of 'B' in
shooting 'A' was to kill him, though only single injury was caused. The case would,
therefore, be of murder falling within Clause (1) of Section 300 of the IPC. Taking
another instance, 'B' sneaks into the bed room of his enemy 'A' while the latter is
asleep on his bed. Taking aim at the left chest of 'A', 'B' forcibly plunges a sword in
the left chest of 'A' and runs away. 'A' dies shortly thereafter. The injury to 'A' was
found to be sufficient in ordinary course of nature to cause death.
There may be no difficulty in holding that 'B' intentionally inflicted the particular injury found to be
caused and that the said injury was objectively sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death. This would bring the act of 'B' within Clause (3) of Section 300 of the IPC and render him
guilty of the offence of murder although only single injury was caused.
(2) Even when the intention or knowledge of the accused may fall within Clauses (1) to (4) of Section
300 of the IPC, the act of the accused which would otherwise be murder, will be taken out of the
purview of murder, if the accused's case attracts any one of the five exceptions enumerated in that
section. In the event of the case falling within any of those exceptions, the offence would be culpable
homicide not amounting to murder, falling within Part 1 of Section 304 of the IPC, if the case of the
accused is such as to fall within Clauses (1) to (3) of Section 300 of the IPC. It would be offence
under Part II of Section 304 if the case is such as to fall within Clause (4) of Section 300 of the IPC.
Again, the intention or knowledge of the accused may be such that only 2nd or 3rd part of Section
299 of the IPC, may be attracted but not any of the clauses of Section 300 of the IPC. In that
situation also, the offence would be culpable homicide not amounting to murder under Section 304
of the IPC. It would be an offence under Part I of that section, if the case fall within 2nd part of
Section 299, while it would be an offence under Part II of Section 304 if the case fall within 3rd part
of Section 299 of the IPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 13
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
(3) To put it in other words, if the act of an accused person falls within the first two clauses of cases
of culpable homicide as described in Section 299 of the IPC it is punishable under the first part of
Section 304. If, however, it falls within the third clause, it is punishable under the second part of
Section 304. In effect, therefore, the first part of this section would apply when there is "guilty
intention,(cid:128) whereas the second part would apply when there is no such intention, but there is "guilty
knowledge(cid:128). (4) Even if single injury is inflicted, if that particular injury was intended, and
objectively that injury was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the
requirements of Clause 3rdly to Section 300 of the IPC, are fulfilled and the offence would be
murder.
(5) Section 304 of the IPC will apply to the following classes of cases: (i) when the case falls under
one or the other of the clauses of Section 300, but it is covered by one of the exceptions to that
Section, (ii) when the injury caused is not of the higher degree of likelihood which is covered by the
expression "sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death(cid:128) but is of a lower degree of
likelihood which is generally spoken of as an injury "likely to cause death(cid:128) and the case does not fall
under Clause (2) of Section 300 of the IPC, (iii) when the act is done with the knowledge that death
is likely to ensue but without intention to cause death or an injury likely to cause death.
To put it more succinctly, the difference between the two parts of Section 304 of the IPC is that
under the first part, the crime of murder is first established and the accused is then given the benefit
of one of the exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC, while under the second part, the crime of murder
is never established at all. Therefore, for the purpose of holding an accused guilty of the offence
punishable under the second part of Section 304 of the IPC, the accused need not bring his case
within one of the exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC.
(6) The word "likely(cid:128) means probably and it is distinguished from more "possibly(cid:128). When chances
of happening are even or greater than its not happening, we may say that the thing will „probably
happen(cid:128). In reaching the conclusion, the court has to place itself in the situation of the accused and
then judge whether the accused had the knowledge that by the act he was likely to cause death. (7)
The distinction between culpable homicide (Section 299 of the IPC) and murder (Section 300 of the
IPC) has always to be carefully borne in mind while dealing with a charge under Section 302 of the
IPC. Under the category of unlawful homicides, both, the cases of culpable homicide amounting to
murder and those not amounting to murder would fall. Culpable homicide is not murder when the
case is brought within the five exceptions to Section 300 of the IPC. But, even though none of the
said five exceptions are pleaded or prima facie established on the evidence on record, the
prosecution must still be required under the law to bring the case under any of the four clauses of
Section 300 of the IPC to sustain the charge of murder. If the prosecution fails to discharge this
onus in establishing any one of the four clauses of Section 300 of the IPC, namely, 1stly to 4thly, the
charge of murder would not be made out and the case may be one of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder as described under Section 299 of the IPC.
(8) The court must address itself to the question of mensrea. If Clause thirdly of Section 300 is to be
applied, the assailant must intend the particular injury inflicted on the deceased. This ingredient
could rarely be proved by direct evidence. Inevitably, it is a matter of inference to be drawn from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 14
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
proved circumstances of the case. The court must necessarily have regard to the nature of the
weapon used, part of the body injured, extent of the injury, degree of force used causing the injury,
the manner of attack, the circumstances preceding and attendant on the attack.
(9) Intention to kill is not the only intention that makes a culpable homicide a murder. The intention
to cause injury or injuries sufficient in the ordinary cause of nature to cause death also makes a
culpable homicide a murder if death has actually been caused and intention to cause such injury or
injuries is to be inferred from the act or acts resulting in the injury or injuries.
(10) When single injury inflicted by the accused results in the death of the victim, no inference, as a
general principle, can be drawn that the accused did not have the intention to cause the death or
that particular injury which resulted in the death of the victim. Whether an accused had the required
guilty intention or not, is a question of fact which has to be determined on the facts of each case. (11)
Where the prosecution proves that the accused had the intention to cause death of any person or to
cause bodily injury to him and the intended injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death, then, even if he inflicts a single injury which results in the death of the victim, the
offence squarely falls under Clause thirdly of Section 300 of the IPC unless one of the exceptions
applies.
(12) In determining the question, whether an accused had guilty intention or guilty knowledge in a
case where only a single injury is inflicted by him and that injury is sufficient in the ordinary course
of nature to cause death, the fact that the act is done without premeditation in a sudden fight or
quarrel, or that the circumstances justify that the injury was accidental or unintentional, or that he
only intended a simple injury, would lead to the inference of guilty knowledge, and the offence
would be one under Section 304 Part II of the IPC.
25. In the light of aforesaid legal proposition and applying the same to the facts before us, there is no
deniability to the fact that the prosecution has successfully discharged the proof of accused-Sabzar
Ahmad Sofi being the culprit who inflicted fatal blow to the deceased with blunt object resulting into
death of deceased. Being a single blow incident and given the fact that there was not any past history
of enmity between the parties, inasmuch as the attack laid by accused on the person of deceased was
neither premeditated nor planned but took place in a heat of passion, it cannot be said with
certainty that the accused intended to cause death by inflicting an injury of a nature which in all
probability would have resulted into the death of deceased. His act is of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder squarely falls in Part II of Section 304 of the Penal Code, as there was no
guilty initiation on the part of the accused to inflict a murderous assault on the person of deceased.
26. The injury was in the nature of a lower degree of likelihood which is generally spoken as an
injury likely to cause death. It cannot be said that the respondent/accused had the knowledge that
his act would result in death of a deceased.
27. Given the material available before the trial court, we are of the considered view that the findings
of acquittal recorded in favour of respondent-Sabzar Ahmad sofi, was not only perverse but against
the material available on record, while as, the prosecution had proved beyond doubt, the culpability
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 15
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
of accused having committed offences of culpable homicide not amounting to murder but falling
within the domain of Part II of Section 304 RPC.
28. For the aforesaid reasons, Sabzar Ahamd Sofi is held guilty of offence under Part II Section 304
RPC and to that extent, the appeal shall stand allowed but as regards the other respondents, Gull
Sofi has already expired, so appeal to that extent shall stand abated but as regards to
respondents-Tanveer Ahmad Sofi and Yousuf Sofi, the appeal fails and is dismissed, accordingly.
29. Now, coming to the issue of sentence, we are conscious of the fact that the occurrence is of
18.06.2001 whereas, the respondents were arrested on 26.06.2001 and stood acquitted by the trial
court on 05.03.2005 and as per record the respondents had been in custody for a period of three
years, two months and 21 days. We are also conscious of the fact that the appeal has been pending
for over more than 19 years so the respondents must have not only suffered ordeal of trial, but agony
of being under sword of acquittal appeal as well. It was in this background the counsel for the
respondents/accused had during the course of hearing prayed that the mitigating circumstances tilt
heavily in favour of the respondents and given the incident happened in a spur of moment and in a
heat of passion, a lenient view needed to be taken by this court, in case it proceeds to reverse the
acquittal.
30. Per contra, appellants' counsel strenuously argued that the family of the victim over the years
has not given up the hope of being delivered the justice as the deceased met untimely death because
of the act of the respondent and the family of the victim has been deprived of sole bread earner
putting them to hardship. The respondent should not go unpunished as the victim had no role to
play in his ordeal of trial or pendency of his acquittal appeal nor have the heirs of the deceased
protracted the proceedings against the respondent at any point of time. There is no dispute on the
issue that guilty should not go unpunished and wrong doer cannot be allowed to take advantage of
delay in justice dispensation. The proportion between the crime and punishment is a goal respected
in principle, in spite of errant notions it remains a strong influence in determination of sentence.
Therefore, undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to justice system
and undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society, which cannot be allowed to
endure in such serious cases. It is therefore, enjoined upon us to award proper sentence
commensurate to the offence committed by the respondent. After appreciating the aggravating
circumstances, though the incident has happened around 24 years back, and before the trial court
the respondent-Sabzar Ahmad Sofi has earned acquittal and since we are reversing his acquittal that
does not mean that delayed dispensation of sentence should work to the advantage of respondent.
After due consideration to the facts and circumstances of this case and for dispensing the justice and
deciding the appropriate sentence, we are of the considered view in the facts and circumstances of
the case that the imposition of sentence of five years' simple imprisonment with fine of Rs.2.00 lacs
would meet the ends of justice.
31. Accordingly, we allow this appeal to the extent of accused- Sabzar Ahmad Sofi by holding him
guilty for offence under Section 304 RPC (part II) and sentence him to undergo simple
imprisonment of five years with a fine of Rs.2.00 lacs. In default of payment of fine, he shall suffer
further imprisonment of six months. Out of fine amount, Rs.1.90 lacs shall be paid to the kith and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 16
State Of J&K Through Ssp Anantnag vs Sabzar Ahmad Sofi on 30 July, 2025
kin of deceased, and the rest of the amount shall be deposited in the Government Treasury. In
addition, the convict is given set-off towards sentence of the period for which he remained in
custody during trial. His bail bonds shall stand withdrawn, he shall surrender before the trial court
immediately enabling the later to send him to custody so as to undergo remaining sentence. In
default, the trial court shall ensure to take all coercive measures to commit him to custody for
undergoing the sentence.
32. The appeal is, accordingly, party allowed to the above extent.
33. A copy of the judgment be notified to trial court for compliance and the record of the trial court
be remitted back.
(SANJAY PARIHAR) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
SRINAGAR
30.07.2025
Ishaq
Whether the judgment is reportable ? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46841259/ 17
