State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
S. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRAA No. 41 of 2011 (O&M)
Reserved on: 11.04.2023
Pronounced on: 28.04.2023
State of J&K ...Appellant(s)
Through :- Mr. K.D.S. Kotwal, Advocate
v/s
Verinder Singh and anr. .....Respondent (s)
Through :- None.
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Rajesh Sekhri-J
1. By virtue of this judgment, the present appeal hanging fire for the last more than 12 years shall be
put to quietus.
2. This appeal has been directed against judgment dated 28.02.2010 rendered by learned 2nd
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter referred to as „trial court(cid:129)), in File No.148/Challan
titled „State of J&K v. Verinder Singh and another(cid:129), and FIR No. 34 of 2007 of Police Station, Miran
Sahib for offences under Sections 353/34 RPC, 4/25 Arms Act, 8/15 of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (NDPS Act, for short) and 6/13 DCO, vide which, respondents
have been acquitted of the charges.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 1
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
3. Before a closer look at the grounds urged in the memo of appeal, it shall be apt to have an
overview of the facts giving rise to the present case.
4. Case of the appellant-State/prosecution is that on 07.07.2007, Ajaz Ahmad, PSI along with police
party of Police Station, Miran Sahib, while on patrolling received source information at about 8:00
P.M that respondents/accused were engaged in illegal trade of Poppy straw in their house in Ward
No. 6. The PSI informed and requested SDPO and SDM to reach before they rushed to the spot to
apprehend accused. Respondent-accused No. 1, it is alleged, on seeing the police party made an
attempt to escape in his car bearing Registration No. JK02P-8077, but his attempt was foiled and he
fled from the spot leaving the car behind. PSI-Ajaz Ahmad conducted search of the car and
recovered poppy straw in a polythene bag, 1000 capsules of paravanspas, 60 capsules of
Spasmoproxvon, a box containing 20 bottles of Rexicof, 02 tokas and one kirch. It is further case of
the prosecution case that respondent/accused No. 2, Kamaljit Kour, meanwhile attacked the police
party with Kirch, but she was overpowered by a lady constable, namely, Kamlesh Kumari and was
taken into custody on the spot and Kirch was seized. Report was flashed to the Police Station, Miran
Sahib, consequently aforesaid FIR came to be registered and investigation was assigned to SHO,
Inspector-Harjit Singh, who came to the spot and seized the car in the presence of SDM and SDPO,
R.S. Pura. After rituals of formal investigation, including preparation of the site plan, formal
recovery and seizures of the aforementioned drugs and weapons, the IO extracted samples of 50
grams of Poppy straw, 10 capsules each of Parvanspas and Spasmoproxvon and one bottle of
Rexicof, which were sealed on the spot. It is also case of the prosecution that 600 grams of opium,
40 kg of poppy straw and a bag containing 20 kg of poppy straw were also recovered and seized on
house search of the respondents, their samples of 50 grams each were also taken and after formal
sealing and re-sealing all the samples were forwarded to FSL for chemical analysis. On the
conclusion of investigation, since aforesaid offences were established against the respondents, a
final report, in terms of Section 173 of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short Cr.P.C.) was
filed.
5. Respondents were charged by the trial court for the aforesaid offences on 10.01.2008, whereby
they pleaded innocence and claimed trial, prompting the trial Court to call for the prosecution
evidence. Prosecution has examined as many as 14 witnesses.
6. In order to appreciate the prosecution evidence in the right perspective, it shall be apt to give a
brief resume of the prosecution evidence, which reads thus:
7. PW-1 Ajaz Ahmad was incharge of the patrolling party at the relevant point of time, on whose
report FIR against respondents came to be registered. He has stated that while on patrolling, he
received source information that accused were involved in the illegal trade of Poppy straw in their
house. He gave telephonic information to the SHO and proceeded to the house of accused along with
the patrolling party. On seeing them, respondent no.1 tried to escape in his car bearing Registration
No. 8077-JK02P, but he ran away leaving the car behind. He searched the car and recovered 02 kgs
of Poppy straw from a polythene bag, 1000 parvanspas capsules, 60 capsules of spasmoproxvon and
20 bottles of Rexicof. Accused-Kamaljeet Kour attacked constable-Sukhvinder Singh with toka, but
she was apprehended by constable-Kamlesh Kumari. Further, two tokas and one kirch were
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 2
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
recovered from the said car. He also stated that after enquiry from accused-Kamaljeet Kour, a bag
containing 40 kgs and another bag containing 20 kgs Poppy straw were recovered on digging the
compound of the house of accused and further on their house search, a bucket containing one kg
Poppy straw, one weighing pan, two weights of 500 gms each, one sword and a plastic cane
containing 500 gms opium came to be recovered. One strip each of 10 capsules was drawn as a
sample. In cross examination, he has stated that they reached Simbal Camp at 7:45 p.m. The
information received by him was not reduced into writing. He did not inform the SHO or SDPO in
writing. There were houses near the Bus Stand at a distance of 200 to 300 meters from the house of
accused persons and there were also houses around the house of accused persons, but none of them
was called at the time of house search. Search warrant was not obtained. He himself recovered the
articles and drugs from the car. SHO used his seal but he does not know where the said seal was
kept. He has no knowledge about the re-sealing. He reflected his ignorance about any dispute
between SHO and accused No.1.
8. PW-2 Rajinder Singh though admitted his signatures but denied contents of the seizure memo.
9. PW-4 Jaswant Singh has turned hostile. He has stated that he was told by the SHO that they had
recovered Poppy straw and other goods from the house of accused and his signatures were obtained
on a plain piece of the paper. Nothing incriminating could be extracted on his cross examination by
the prosecution.
10. PW-5 Sampuran Singh has also turned hostile.
11. PW-6 Karanjit Singh, another member of the patrolling party, has stated that on 07.07.2007,
while he along with PW-1, SI-Ajaz Ahmad and other police officials were on patrolling, they were
informed by a person that accused were engaged in the trade of Poppy straw. They went to the spot.
Accused No. 1, on seeing them, tried to escape in his vehicle bearing Registration No. JK02P-8077,
but he ran away, leaving the vehicle behind. PW-1 informed SDPO and SHO. He was sent to the
Police Station with the report for lodging FIR. He returned to the spot along with SHO, SDPO and
SDM. They conducted search of the car. One white coloured polythene bag containing 1000 capsules
of spasmoproxvon and 60 capsules of proxvon, two tokas, one kirch and a box containing bottles
were recovered. When they asked for the search, Constable-Sukhvinder Singh was attached by
accused No. 2 with a Kirch, but she was caught by a lady constable and was taken into custody.
Thereafter, they recovered two bags containing 40 kgs and 20 kgs Poppy straw in the presence of
SDPO and SDM. They also went to the basement of the house and recovered a plastic bucket
containing Poppy straw, a sword, one gallon containing raw opium, two pans and two weights of ½
kg each and one weight of 200 gms. SHO had taken 10 capsules each, 40 gms Poppy straw from
each packet and 10 gms opium as samples for chemical analysis. In cross-examination, he has stated
that they reached Simbal Camp, Matador Stand at around 7:45 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. They received the
information from a Sikh aged about 60/70 years. Neither information was reduced into writing by
SI-Ajaz Ahmad, nor they informed their superior officers. They did not send any report to the Police
Station from the bus stand. There were shops at the Matadoor stand at a distance of about 30 mtrs
from the house of the accused. He forwarded the docket for registration of the case to the Police
station before the house search. Police personnels did not get themselves searched before house
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 3
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
search was conducted. Packets were signed by the SHO. He does not know who went to the
basement and where poppy bags were recovered from.
12. PW-7 Kamlesh Kumari is also member of the Patrolling Party and has stated that on 07.07.2007,
while they were patrolling in Ward No. 4, Matador Stand, Simbal Camp, SHO received source
information that accused were dealing in the sale of Poppy Straw. They along with SHO went to the
spot at Ward-4, Simbal Camp. A Maruti Car was parked outside the house of accused and when they
tried to arrest accused-Verinder Singh, he escaped with his vehicle. SDPO and SDM were called by
the SHO on spot. She again stated that accused had left the Car behind and on the search of the Car,
Poppy straw and Tokas were recovered. Thereafter, they conducted house search of accused.
Accused-Kamaljeet Kour tried to assault Constable-Sukhvinder Singh, but she caught hold of her.
On house search, Poppy straw, capsules, opium, toka etc. were recovered from the basement of the
house. In cross examination, she deposed that they left the police Station at about 7:30 p.m. and
when they reached the spot, accused were standing near the car. She does not remember who
brought out articles from the Car and whether SDPO and SDM reached after the search had
concluded. She does not remember who had informed SDPO and SDM and whether Poppy straw
was weighed in the Police Station or not. Seized material was not seized in her presence and was not
put on her superdnama.
13. PW-8 Yashpal is also member of the patrolling party and has stated that on 07.07.2007, while he
along with other police personnels was on patrolling in Ward No. 4 Simbal Camp, SI Ajaz Ahmad
received information at about 7-7:30 p.m. that accused were dealing in the trade of Poppy straw.
They proceeded towards the house of accused. Accused was standing near the car, and ran away. On
search of the vehicle, a bag containing capsules, bottles and Poppy straw were recovered. SI-Ajaz
Ahmed informed SDPO and called him on the spot and on the arrival of the SDPO, when accused
No. 2 was enquired, she attacked Sukhvinder Singh with Kirch, however, she was caught hold by
PW-Kamlesh Kumari and thereafter, on disclosure of accused No. 2 and on digging the compound of
the house, two bags of Poppy straw were recovered. On further house search about 01 kg Poppy
straw from a bucket and a bottle containing some liquid were also recovered. A small quantity was
drawn as a sample and was taken to the Police Station. In cross-examination, he has stated that
there were open shops at Simbal Morh. The person who informed SI-Ajaz Ahmed about accused was
a Sardar of about 40 to 45 years of age. House of accused was at a distance of 50 to 70 ft. from
Simbal Chowk and there were also houses around their house. Information received at Simbal
Chowk was not reduced into writing by SI- Ajaz Ahmed nor anybody was sent to Police Station from
the said place for Registration of the FIR. They had not obtained search warrant before or after
search of the car. House search was conducted in the presence of SDPO and SDM, but nobody got
himself searched before search of the house. Neither Constable-Sukhwinder Singh nor Karanjeet
Singh sustained any injury. He has not seen Poppy straw, capsules or kirch in the Court.
14. PW-9 Sukhwinder Singh, being a member of the patrolling party, has also stated that while on
patrolling, when they reached Matador Stand in Ward No. 4, Simbal Camp at about 9.00 p.m., Ajaz
Ahmad-SI received information that accused were running the trade of Poppy straw in their house.
This information was flashed by SI-Ajaz Ahmad to the SDPO. They went to the house of accused.
Accused tried to escape in the car, but did not succeed and thereafter he ran away leaving the car on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 4
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
the spot. On search of the Car, a cloth bag containing Poppy straw, white envelope containing
capsules of parvanspas and spasmoproxivon, one box containing bottles of Rexicof, two tokas and
one kirch were recovered from the Dicky of the car. Accused-Kamaljeet Kour attempted to attack
him with Kirch but she was caught by Kamlesh Kumari and Kirch was seized. Karanjeet Singh was
sent to the Police Station with a docket, thereafter SHO, SDPO, and SDM came to the spot and at the
instance of accused- Kamaljeet Kour, two bags containing Poppy straw were recovered from the
compound and one bucket containing 01 kg Poppy straw, a weighing pan, two weights of 500 grams,
one sword and a plastic cane containing opium were recovered from the basement. Samples of 50
grams each of Poppy straw, 10 capsules each and 10 grams of opium and one bottle were extracted
as samples marked A to Z and were sent to FSL. In cross examination, he has stated that there is a
market in the Simbal Camp Chowk and there were open shops. Information was neither reduced
into writing nor sent to the Police Station by PW-1. PW-1 did not send message to his Senior Officers
in writing from Simbal Camp. They had not obtained any search warrant from the Magistrate for the
house search. The bag and seal were kept in the Malkhana by the SHO. He has admitted that
accused-Virender Singh and his wife (accused No. 2) had filed a complaint against SHO before the
CJM in April 2007 and same is being investigated by SDPO, R.S. Pura and that prior to the
occurrence, accused- Virender Singh and his wife were also taken into custody in Police Station,
Miran Sahib.
15. PW-10 HC Abdul Qayoom was Incharge Malkhana of Police Station Miran Sahib. He has stated
that seized articles were handed over to him by the SHO, which were kept in the Malkhana. Samples
and seals were sent to FSL. The details of the sealed articles were entered in Register No.19. In
cross- examination, he has stated that 08 packets were sent to FSL two days after. He did not weigh
those packets. He has not produced the Malkhana Register.
16. PW-11 Rajiv Mangotra was Naib Tehsildar, Executive Magistrate Maralia. He has stated that on
10th of July, 2007, he re-sealed 08 sealed packets produced before him and issued certificate
EXP-RM. He had also put impression of seal, used for re-sealing, on the certificate. In cross
examination, he has stated that packets were not opened and shown to him. The impression of seal
already put on the sample was not given to him. 07 packets were produced before him on
08.07.2007.
17. PW-12 Mandeep Kour was Sub Divisional Magistrate R.S. Pura at the relevant time. She has
stated that on 7th of July, 2007, Police conducted house search in her presence. There were 2/3
ladies in the said house and there was no male member. She does not remember about the articles
seized by the Police. She has identified her signatures on the seizure memo but stated that she
signed it on the asking of SHO. She has also signed seizure memo of the car. She has identified her
signatures on seizure memo of Poppy straw, weighing pan etc. She has clarified that all these
documents were signed by the SHO and later she put her signatures on his request.
18. PW-14 Pawan Abrol, Assistant Scientific Officer, FSL, Jammu has stated that he received 08
sealed packets forwarded by the Assistant Superintendent of Police, SDPO, R.S. Pura vide his letter
No.29977-78/SDA dated 11.11.2007 through Constable-Karanjeet Singh on 12.07.2007. Said
exhibits were subjected to various chemical tests and Chromatographic examination and Exhibit No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 5
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
P-334/07, Exhibit No. P-338/07, Exhibit No. P- 339/07, Exhibit No. P-340/07 revealed the
presence of characteristic features of Poppy plant and morphine. Exhibit No. P-341/07 was
identified as Opium Dextropropoxyphene, hydrochloride Dicyclomine hydrochloride and
Acetaminophen were found present in exhibit No. P-336/07. Dextroprophyphene, hydrochloride,
dicyelomine hydrochloride and Paracetamol were found present in Exhibit P-335/07. Codeine
Phosphate and chloropheniramine maleate were found in the Exhibit No. P-337/07. He has
admitted the certificate as Ext-P14 under his name and signatures. In cross examination, he has
stated that packets were bearing signatures of Dy.S.P. and the Magistrate but there were no
signatures of accused. He has not mentioned weight of Poppy straw. He received 79, 71 gms of
Poppy straw respectively. He also received 27 grams of opium, 5/10 gms of opium and 50 gm of
Poppy straw were taken for test.
19. PW-17 Harjeet Singh, Dy. S.P. was SHO of P/S Miran Sahib at the time of occurrence. He
conducted investigation of the present case. He has stated that on 07.07.2007 at about 8:00 PM, he
received a report (Ext-P-1) of Ajaz Ahmed through Constable- Karanjeet Singh with respect to the
information received by the said SI, on the basis of which FIR No. 34/07 (EXT-P17) for offences
under sections 8/15 NDPS Act, 353 RPC, 6/13 DCO & 4/25 Arms Act was registered. He started
investigation and proceeded to the spot. SDPO and SDM also came on the spot. Seizure memos of
the Poppy straw, Maruti car, toka, kirch, two bottles containing 1000 Spasmo Provsivan capsules
and seizure memos of site plan were prepared. Superdnama (EXTP-17/8) was also prepared. He
took samples from the seized items and sealed on the spot which were sent to FSL for chemical
analysis. He recorded statements of witnesses. Accused- Verinder Singh had absconded, but his
wife, accused Kamaljit Kour was arrested and was sent to Women Cell, Jammu. Aforesaid offences
were established against accused during investigation. In cross-examination, he has stated that
Munshi of P/S has not been cited as a witness. He reached the spot at 8.30 PM. He has admitted
that it was sun set at the time he received the information. PSI Ajaz Ahmed had not entered the
house of accused till he reached the spot. He entered the house of accused after getting permission
from his seniors. His search and search of accused was conducted by the SDPO, but no document
was prepared regarding the same, however, it is reflected in the daily diary. From the basement of
the house of the accused, a plastic bucket containing Poppy straw and a weighing pan were
recovered. Memos were not prepared with respect to articles recovered from the house of accused.
The packets of samples were not signed by accused, but said packets were signed by the independent
witnesses. CFSL form was not filled. He did not put his seal on the seized items. The seal was kept
on the superdnama of one Karanjeet Singh. Seized articles were re- sealed on 10.07.2007. He did
not obtain receipt from the Malkhana. Samples were sent to FSL on 12.07.2007. He does not know
whether accused had lodged any complaint against him in the Court of CJM, Jammu before the
occurrence and he has denied that present case was registered against the accused because of the
said complaint.
20. PW-18 Daljeet Singh has conducted partial investigation of the present case. He has stated that
he got information about this case on 07.07.2007. He arrested accused during his investigation and
obtained report of the FSL and presented challan in the court. In cross-examination, he has stated
that investigation was entrusted to him on 07.07.2007 and accused was arrested on 27.11.2007 from
Bus Stand, Jammu. He has not mentioned in the memo of arrest that accused was arrested from Bus
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 6
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
Stand Jammu.
21. This is the crux of prosecution evidence. Accused were examined under Section 342 Cr.P.C.
whereby they not only denied the incriminating imputations arrogated to them but discarded the
evidence as being farce and frivolous on account of a complaint filed by respondent No.1 against the
Investigating Officer-Harjeet Singh and opted not to enter the defence.
22. Learned trial court on appreciation of the prosecution evidence and after hearing the rival sides
has acquitted the respondents as noticed at the outset.
23. Having heard the rival contentions and perused the impugned judgment, we find ourselves in
total agreement with the findings recorded therein.
24. Mr. K.D.S. Kotwal, learned Dy. AG has reiterated the grounds urged in the memo of appeal.
25. The appellant-State has questioned the impugned judgment on the usual grounds that learned
trial Court has failed to appreciate the evidence in the right perspective, impugned judgment has
been passed in a mechanical fashion and there was sufficient material in the shape of ocular and
documentary evidence on record to sustain conviction of the respondents, but learned trial court has
fallen in error of law to ignore such vital evidence and, therefore, impugned judgment is liable to be
set aside.
26. However, minute evaluation of evidence recorded in the case canvasses a picture that creates a
conceivable doubt about the truthfulness of the prosecution story which is marred with glaring
discrepancies. We are of the considered opinion that case of the appellant-State in the trial Court is
not only discrepant on material aspects particularly with respect to the infraction of mandatory
provisions of the NDPS Act, but also replete with serious contradictions.
27. Learned trial Court has underlined infraction of various mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act
and we find ourselves in complete agreement with the observations of learned trial Court that in
cases under the NDPS Act and the Rules framed thereunder, it is not only the recovery and seizure
of the contraband, which is sufficient to sustain conviction, but manner of conducting investigation
is of vital significance, in view of the fact that offences under the NDPS Act, being heinous in nature
and against the society at large, are visited with severe punishment and the legislature in its wisdom,
while legislating the Act has provided various safeguards to be religiously followed by the
investigating agency. Various provisions governing the arrest, search and seizure have been
incorporated in Chapter-V of the NDPS Act to ensure that no innocent person is subjected to
harassment.
28. Keeping the aforesaid principles in mind, if we proceed to analyze the prosecution evidence in
the present case, it is found that mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act have been observed in
breech and flouted by the investigating agency with impunity. It needs a specific mention that in
NDPS cases the investigation of a case, if conducted properly and in accordance with the NDPS Act
and the Rules framed thereunder, gets completed on the spot, except the placing of the recovered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 7
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
and seized contraband in safe custody, re-sealing of the same through Executive Magistrate or
Gazetted officer 1st Class and forwarding of the re-sealed sample for chemical analysis through FSL.
29. One of the salutary provisions, investigating officer is bound to follow is that he is obliged to
reduce the information received by him into writing and forwarding a copy thereof to his immediate
superior officer within 72 hours. Section 42 of the NDPS Act mandates compliance of the
requirements contained therein, i.e. if the officer has reason to believe from personal knowledge or
information received by him from any person which is required to be taken down in writing that any
drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance in respect of which an offence punishable
under the Act has been committed, he is empowered to exercise his power enumerated in clauses (a)
and (b) of sub Section 1 of Section 42 of the NDPS Act between sun rise and sun set, subject to just
exceptions. It is manifest, as such, that taking down of information in writing is necessarily to be
complied with. The proviso appended to sub section (1) of Section 42 of the NDPS Act provides that
if such officer has reason to believe that search warrant or authorization cannot be obtained without
affording opportunity for the concealment of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he
may enter and search such building conveyance or enclosed place at any time between sun set and
sun rise after recording the grounds of his belief. Further sub section (2) of Section 42 of the NDPS
Act lays down that where an officer takes down any information in writing under Sub Section (1) or
records grounds of his belief under the proviso thereto, he shall within 72 hours send a copy of the
same to his immediate superior officer.
30. Reverting to the present case, it is the case of appellant that while patrolling in Ward No. 4,
Simbal Camp, the Incharge patrolling party, PSI-Ajaz Ahmad received source information that
accused were peddling narcotic drugs from their house. According to PW-1 Ajaz Ahmed, on receipt
of this information he telephonically informed the SHO and proceeded to the spot. It is not only an
admitted case of the prosecution/appellant-State in the trial Court, but all the prosecution
witnesses, who happened to be members of the Patrol party, have stated that information received
by the Incharge PW-1, Ajaz Ahmed was neither reduced into writing nor same was forwarded to the
immediate superior officers. As a matter of fact, there is admission on the part of the complainant
i.e. Incharge of the Partrolling Party, PW-Ajaz Ahmed that information received by him was neither
reduced into writing nor forwarded to the superior officers. It is manifest that investigating officer
has given a complete go bye to this mandatory provision of law.
31. Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana reported as (2000) 2 SCC 513,
commenting upon the import of Section 42(2) of the NDPS Act has clearly ruled in the following
words:
"Under Section 42(2) as it stood prior to amendment such empowered officer who
takes down any information in writing or records the grounds under proviso to
Section 42(1) should forthwith send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior.
If there is total non-compliance of this provision the same would adversely affect the
prosecution case and to that extent it is mandatory. But if there is delay whether it
was undue or whether the same has been explained or not, will be a question of fact
in each case, it is to be concluded that the mandatory enforcement of the provisions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 8
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
of Section 42 of the Act non-compliance of which may vitiate a trial has been
restricted only to the provision of sending a copy of the information written down by
the empowered officer to immediate official superior and not to any other condition
of the Section."
(Emphasis supplied)
32. A similar view has been expressed by Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in 2009 AIR (Criminal) 401 SC.
33. It is manifest from the afore-quoted case law that non-compliance of Section 42 of NDPS Act
vitiates the trial.
34. Further house search of the respondents in the present case has admittedly been conducted after
the sun set and it is also admitted case of the Appellant-State in the trial court that no search
warrant was obtained for the house search. As already observed that if investigating agency has
reason to believe that a search warrant or authorization cannot be obtained without affording
opportunity for the concealment of the evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may
enter and search such building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time between sun rise and sun
set, but after recording the grounds of his belief within the meaning of proviso appended to sub
section 1 of Section 42 of the NDPS Act. It is evident from the said proviso that requirement of
obtaining search warrant can be dispensed with, if the investigating officer has reason to believe that
such warrant cannot be obtained without affording opportunity to the offender to escape or conceal
the evidence and the investigating officer can enter the house for search even after sun set but after
recording the grounds of his belief. Admittedly, no such reasons have been recorded by the
investigating officer in the present case before house search of accused persons. House search, as
such, in the present case is in clear violation of the mandatory provisions of section 42 of the NDPS
Act.
35. It is further case of the prosecution that PW-1 Ajaz Ahmed, during Naka duty, received source
information that accused were involved in the illegal trade of Poppy straw from their house and the
Incharge Naka after sending telephonic information to the SHO, Police Station, proceeded to the
house of accused persons. The Incharge Naka PW1-Ajaz Ahmad has reiterated the same statement
in the Court but he has nowhere stated that he informed any gazetted officer or Executive Magistrate
1st class. According to the investigating officer PW-17 Harjit Singh, SDPO and SDM also came to the
spot as PW-1 had already informed the SDPO and SDM. Almost a similar line has been toed by most
of the prosecution police witnesses. However, it is an admitted case of the prosecution/appellant
State in the trial court that accused were not served upon prior notice of option to be searched in the
presence of a Magistrate or Executive Magistrate 1st Class. Section 50 of the NDPS Act envisages
that any officer duly authorized under Section 42 of the NDPS Act in case of prior information about
the commission of offence under the Act, shall take the person, about to be searched, without
unnecessary delay to the nearest gazetted officer or Magistrate. The safeguard provided under
Section 50 of the NDPS Act is intended to serve dual purpose "to protect an accused against false
accusation and frivolous charges as also to lend credibility to search and seizure conducted by the
empowered officer" and infraction thereof vitiates the trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 9
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
36. Another staggering circumstance, to shake credibility of the prosecution case, is testimony of the
gazetted officer, PW-12 Mandeep Kour, SDM R.S. Pura who has stated that she put her signatures
on the seizure memo of Poppy straw and car on the asking of the SHO only. Therefore, entire case of
the prosecution has been dislodged by the Gazetted officer stated to have been called on the spot by
the investigating agency.
37. Further section 52(A)(2) of the NDPS Act provides for preparation of an inventory of the
narcotics drugs and psychotropic substances containing details like description, quality, quantity,
mode of packing, marks, numbers and other identifying particulars etc. and forwarding the same to
the officer of the nearest Police Station or to the officer empowered under Section 53 of NDPS Act
and making an application to the Magistrate for the purpose of certifying the correctness of the
inventory so prepared; or taking, in the presence of such Magistrate, photographs of such drugs or
substance and certifying photographs as true; or allowing drawing representative samples of such
drug or substance; in the presence of Magistrate and certifying the correctness of any list of samples
so drawn. The Magistrate is bound to allow such application as soon as may be. In the present case,
neither any such inventory has been prepared nor application made to the Magistrate as mandated
nor any form has been filled up by the Executive Magistrate.
38. Commenting upon the import of section 52(A)(2) of the NDPS Act, Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in
Gurbax Singh v. State of Haryana reported as 2001 (1) Supreme 625 has observed as under:
" ........ that non-compliance of the provisions of Sections 52, 55 and 57, which are no
doubt, directory and violation thereof, would not ipso facto violate the trial or
conviction. However, the Investigating Officer cannot totally ignore these provisions,
and, as such, failure will have bearing, on the appreciation of evidence, regarding
search and seizure of the accused."
39. It is evident from the afore-quoted observation of Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court that compliance of
Section 52(A)(2) of the NDPS Act is an indicator towards reasonable, fair and just procedure
adopted by the investigating officer during search and seizure and non-compliance thereof,
deliberately and intentionally, must be viewed with suspicion. It may be underlined that if such
mandatory provisions are observed in breech by the investigating agency and if Courts condone such
acts or violations of statutory safeguards, the legitimacy of the judicial procedure may come under
cloud.
40. Another lacuna noticed in the prosecution case is that it has failed to prove that contraband
recovered in the present case was kept in the safe custody and forwarded to FSL in accordance with
law and without any delay. It is pertinent to note that in view of stringent provisions regarding
punishment and grant of bail, the legislature in its wisdom enacted section 55 of the NDPS Act to
ensure that officer Incharge of Police Station shall immediately take charge and keep the alleged
contraband in safe custody, in order to rule out any possibility of tampering with the contraband.
Prosecution is obliged to prove that the contraband after its recovery and seizure from the accused
was kept in safe custody, in the Malkhana of the concerned Police Station under proper entry in the
Malkhana register. The prosecution is also obliged to prove that said sample of the contraband was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 10
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
forwarded to FSL without any delay.
41. Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Gurmail Singh reported as AIR 2005 SC 1578
has clearly ruled that if the link evidence adduced by the prosecution is not satisfactory and
Malkhana Register is not produced to prove that contraband was kept in the safe custody of the
Malkhana and further that if no sample of seal is sent along with samples to the Chemical Analyst,
the prosecution case can be viewed doubtful. The relevant extract of the judgment has been culled
out below as a ready reference:
"We have perused the judgment of the High Court. Apart from other reasons
recorded by the High Court, we find that the link evidence adduced by the
prosecution was not at all satisfactory. In the first instance, though the seized articles
are said to have been kept in the malkhana on 20th May, 1995, the Malkhana register
was not produced to prove that it was so kept in the malkhana till it was taken over by
PW-6 on June 5, 1995. We further find that no sample of the seal was sent along with
the sample to Excise Laboratory, Jodhpur for the purpose of comparing with the seal
appearing on the sample bottles.
Therefore, there is no evidence to prove satisfactorily that the seals found were in fact
the same seals as were put on the sample bottles immediately after seizure of the
contraband. These loopholes in the prosecution case have led the High Court to
acquit the respondent."
42. A similar view has been expressed by the Apex Court in State of Rajastan v. Daulat Ram reported
as AIR 1980 Sc 1314.
43. Similarly, in Prem Shahi v. State of Uttrakhand reported as (2013) Supreme (UK) 162,
Uttrakhand High Court has also held as below:
"Having perused the contents of Section 55 of the NDPS Act, I have no hesitation to
hold that contraband, so recovered from the accused, shall be forwarded to the officer
Incharge of the police station; who shall put the contraband and sample seal in a safe
custody and shall affix his seal to such articles before keeping them in the Maalkhana.
Section 55 further authorizes Incharge of the police station to permit the
Investigating Officer or any other officer to take sample of the contraband in the
presence of Incharge of the police station and affix his own seal on the sample, so
drawn as well as on the packet, wherein rest of the contraband, is kept, after taking
the sample."
44. Reverting to the present case, though prosecution has examined incharge, Malkhana, PW HC
Abdul Qayoom, but he has failed to produce the Malkhana register in the trial Court to prove that
contraband alleged to have been recovered from the possession of accused was kept in safe custody
in the Malkhana of concerned Police Station. Reference is made to State of Rajasthan v. Tara Singh
reported as 2011 (3) SCR 1112, in which High Court of Rajasthan dealing with the import and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 11
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
significance of Section 55 of NDPS Act, has held in the following manner;
"4. xxx xxx xxx We must emphasize that in a prosecution relating to the Act the
question as to how and where the samples had been stored or as to when they had
dispatched or received in the laboratory is a matter of great importance on account of
the huge penalty involved in these matters."
45. There is an admission on the part of investigating officer PW-17 Harjit Singh, Dy. SP that he did
not obtain any receipt of seized articles from the Malkhana. Incharge Malkhana PW-10, HC-Abdul
Qayoom has stated that seized articles were handed over to him by the SHO and he kept them in the
Malkhana. He further stated that details of sealed articles were entered in register No. 19. However,
he clarified in cross examination that he has not brought Malkhana register in the court. Although
prosecution has examined Incharge Malkhana, however, it failed to prove the Malkhana Register as
also the relevant entry made in the said Register to establish that seized contrabands recovered in
the present case were kept in the safe custody, which adversely affects the prosecution case and
vitiates the trial.
46. Another significant aspect of the present case is delay in forwarding the samples of the
contraband allegedly recovered from the respondents to FSL. As per the prosecution case,
contraband were recovered and seized on 07.07.2007 and were re-sealed by the Executive
Magistrate on 10.07.2007 and forwarded to FSL on 12.07.2007. There is nothing in the prosecution
evidence to show that when did the investigating officer received samples from the Incharge
Malkhana and whether after re-sealing same were re-deposited in the Malkhana or not. Since
samples were handed over to the Incharge Malkhana on 07.07.2007 and re- sealed by Executive
Magistrate on 10.07.2007 and were forwarded to the FSL on 12.07.2007, it can be presumed that
samples remained with the investigating agency between 10.07.2007 to 12.07.2007. Incharge
Malkhana PW-10 Abdul Qayoom has not even stated about the date of receipt of contraband by him
and he has admitted in the cross examination that samples were sent to FSL after two days. The
investigating officer has admitted that he did not obtain the receipt of the seized articles from the
Malkhana and he further admitted that after re-sealing of articles on 10.07.2007, samples were sent
to FSL on 12.07.2007. There is clearly delay in sending the samples to the FSL.
47. Following observation of Chhattisgarh High Court in Ganga Bhai v. State of M.P reported as
2012 (4) Crimes (HC) 687 is apposite to the context, it reads thus:
"30. After having considered the evidence led by the prosecution in its entirety, I am
of the considered opinion that there is non compliance of the provisions of Sections
52 and 55 of the Act, 1985. Neither delay in delivering the sample at FSL has been
explained nor the Malkhana Register was produced in evidence. The prosecution did
not examine the officer-in-charge of Malkhana, Station House Officer and Constable
302 Shyam Sunder Chandrakar. Therefore, the report of FSl (Ex. P8) cannot form
basis of conviction of the appellant under Section 20B of the Act, 1985. In view of teh
above, the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 12
State Of J&K vs Verinder Singh And Anr on 28 April, 2023
48. It is clear from the afore-quoted observations of Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court that placement of the
contraband recovered and seized from accused is significant to rule out the possibility of the
contraband and the sample being changed or tampered with. It is trite that prosecution is obliged to
prove that right from the stage of seizure of the contraband, till it reaches the hands of chemical
analyst, there is no possibility of the contraband being tampered with. In the present case, there is
not only delay in forwarding the samples of the alleged contraband to the FSL, but prosecution has
also failed to prove that when investigating officer obtained contrabands from the Malkhana for
re-sealing.
49. At last but not the least all the independent witnesses PW-2 Rajinder Singh, PW-4 Jaswant
Singh and PW-5 Sampuran Singh associated with the seizure memos, have turned hostile. Witnesses
to the seizure memo though admitted their signatures but denied the contents. The gazetted officer
PW-12 Mandeep Kour, SDM, R.S. Pura not supporting the case of the prosecution goes to the root of
the prosecution.
50. Having considered the evidence led by the prosecution in the trial court, in its entirety, we are of
the considered opinion that there is not only infraction of various mandatory provisions of the
NDPS Act, but prosecution evidence is found discrepant on material factual aspects. In this
backdrop, there is no scope to raise hypothesis of guilt against the respondents for the commission
of offences, they have been charged with. Thus considered, we do not find any illegality, much less,
perversity in the otherwise well reasoned impugned judgment.
51. Consequently, the present appeal, being devoid of merit, is dismissed and impugned judgment is
upheld. Record of the trial court, if any, be returned forthwith. Respondents are discharged of their
bail bonds.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
JAMMU
28.04.2023
Paramjeet
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177254012/ 13
