State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
Author: Puneet Gupta
Bench: Puneet Gupta
Sr. No. 01
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRAA No. 21/2001
Pronounced on: 28.03.2023
State of J&K ...Appellant(s)..
Through:- Mr. R.S. Jamwal, AAG.
V/s
Haji Kala and others ...Respondent(s)..
Through:- Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Waheed Choudhary, Advocate.
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
PER PUNEET GUPTA-J
1. The appeal has been preferred against the judgment dated 23.10.1999, passed by the court of
learned Sessions Judge, Rajouri whereby the respondents (referred to as accused for the purposes of
discussion) have been acquitted by the trial court. The respondent Nos. 2, 3, 6, 8, 9, 10 & 12 have
died during the pendency of appeal and, therefore the appeal abates qua the said
respondents-accused.
2. The brief facts of the case: Mst. Ghulam Bibi, mother of the prosecutrix, filed a written application
with the court of learned CJM, Rajouri on 27.01.1982 that 13 persons, as named in the application,
and about 20/25 other persons residents of Pharwala, Sankari and Kot Dhara armed with lathis,
axes and knives entered the house on the intervening night of 26th and 27th January, 1982 at 12
O'clock with a purpose to kidnap Mst. Zeenat Bi but she was away with her father to High Court at
Jammu. The accused failing to find Zeenat Bi caught hold of her other daughter, prosecutrix,
studying in 4th standard and aged 12/13 years. The accused also committed theft of ornaments and
clothes of her daughter-in-law and also cash amounting to Rs.600/-. The prosecutrix was kidnapped
by the accused and her nephew and child who was aged 7/8 years were beaten mercilessly by the
accused when they resisted the accused. The prosecutrix was taken away after being kidnapped by
the accused. The application also states of the action of the accused being in retaliation to the search
warrant issued in terms of Section 100 Cr.P.C against Haji Kala who had confined the daughter of
the applicant Zeenat Bi and who was recovered from the said accused-Haji Kala. On the application
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 1
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
filed, the learned Magistrate directed the SHO Police Station, Rajouri for necessary action under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C which resulted into registration of FIR No. 25/1982 under Sections 363/109
RPC. On the completion of investigation, the challan was presented against the accused-Haji Kala,
Haji Mohd. Shabir and Sattar Mohd. under Sections 363/376 and against accused Haji Mohd.,
Kramat under Sections 363/376/323 RPC. Some of the accused were also charged under Section
363 RPC and other offences as mentioned in the charge framed against them. The charges were
framed against the accused including of the offences under Sections 363/376/149/367 RPC as
detailed in order dated 20.10.1982. It may be mentioned herein that out of thirteen persons named
in the application filed by the mother of the prosecutrix, Nazir Mohd., Mohd. Iqbal, Ahmed Din and
Abdul Haq did not figure in the charge sheet and instead four other persons were named in the
charge sheet though the application mentioned of 20/25 persons being participants in the
occurrence. The accused indeed denied the charges and claimed trial.
3. The prosecution has examined number of witnesses in support of its case including PW-1 Mst.
Ghulam Bibi (complainant), PW-2 prosecutrix, PW-3 Ghulam Fatima (daughter-in-law of the
complainant), PW-6 Mohd. Alam (nephew of the complainant), PW-12 Naseem Choudhary, PW-13
Dr. Chanchal Gupta, PW-14 Dr. Inder Singh (Radiologist), PW-15 Dr. Anil Kumar and PW-18
Yaseen Shah (Investigating Officer). The statements of the accused under Section 342 Cr.P.C were
recorded on the closure of prosecution evidence. The accused denied the incriminating material that
came on record through the prosecution evidence. The accused also produced evidence in defence.
4. Learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State-appellant has argued that the trial
court has failed to appreciate the prosecution evidence in right manner and acquitted the accused
erroneously. He has particularly referred to the statements of the prosecutrix and her mother to
support his contention that the prosecution was able to prove its case against the accused beyond
shadow of doubt. The accused are required to be punished of the offences committed by them.
5. Mr. Sunil Sethi, learned Senior counsel appearing for the accused has submitted that the trial
court has taken all aspects into consideration while holding the accused not guilty of the charges
framed against them. He has also referred to the statements of the doctors in conjunction with the
statement of the prosecutrix to impress upon the court that the charge of rape was not made out
against the accused persons. The prosecutrix was major at the time of occurrence and had
accompanied the accused of her own will and was not kidnapped as alleged by the prosecution.
6. Heard and perused the record.
7. As this court is dealing with the appeal against the judgment of the acquittal recorded by the trial
court, it is apt to examine the scope of interference with judgment of acquittal. In N. Vijayakumar v.
State of T.N., (2021) 3 SCC 687, Apex Court has held as under:
"20. Mainly it is contended by Shri Nagamuthu, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the appellant that the view taken by the trial court is a "possible view", having regard
to the evidence on record. It is submitted that the trial court has recorded cogent and
valid reasons in support of its findings for acquittal. Under Section 378 CrPC, no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 2
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
differentiation is made between an appeal against acquittal and the appeal against
conviction. By considering the long line of earlier cases this Court in the judgment in
Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka [Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka, (2007) 4 SCC
415] has laid down the general principles regarding the powers of the appellate court
while dealing with an appeal against an order of acquittal. Para 42 of the judgment
which is relevant reads as under:
42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general
principles regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal
against an order of acquittal emerge:
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach
its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law. (3) Various expressions,
such as, "substantial and compelling reasons", "good and sufficient grounds", "very
strong circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring mistakes", etc. are not
intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an appeal against
acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of language" to
emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal than to
curtail the power CRR No. 48/2013 of the court to review the evidence and to come to
its own conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence is
available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent
court of law. Secondly, the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of
his innocence is further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court. (5)
If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the
appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court.
21. Further in the judgment in Murugesan [Murugesan v. State, (2012) 10 SCC] relied on by the
learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, this Court has considered the powers of the High Court in
an appeal against acquittal recorded by the trial court. In the said judgment, it is categorically held
by this Court that only in cases where conclusion recorded by the trial court is not a possible view,
then only the High Court can interfere and reverse the acquittal to that of conviction. In the said
judgment, distinction from that of "possible view" to "erroneous view" or "wrong view" is explained.
In clear terms, this Court has held that if the view taken by the trial court is a "possible view", the
High Court not to reverse the acquittal to that of the conviction."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 3
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
8. Taking into consideration the principle laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, we would examine
the contentions of the contesting parties.
9. The alleged act of the accused persons on the intervening night of 26th and 27th January, 1982 in
the house of the complainant PW-1 Mst. Ghulam Bibi and the subsequent sexual assault committed
upon the prosecutrix led to the filing of the challan against the accused persons. At the outset, it may
be mentioned that the trial court suspected the case set up against the accused persons on the
ground that though 13 persons were mentioned in the complaint filed by PW-1 Mst. Ghulam Bibi yet
the name of the 04 persons mentioned in the complaint did not figure in the challan and instead 04
other persons out of the alleged 20/25 persons who were stated to be part of the occurrence,
namely, Haji Shabeer, Mohd. Hussain S/o Ghulam Mohd., Gulzar Hussain and Rafiq Hussain were
arrayed as accused. The four aforesaid persons were nominated as accused in the challan and there
is no explanation for the exclusion of those other 20/25 persons, as mentioned in the application, in
the challan. The trial court is not wrong in stating that there appears to be manipulation and
fabrication of the case against the accused persons on aforesaid account. The trial court has
thrashed the statements of the prosecution witnesses and arrived at the conclusion that the case
built by the prosecution that the accused persons entered the house of the complainant by forcibly
pushing the door of the house and thereafter committing the act of beating the persons who were
stated to be present in the house and forcibly taking the victim from the house of the complainant is
not proved beyond shadow of doubt.
10. The court has well appreciated the evidence on record before arriving at the conclusion that
there was no forcible entry in the house of the complainant by the accused persons. The court has
thrashed the statement of the complainant, prosecutrix and also of PW-Abdul Hamid, PW-Abdul
Rashid and PW-Mohd. Alam in this regard. The door of the room where the accused barged into was
bolted from inside and when the door was pushed the bolt opened and the accused entered the room
where the prosecutrix was also present in a way is the narration from the prosecution witnesses. The
factum of the door of the house of the complainant being opened after the same was pushed by the
accused persons is not established and gets contradicted from the statement of the witnesses as they
speak that the door was bolted from inside loosely to another version also that the bolt being weak
fell down and that the door opened itself after being pushed by the accused. The court has held that
the door might not have been bolted from inside which resulted into entry of the accused in the
room and, therefore, the story that was being highlighted by the prosecution that the bolt of the
room was opened by the accused or the door being pushed by the accused cannot be said to be
unreasonable or far-fetched one of the trial Court.
11. The prosecution alleged that the accused had entered the room of the house where the
complainant, prosecutrix, Abdul Hamid and Abdul Rashid were sleeping in the room. The court
disbelieved the version of the prosecution that six inmates were present in one room of the house
though as per some of the prosecution witnesses the house had three rooms. The trial court has
pointed out the contradiction in the size of the room qua the presence of the six persons in that
room when the accused entered the room. The court did not falter in holding that the presence of
the six persons in one room at the time of alleged occurrence was improbable. The witnesses though
have mentioned that all the witnesses slept in one room and the prosecutrix making the statement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 4
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
in such a manner as if there was only one room of the house and not three rooms as mentioned by
other witnesses so as to make the court believe that there was only one room where the all the
occupants were sleeping on the night of occurrence. All the persons including males and females
would have cramped themselves in one room of not big size is somewhat doubtful more so when
some of the occupants were grown up persons. The trial Court has justifiably improbabalize the
presence of all the persons and sleeping in one room keeping in view the size of the room.
12. The trial court has discussed the aspect if the manner in which the accused are alleged to have
kidnapped the prosecutrix could be believed in the light of the evidence that came on record.
13. The complainant Mst. Ghulam Bibi has deposed that six persons including Haji Kala, Haji
Kramat, Haji Bashir and Sattar Mohd. had entered the room whereas the other accused stationed
themselves at the door of the room. The witness has also deposed that the prosecution witnesses
present in the house tried to rescue the prosecutrix but the accused persons were successful in
leaving the room with the prosecutrix but only after inflicting injuries upon the persons present in
the room. Admittedly, there is no medical evidence on record to show that the family members of
the prosecutrix received injuries including fractures as mentioned by the complainant witnesses
except that Mohd. Alam had a bruise over the right side of the face as per Dr. Anil Kumar Amla. The
court has also noticed that whereas PW-Abdul Rashid has stated that the family members of the
complainant were held up by the accused persons for about half and an hour, on the other hand,
PW-Mohd. Alam has deposed that the accused entered the room and left the place with prosecutrix
within 5/7 minutes. PWs-Abdul Rashid and Abdul Hamid are stated to have received blows on their
body and the clothes were also torn but neither any injury is proved nor the torn clothes were seized
by the police. Infact the complaint did not mention the names of these two witnesses and appears to
have been brought in the picture only with a purpose to cement the case of the prosecution but that
does not convince the court in any manner for the reasons mentioned above.
14. PW-Mohd. Alam particularly mentions that he sustained the injury while lying on the bed and
was unable to move on account of his being suffering from Kyphosis. The trial Court has disbelieved
this version of the witness for the reason that PW-Abdul Rashid had stated that PW-Mohd. Alam
had received injury from iron rod though the same is not the case set up by the prosecution qua the
weapons used by the accused during the occurrence. The complainant has also stated that clothes of
Mohd. Alam was blood stained due to injuries but the clothes were not produced by the victim
during investigation. Thus, the so called injury received by Mohd. Alam was on account of the attack
made by the accused persons is not established. In totality of the circumstances, the finding of the
trial court on the above evidence disbelieving this part of the prosecution evidence is not perverse or
can be said to be unconvincing in any manner.
15. It is the case of the prosecution that during the course of occurrence, hue and cry was raised by
the persons present in the house of the complainant when the prosecutrix was being kidnapped by
the accused persons and this is what is deposed by the complainant Ghulam Bibi. Infact all the
members of the family have deposed about raising a noise during the course of occurrence in the
house. PW-Abdul Hamid has even gone to the extent of saying that the noise was raised even on the
road after the accused left the house.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 5
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
16. PW-Parmanand and PW-Kasturi Lal are the persons who are stated to have reached the house of
the prosecutrix on hearing the noise raised by the complainant party. The complainant in her
statement has even deposed that other 30 to 40 persons also gathered on the spot but could not
name any of them which appears to be not credible version as the persons who are alleged to have
come on spot will surely be the ones from the nearby area of the occurrence. It has come in the
evidence that PWs-Parmanand and Kasturi Lal reside not far away from the house of the prosecutrix
and were on the spot of occurrence within a very short period of time. The prosecution evidence also
reveals that the crying of the prosecutrix could be heard from the bank of the river and not to speak
of the noise coming from the house of the complainant and noise travelling outside the house for
some distance. The trial court has rightly taken note of the absence of Isher Dass from the case set
up by the prosecution as he was as per the site plan EXPW-18 was residing on the same side of the
road and the prosecutrix has also mentioned that Isher Dass reached the spot. Why the said Isher
Dass who happens to reside at a close distance of 30 to 40 yards of the house of the complainant and
would have in all probability heard the noise coming from the house of the complainant has not
been produced as a witness in the case is best known to the prosecution only. He was indeed an all
important witness in the case but has been left out by the police to support its case. It is evident
from the evidence that in case the accused would stay in the house for a very short duration it will
not probably attract the attention of any outsider and the scuffle having taken place or the injuries
as reported by the witnesses would have also not occurred. The witnesses though mention of
reaching the spot but they also failing to depose that they saw the accused taking away the
prosecutrix shows that the occurrence has not happened in the manner it is projected by the
prosecution.
17. The next point for discussion is the allegation of rape leveled against the accused-Haji Kala and
some other accused and if can be sustained in the present facts and circumstances of the case. The
medical evidence though may not conclusively prove the happening or not of rape yet the same
cannot be brushed aside and can aid the court in determining the allegation of rape leveled against
the accused.
18. The prosecution has examined three doctors in the case. PW-Dr. Inder Singh, who has been
examined regarding the certificate given by the Radiologist Dr. Manjeet Arora as the said Doctor
was not available and had gone to Saudi Arabia, has given opinion regarding the age of prosecutrix
to be above 14 and not less than 16 on the basis of said certificate. The opinion of the radiologist
regarding the age of the prosecutrix and based upon the ossification test is not conclusive as the
margin of two years regarding the age can be taken while determining the age of the victim. Thus,
the age of the prosecutrix could be between 16 and 18 and even more also though the appellant has
tried to convince the court that the victim was below age of 16 years when the occurrence took place.
19. The prosecution though claims that the prosecutrix was minor though not specifying the age yet
the same cannot be accepted for another reason that school certificate or any other evidence was not
produced evidencing the age of the prosecutrix at the time of occurrence. There is no credible
evidence that the victim was in 4th standard when the occurrence took place.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 6
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
20. Keeping in view the aforesaid opinion of the radiologist and absence of any documentary
evidence from the school, the trial court has held the age of the victim could be between 16 to 18
years. The age could even be more than eighteen years if seen in the light of the statement of above
witness.
21. PW-Dr.Naseem who conducted the medical examination of the prosecutrix has recorded that
there was no evidence of rape and the prosecutrix was used to intercourse and has further stated
that in case of gang rape as is the case set up by the prosecution the prosecutrix was bound to have
number of injuries which may not be present on the private part but on other parts of the body but
the same were not found during the examination. The prosecutrix was also examined by Dr.
Chanchal Gupta may be for the reason that the prosecution was not satisfied with the opinion of Dr.
Naseem. The evidence of Dr. Chanchal Gupta is not in a way contrary to what had been opined by
Dr. Naseem as she has stated that there was no presence of spermatozoa as well as the private part
hymen of the prosecutrix was torn bearing old tears and vagina easily admitting two fingers. As per
this doctor also, the prosecutrix was used to sexual intercourse and no definite opinion regarding
the rape in the recent past can be given. It may also be mentioned that the prosecutrix was advised
by Dr. Naseem for medical examination after 20 days for confirmation of pregnancy but the
prosecutrix never turned for medical examination thereafter as per advice. The allegation of rape
leveled against the accused who have been charged for the said offence cannot sustain and the
finding recorded by the trial court on this aspect of the case does not in any manner require reversal
of the said finding by this court in appeal when viewed in light of other circumstances of the case.
22. It would be advantageous to take note of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court passed in
Criminal Appeal No. 1095 of 2018 (arising from SLP (Crl.) No. 8578/2017) titled "Dola @
Dolagobinda Pradhan and anr. Versus The State of Odisha" wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court
observed as under:-
"In our considered opinion, the Trial Court as well as the High Court have convicted
the appellants without considering the aforementioned factors in their proper
perspective. The testimony of the victim is full of inconsistencies and does not find
support from any other evidence whatsoever. Moreover, the evidence of the
informant/victim is inconsistent and self-destructive at different places. It is
noticeable that the medical record and the Doctor's evidence do not specify whether
there were any signs of forcible sexual intercourse. It seems that the First
Information Report was lodged with false allegations to extract revenge from the
appellants, who had uncovered the theft of forest produce by the informant and her
husband. The High Court has, in our considered opinion, brushed aside the various
inconsistencies pointed out by us only on the ground that the victim could not have
deposed falsely before the Court. The High Court has proceeded on the basis of
assumptions, conjectures and surmises, inasmuch as such assumptions are not
corroborated by any reliable evidence. The medical evidence does not support the
case of the prosecution relating to the offence of rape. Having regard to the totality of
the material on record and on facts and circumstances of this case, it is not possible
for this Court to agree with the concurrent conclusions reached by the courts below.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 7
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
At best, it may be said that the accused have committed the offence of hurt, for which
they have already undergone a sufficient duration of imprisonment, inasmuch as they
have been stated to have undergone two years of imprisonment. Accordingly, the
appeal is allowed. The judgments of the Trial Court as well as the High Court are set
aside. The appellants are acquitted of the charges levelled against them. They should
be released forthwith, if they are not required in any other case."
23. The trial court has also minutely discussed the other aspects of the charge of rape if having been
established by the prosecution. As per the statement of the prosecutrix she was initially stripped of
her shalwar by the accused Haji Kala and shalwar was kept under her body when the rape was
committed and that her shalwar was washed after the rape was committed upon her and the same
shalwar was worn by her. The prosecutrix is allegedly raped later by other accused persons charged
of said offence. The court has rightly reasoned that if the shalwar was washed and the same was
seized by the police during investigation then the statement of the complainant-mother that the
clothes of the victim were tattered when her daughter came to her house cannot be countenanced.
The seizure of the shalwar becomes doubtful which is stated to have been worn by the victim during
her stay with the accused persons. In addition to above, the forensic report from FSL Jammu
revealed the presence of semen/human spermatozoa on the seized shalwar and presence of blood.
The chemical examination from FSL Calcutta did not determine blood group of the stain and thus
there is no matching of blood group on the shalwar with that of the prosecutrix. The presence of
spermatozoa and blood stains on the shalwar is contrary to the findings of the doctors who had
examined the prosecutrix during investigation and, therefore, from that angle also the charge of
rape against the accused cannot be said to be proved beyond shadow of doubt.
24. Last but not the least as far as kidnapping of the victim by the accused persons is concerned, the
same cannot sustain though the appellant has tried to make out a case for the same. The prosecutrix
is alleged to have been recovered from the house of Mohd. Hussain where the prosecutrix along with
the accused Haji Kala was present in one room. The door of the room where both were found was
not closed and the prosecutrix was wearing a new dress at that time. They were sitting on a cot and
the prosecutrix was found in good condition. PW-Prem Nath in whose presence the prosecutrix was
recovered from the house of Mohd. Hussain has stated so. PW-Abdul Hamid, Chowkidar has
deposed in the same terms and has further stated that the accused did not attempt to flee from the
house when the police came on spot nor the prosecutrix was found weeping at the time of recovery
nor the girl informed that she had been raped. PW-Yaseen Shah, Investigating Officer, has also
deposed that the room was open and Haji Kala was sitting there at the time of recovery of the
prosecutrix from the house of accused-Mohd. Hussain. He has further deposed that all family
members of Mohd. Hussain were present in the house. No witness who was present at the time of
recovery of the girl has deposed that the prosecutrix admitted having been harassed or raped by the
accused persons during her stay with the accused. It would be but natural for the prosecutrix to state
this fact to the witnesses who were present at the time of recovery but the witnesses have not stated
so in their deposition in the court. The prosecutrix having gone to the house of Mohd. Hussain of
her own will and volition from her house cannot be ruled out. It is also very relevant to take note of
the fact that the wife of Mohd. Hussain where the prosecutrix allegedly stayed and also recovered
was also present in the house and as per the statement of the prosecutrix, she had even provided
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 8
State Of J&K vs Haji Kala And Others on 28 March, 2023
milk to her during her stay in that house. Investigating Officer has also mentioned that all the family
members of the said Mohd. Hussaain were present when the prosecutrix was recovered from the
house of said Mohd. Hussain. It is very unlikely that in the presence of the wife of accused Mohd.
Hussain and family members, the accused-Haji Kala and others, who are facing rape charges would
have been allowed by the family members including the female occupants of the house to commit
such grave activity as attributed to those accused persons.
25. The prosecution has to stand on its own legs to prove the case against the accused beyond
shadow of doubt irrespective of the defense evidence that may have come on record. The court is of
the view that the trial court has acquitted the accused persons after thrashing the evidence in a
proper manner. The finding of the trial court is neither perverse nor improbable. If two views are
possible from the evidence that comes on record, the one which favours the accused should be taken
is a trite proposition of law.
26. The accused have produced defense evidence in order to show the divorce between Zeenat Bi
and Alaf Din had been granted by the court of District Judge, Rajouri and this fact is mentioned in
the marriage agreement between Haji Kala and Zeenat Bi dated 25.04.1981 registered with
Registrar, Rajouri and which is on the file. PW-Abdul Hameed is witness to the document and
surprisingly in his statement before the Court denies the knowledge of marriage of Zeenat Bi with
Haji Kala. After the divorce of Zeenat Bi with Alaf Din, the prosecutrix had Nikkah with the accused-
Haji Kala. The statements recorded by the defense witnesses do speak of the same fact. The version
of PW-complainant Ghulam Bibi that her daughter was married to Alaf Din apparently gets belied
by the document placed on record which shows that Zeenat Bi and Alaf Din had divorced and Zeenat
Bi was married to the accused-Haji Kala. Irrespective of what has been produced by the defense, the
prosecution has failed to establish that the accused entered the house of the complainant forcibly,
took away the prosecutrix from her house against her will, the victim was minor at the time of
occurrence, the rape alleged against the accused persons charge sheeted for the same. There is no
reason for this Court to take contrary view to what has been taken by the trial Court while acquitting
the respondents-accused.
27. The appeal has no merit and is dismissed.
28. Record of the trial Court be sent back. The trial Court shall proceed against the accused-Karamat
Hussain who has been proceeded in terms of Section 512 Cr.PC.
(Puneet Gupta) (Rajnesh Oswal)
Judge Judge
Jammu :
28.03.2023
Pawan Chopra
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100488739/ 9
