State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU, KASHMIRAND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Reserved on : 13.07.2023
Pronounced on: 14 .08.2023
CRAA No. 105/2012
State of J&K
.....Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. P. D. Singh, Dy.AG,
v/s
Mukesh Kumar and others .....Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. V. Bhushan Gupta, Advocate
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Appellant-State has preferred the present appeal against the judgment dated 14.07.2012 of
learned Third Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (for brevity 'trial Court') in File No. 207 by which
the respondents Mukesh Kumar and Anil Kumar were acquitted of the charge under Sections 304
Part-II/34 RPC.
2. In brief, the prosecution case is as under:-
On 08.12.2006 Police Station, Janipur received information at 9:30 a.m. from
reliable sources that dead body of one Gautam S/o Buta Ram R/o Mandlik Nagar,
Jammu, who had been murdered by some unidentified person/persons by inflicting
injuries on his head and other parts of his body, was lying in a room existing on a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 1
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
shed belonging to one Mohan Singh. On said information a case FIR No. 161/2006
for offence under Section 302 RFC was registered and investigation commenced.
During the course of investigation, it was found that the body of the
deceased-Gautam was already shifted to the CMC, Jammu. After postmortem body of
the deceased was taken into the custody and seizure memo was prepared. The Police
visited the spot, where body of the decease Gautam was found lying and the site plan
of the place of recovery of dead body was prepared, blood stained clothes of the
deceased-Gautam were seized and the FSL team was called to examine the spot. After
recording the statements of witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C it came to the fore
that deceased and accused persons were having prior acquaintance with each other,
but after some time, relations between them turned sour. On 07-12-2006 at 7.00
p.m. the deceased in the company of PWs Naresh Kumar and Shanker, later
Chowlddar of PW Mohan Lai were going towards Toph Bridge and when they
reached at cremation ground near PHE office, deceased had confrontation with the
accused persons who were also present there which turned into a fist fight, PWs
Naresh Kumar and Shanker tried to intervene, but without any success. It is further
alleged that during the scuffle deceased and accused came near a canal and in the
process of administering beating to the deceased, both the accused pushed the
deceased towards the canal. The deceased could not control himself and fell in the
canal with his head downwards towards the water. PWs Naresh Kumar and Shanker
along with accused brought out the deceased from the canal, who was unconscious
and blood was oozing out from his head and nose. PW4 Naresh Kumar immediately
left the spot in order to inform the family of the deceased. However, accused persons
along with PW Shanker boarded on Auto No.JK02U/9681 of PW Partap Singh and
put the deceased in the same and proceeded in the said Auto towards a lane near the
plot of PW IO Mohan Singh at Mandlik Nagar in order to keep the deceased in the
room of PW Shanker existing in the aforesaid plot. During investigation it came to
fore that when it was found by the accused that body of the deceased got stiff and had
died, accused persons along with PW Shanker left the spot leaving the body of the
deceased-Gautam in the aforesaid room after locking the latch of the room from
outside. The accused were taken into custody along with PW Shanker and during the
course of their custodial interrogation, it was found that PW Shanker was not
involved in the occurrence in any manner, as such, benefit under Section 169 Cr.P.C
was given to him and he was released from custody. His statement was recorded
under section 161 Cr.P.C as a witness in the case. After receiving the post-mortem
and FSL report and after completion of investigation, it was found that offence under
section 302 RPC was not made out against the accused, rather they had committed
offence under section 304 RPC, so offence under section 302 RPC was dropped and
final report under Section 173 Cr.P.C was filed in the Court of law and after the
conclusion of the trial the same has resulted in the impugned judgment.
3. Mr. P. D. Singh, learned Dy.AG while assailing the impugned judgment urged that the trial Court
has passed an order of acquittal without application of mind to the evidence produced by the
prosecution. Further, that the prosecution evidence has proved the offences against the respondents
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 2
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
beyond any shadow of doubt, but the trial Court has on the basis of minor contradictions in the
evidence acquitted the respondents.
4. Learned counsel for the respondents controverted the arguments and contended that there was
no reliable, cogent and consistent evidence before the trial Court even to convict the respondents
under Section 304 Part II IPC and that the respondents were falsely implicated in the case.
5. The prosecution has examined Partap Singh, Parshotam, Deepu, Naresh Kumar, Shashi, Dalbir
Singh, Dr. K. K. Thakur, Tej Ram, Mohd Raj, Mohan Singh, Dinesh Singh, Anil Mangotra,-
Executive Magistrate and Inspector Surinder Biloria.
Brief resume of their evidence is as under:-
PW 1 Partap Singh is the auto driver, has stated that accused are known to him, but
deceased was not known to him. On 31.12.2006 in the evening, he was standing near
Toph Bridge, in the meanwhile, accused Mukesh Kumar came to him and told that a
heavily drunk person is required to be taken to his house, he was reluctant to take the
said unconscious person in his Auto, however on the request of the accused persons,
took them towards Manklik Nagar. He further stated that on the nrext day, he was
sitting in his house, brother of the deceased whose name is not known to him came
there and told him about the identity of the persons who were taken by him in his
Auto to Mandlik Nagar, thereaftrer police came and took him to Janipur police
station and his Auto was seized.
In cross-examination, he has stated that accused were not known to him before the
occurrence, the police had not conducted identification parade in respect of the
accused and nor any identification was got conducted by the police in respect of the
person who was put in his Auto by the accused persons in an unconscious position.
He further stated that he has no knowledge about the actual occurrence.
PW2 Parshotam has stated that accused are known to him. Deceased was his real
brother. He has further stated that on 7.12.2006 he was coming back to his house
after funishing his duty and on the way near Mandlik Nagar, PW 4 Naresh Kumar
met him and told him that there was a scuffle between his brother Gautam and
accused persons.
He alongwith Naresh Kumar rushed to a canal near Mandlik Nagar, bu no body was found there, the
place where deceased used to work was also searched, thereafter they went to the house of
brother-in-law of the accused near Mandlik Nagar, but he beat them with fists and blows due to
which PW 4 Naresh Kumar was injured. He stated that due to late night hours, they abandoned the
search the search and on next day in the morning, they went to the auto stand where auto driver
Partap Singh told them that he had left deceased in the saw mill of PW I0 Mohan and thereafter
from the room of chowkidar of said mill which was locked from outside, the body of deceased was
found which was taken in the car of PW I0 Mohan to the hospital. The police was informed in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 3
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
hospital.
In cross-examination he has stated that occurrence had not taken place in his presence nor he has
any knowledge about the same. He stated that the deceased was an employee in the same saw mill
from where his body was recovered. The dead body of the deceased was lying on a bed in a naked
condition and in the same condition it was taken to the hospital.
PW 3 Deepu has stated that accused and the deceased are known to him. The deceased was
brother-in-law of his brother. On 7.12.2006 he had received a phone call from PW Parshotam about
the death of deceased Gautam. He went to the hospital where postmortem of the deceased was got
conducted.
PW4 Naresh Kumar has stated that accused and deceased are known to him. On 7.12.2006, he along
with PW Shanker and deceased-Gautam were going towards Toph bridge and on the way, accused
Mukesh met him who enquired from the deceased as to what he was saying on phone, over which
arguments started between them. Thereafter accused Mukesh left the spot. He has further stated
that when they were returning back and reached at a canal near PPIE office, accused persons met
them and they started beating the deceased-Gautam, he tried to intervene, in the meantime, accused
Mukesh pushed the deceased towards the canal due to which deceased tell down, they all tried to
pull the deceased from the but deceased was found dead, he had asked PW Shanker to sit there and
went to inform family members of the deceased. That he reached the house of deceased at Mandlik
Nagar and from there brought brother of the deceased, namely, PW Parshotam to the spot, but
neither accused nor PW Shanker or deceased were found present there. They rushed to the house of
brother-in-law of the deceased, but he beat them due to which he received injuries.
In cross-examination he has stated that none of them including deceased and accused had taken
alcohol on the eventful day, as soon as deceased fell down in the canal, all of them were worried,
they made a Joint effort to pull out the deceased from the canal as water of canal was very cold due
to which there was possibility of death of deceased. That on timely efforts made by accused Mukesh
and PW Shanker, deceased was pulled out from the canal. He further stated that the report was not
lodged to the police on the same day but was made on the next day and it was the Job of the family
of deceased to lodge the report earlier.
PW 5 Shashi has stated that accused were not known to him prior to occurrence, but after the
occurrence, he had seen the accused in the police station. The deceased was his brother-in-law. That
on 7/8th of December, 2006 after receiving a phone call about the deceased having scuffle with
some person, he went to Mandlik Nagar, but nobody was there. He stated that PW4 Naresh had
probably given him phone call about the scuffle and injuries received by the deceased at the hands of
accused, who had pushed the deceased in a canal.
PW 6 Dalbir Singh is the photographer who had taken photographs of the dead body of the deceased
at GMC. Jammu and at the place of occurrence.
PW 7 Dr. K.K. Thakur has conduced postmortem of the deceased and found following injuries;-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 4
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
1. Abrasion 1cm x 1/2 cm over the forehead radish in colour.
2. Abrasion over right knee l0 cm x 1cm over the left knee 1cm x 5cm, below the left knee 1.5cm x
.5cm, on the right leg interior aspect .7cm x .5cm and interior aspect of left leg .5cmX .5cm.3.
3. Abrasion .5cm on the darcel aspect of left little finger. .All the abrasions were radish in colour.
4. Haematoma present over the scalp in the right occipital with brushing of the scalp underneath.
One haemotoma present in parietal area extending to temporal area 8cm x 3cm radish brown in
colour. Sub dural haemotoma present in right parietal area 4cm x 3cm x .5cm with multiple small
haemorrhage in the brain substance, fracture in the anterior cranial fossa present on the right side.
According to his opinion, death in this ease was due to cranio-cerebral damage as a result of blunt
trauma head.
In cross-examination he has stated that postmortem was conducted on 8.12.2006 at 4.00 p.m. and
the time of death as per postmortem has been about 12 hours which means it can be eight hours or it
can be maximum sixteen hours. That there was smell of alcohol in the contents of the food found in
the stomach of the deceased.
PW 8 Tej Ram has stated that police had recovered clothes of the deceased from the place of
occurrence which were sealed and the ring used for seal impression was kepi on his supurdnama,
which is in the file.
PW 9 Mool Raj. Scientific Officer, FSL. Jammu has proved his report in the file regarding the FSL
opinion about the clothes of deceased, wet clay and unstained clay.
PW10 Mohan Singh has stated that accused are known to him, deceased was also known to him,
who used to work with him. .About four years back on 7 th of December at 10.00 a.m. he went to his
shop and found its shutter closed. That he came to know from his neighboring shop owner about
some quarrel with the accused and thereafter he went to the house of the deceased where he came to
know about a quarrel which took place between deceased and the accused in the process of which
deceased was thrown in a canal. The father of the deceased told him that they made a search of the
deceased on the previous day but no clue was found. He along with family members of the deceased
went to the house of PW Shankar but the room was found locked from outside and when they went
inside they found deceased lying on a bed and after watching the deceased closely, it was found that
he was dead and he was taken to hospital in his vehicle where he was declared as brought dead.
PW 13 Inspector Surinder Biloria is the 1.0 in the case. He has stated that in the year 2006, he was
posted as SHO of Police Station, Janipur and had registered case FIR No. 161/2006 for offence
under Section 302 RPC and took over investigation. Since dead body was taken to the hospital, so he
went to the GMC and seized the body. He identified memos prepared during investigation of the
case. He has further that as per the investigation it was established that deceased Gautam was killed
by accused persons by inflicting injuries over his head and he has produced challan in the Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 5
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
against the accused for commission of offence under Section 304 RPC as the deceased died on
account of a scuffle.
In cross-examination, he has stated that it is true that case was made out against the accused due to
statement given by PWs Naresh Kumar and Shanker. This is correct to say that PW Shanker had
also remained in custody of the police from 11th of December to 18th of December 2006 and before
that PW Shanker was absconding. The 'body of the deceased was found from the room of Shanker
alongwith blood stained clothes, but as per his investigation, the place of occurrence is a spot near
canal and not the room of PW Shanker. That no report was lodged about the occurrence on the same
night. That during investigation, involvement of PW Shanker was not found, as such he was given
benefit under section 1 69 of Cr.P.C."
6. Statements of accused under Section 342 Cr.P.C were recorded on 02.01.2012 in which accused
have denied the truth of prosecution evidence against them and they have further denied that any
scuffle took place between them and deceased.
7. As already observed hereinabove the prosecution has let in evidence by subjecting to examination
the aforesaid witnesses. PW1 Partap Singh is the Auto Driver, who took an unconscious heavily
drunk person in his Auto at the request of accused-Mukesh who had no knowledge about the
unconscious condition of the deceased -Gautam. The investigation officer of the case has not made
any effort to get the identification of body of deceased-Gautam from the said witness to establish the
fact that after the alleged occurrence both the accused dumped the body of the deceased in a room of
Saw Mill.
8. It is required to state that trial Court rightly held that PW 5 Shashi is the person who was
informed by some body on phone about the scuffle which took placed between the deceased and
accused persons and he was not an eye witness and the trial court has rightly held that this witness
has given different colour to the prosecution case by implicating PW IO Mohan Singh and PW
Shanker in the crime which is not the case of prosecution. Witnesses, PW 6 Dalbir Singh, PW 11
Dinesh Singh, photographers, PW 8 Tej Ram and PW 12 Anil Mangotra, Naib Tehsildar are formal
in nature.
9. PW Mohan Singh, has not supported the case of the prosecution as he has not stated anything
incriminating against the accused persons to connect the accused with the crime. He has only stated
that deceased-Gautam, PW Shankar and accused used to sit in the room of his saw mill and they
used to take liquor together.
10. The medical evidence is also not favourable to the prosecution, as the most important witness,
PW 7 Dr. K.K.Thakur who conducted the post on the body of the deceased on 8.12.2006 stated that
deceased had died due to cranio cerebral damage as a result of blunt trauma head. He has
specifically stated that the time of death of deceased was about 12 hours when postmortem was
conducted by him at 4.00 p.m. He has further stated that by taking maximum side as 16 hours the
time of death, then the death had taken place at about 12 noon at 8.12.2006 and on going to
minimum side, the death had taken place at 8'o clock in the morning on 8.12.2006 and there cannot
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 6
State Of J&K vs Mukesh Kumar And Others on 14 August, 2023
be any other opinion possible or plausible with regard to the time of death. Thus, as per the
statement of this witness, it seems that deceased had died at 12 noon or 8'o clock in the morning on
8.12.2006 and his testimony has almost ruled out that deceased had died on the spot in the evening
of 7.12.2006.
11. There is no dispute about the death of deceased-Gautam at the prime of his youth, but there is no
justifiable ground as urged in this appeal for seeking intervention even by challenging the acquittal
judgment and no worthwhile evidence has been adduced by the prosecution for securing conviction.
12. The trial Court has on appreciation of evidence on record held that material on record is not
sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that accused were the perpetrators of crime with which they have
been charged.
PW Shanker an eye witness in the case has not been examined, PW4 Naresh Kumar has not been
found to be reliable and trustworthy witness, the evidence of other witnesses examined in the case is
hearsay and last but not the least, even medical evidence is not supporting the prosecution case,
insofar as the time of death of deceased is concerned.
While going through the record of the case, no fault can be found so far appreciation of the
prosecution evidence by the trial Court is concerned.
13. In the instant case, the prosecution has not been able to produce worthwhile evidence or even
adequate evidence to prove the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubt. There are serious
discrepancies in the statements of the prosecution witnesses, and there is no cogent and convincing
evidence in the case to show the involvement of the accused in the crime. The prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, in terms of
the aforesaid reasons and findings, I am of the opinion, that the prosecution has failed to establish
the guilt of the accused. There is no perversity or absurdity or infirmity found in the impugned
judgment rendered by the trial Court.
Consequently, acquittal judgment rendered by the trial Court in in File No. 27 dated 14.07.2012, is
hereby confirmed.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE Jammu 14 .08.2023 Bir Whether approved for reporting?
Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102730136/ 7
