State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others ....
Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
Author: S.K. Panigrahi
Bench: S.K. Panigrahi
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.22057 of 2019
State of Odisha & Others .... Petitioners
Mr. M.K. Khuntia, Addl. Government Advocate
-versus-
Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. Krishna Chandra Sahu, Advocate
(For Opposite Party No.1)
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI
ORDER
Order No. 15.07.2021
5. 1. This matter is taken up by video conferencing mode.
2. The present writ petition filed on 15th November, 2019 challenges an order dated 19th May, 2017
by the Odisha Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, Bhubaneswar (OAT) in O.A. No.98 of 2015.
3. Although it is stated in para-28 of the writ petition that the copy of the impugned order of the
OAT was received by the State Government on 13th July, 2017 itself from the Registry of the OAT,
the inordinate delay of over two years in filing the writ petition has not been explained by filing an
application for condonation of delay.
4. The only explanation offered is in para 28 of the writ petition wherein it is stated that after receipt
of the copy of the // 2 // impugned order, a letter was written to the Principal Secretary to
Government, Health & Family Welfare Department, Odisha on 31st July, 2017 to take further course
of action in the matter. It appears that for nearly one year and seven months thereafter no action
appears to have been taken. The Law Department by a letter dated 2nd March, 2019 conveyed the
decision of the Government that a writ petition should be filed before this Court. There is no
explanation offered why it took the Law Department nearly two years to give the above opinion.
Thereafter there were again a series of delays. The response of the office of the Advocate General
was received on 8th May, 2019 that the writ petition was ready to be filed. Again nothing seems to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178655162/ 1
State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
have happened thereafter except holding further discussions regarding the conflicting decisions of
the OAT. It appears that on 25th June, 2019 the Government decided to file review petition before
the OAT. A green signal for the review petition was received from the office of the Chief Minister
only on 10th July, 2019 but again nothing was done immediately thereafter. With the OAT itself
being abolished in August 2019 the file again travelled to the Chief Minister for sanction to file a writ
petition which was received only on 10th October, 2019 Even thereafter the writ petition was not
immediately filed and ultimately it was filed only on 15th November, 2019.
5. It is, therefore, seen that at every stage there was a lackadaisical approach by the State
Government in processing the file for filing the writ petition before this Court. This kind of
explanation has been consistently rejected several times by the Supreme Court in the series of
judgments.
// 3 //
6. In The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bherulal 2020 SCC OnLine SC 849, the Supreme Court held
that there have to be proper and convincing reasons for the delay in the state authorities filing
appeals or petitions. In the said decision the Supreme Court observed as under:
"2. We are constrained to pen down a detailed order as it appears that all our
counseling to Government and Government authorities have fallen on deaf ears i.e.,
the Supreme Court of India cannot be a place for the 2 Governments to walk in when
they choose ignoring the period of limitation prescribed. We have raised the issue
that if the Government machinery is so inefficient and incapable of filing
appeals/petitions in time, the solution may lie in requesting the Legislature to expand
the time period for filing limitation for Government authorities because of their gross
incompetence. That is not so. Till the Statute subsists, the appeals/petitions have to
be filed as per the Statues prescribed.
3. No doubt, some leeway is given for the Government inefficiencies but the sad part
is that the authorities keep on relying on judicial pronouncements for a period of
time when technology had not advanced and a greater leeway was given to the
Government (Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag & Anr vs. Mst. Katiji & Ors.
(1987) 2 SCC 107). This position is more than elucidated by the judgment of this
Court in Office of the Chief Post Master General & Ors. v. Living Media India Ltd. &
Anr. (2012) 3 SCC 563 where the Court observed as under:
"12) It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were well aware or conversant
with the issues involved including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in 3 this Court. They cannot claim
that they have a separate period of limitation when the Department was possessed
with competent persons familiar with court proceedings. In the // 4 // absence of
plausible and acceptable explanation, we are posing a question why the delay is to be
condoned mechanically merely because the Government or a wing of the Government
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178655162/ 2
State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
is a party before us. Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter of
condonation of delay when there was no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or
lack of bonafide, a liberal concession has to be adopted to advance substantial justice,
we are of the view that in the facts and circumstances, the Department cannot take
advantage of various earlier decisions. The claim on account of impersonal
machinery and inherited bureaucratic methodology of making several notes cannot
be accepted in view of the modern technologies being used and available. The law of
limitation undoubtedly binds everybody including the Government.
13) In our view, it is the right time to inform all the government bodies, their agencies
and instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable and acceptable explanation
for the delay and there was bonafide effort, there is no need to accept the usual
explanation that the file was kept pending for several months/years 4 due to
considerable degree of procedural red tape in the process. The government
departments are under a special obligation to ensure that they perform their duties
with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an exception and should not
be used as an anticipated benefit for government departments. The law shelters
everyone under the same light and should not be swirled for the benefit of a few.
Considering the fact that there was no proper explanation offered by the Department
for the delay except mentioning of various dates, according to us, the Department has
miserably failed to give any acceptable and cogent reasons sufficient to condone such
a huge delay."
// 5 // Eight years hence the judgment is still unheeded!
4. A reading of the aforesaid application shows that the reason for such an inordinate delay is stated
to be only "due to unavailability of the documents and the process of arranging the documents". In
paragraph 4 a reference has been made to "bureaucratic process works, it is inadvertent that delay
occurs".
5. A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that if there is some merit in the case, the
5 period of delay is to be given a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed in any case. It is
really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases. This does not, of course, take away the
jurisdiction of the Court in an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being adopted in what we have categorized
earlier as "certificate cases". The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of dismissal from the
Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue and thus, say that nothing could be done because the
highest Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality and save the skin of officers
who may be at default that such a process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no improvement. The purpose of coming
to this Court is not to obtain such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time when
the concerned officer responsible for the same bears the consequences. The irony is that in none of
the cases any action is taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It is presumed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178655162/ 3
State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
that this Court will condone the delay and even in making submissions, straight away counsels
appear to address on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as happened in this
case till we pointed out to the counsel that he must first address us on the question of limitation.
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to do in all matters today, where there
are such inordinate delays that the Government or State // 6 // authorities coming before us must
pay for wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such costs can be recovered from the
officers responsible.
8. Looking to the period of delay and the casual manner in which the application has been worded,
we consider appropriate to impose costs on the petitioner- State of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty five
thousand) to be deposited with the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee. The amount be
deposited in four weeks. The amount be recovered from the officers responsible for the delay in
filing Page 5 of 6 the special leave petition and a certificate of recovery of the said amount be also
filed in this Court within the said period of time.
9. The special leave petition is dismissed as time barred in terms aforesaid."
7. The Supreme Court has recently in a series of matters reiterated that the explanation usually
offered by the State and its entities for the delay on account of administrative exigencies should not
be accepted unless they are shown to be justified. A sampling of such orders is as under:
(i) Order dated 13th January 2021 in SLP No.17559 of 2020 (State of Gujarat v.
Tushar Jagdish Chandra Vyas & Anr.)
(ii) Order dated 22nd January 2021 in SLP No.11989 of 2020 (The Commissioner of
Public Instruction & Ors. v. Shamshuddin)
(iii) Order dated 22nd January 2021 in SLP No.25743 of 2020 (State of Uttar Pradesh
& Ors v. Sabha Narain & Ors.)
(iv) Order dated 4th February 2021 in SLP No.19846 of 2020 (Union of India v.
Central Tibetan Schools Admin & Ors) // 7 //
(v) Order dated 11th January 2021 in SLP No.22605 of 2020 (The State of Odisha &
Ors v. Sunanda Mahakuda)
8. The Court not being satisfied with the explanation for the inordinate delay in filing the present
writ petition, dismisses it on the ground of laches. The interim order passed by this Court earlier on
24th January, 2020 stands vacated.
9. As the restrictions due to resurgence of COVID-19 situation are continuing, learned counsel for
the parties may utilize a printout of the order available in the High Court's website, at par with
certified copy, subject to attestation by the concerned advocate, in the manner prescribed vide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178655162/ 4
State Of Odisha & Others vs Sanjulata Sethy & Others .... Opposite ... on 15 July, 2021
Court's Notice No.4587, dated 25th March, 2020 as modified by Court's Notice No.4798, dated 15th
April, 2021.
(Dr. S. Muralidhar) Chief Justice (S.K. Panigrahi) Judge A.K.Kar/L. Behera
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/178655162/ 5
