State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September,
2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 19.09.2023
Pronounced on: 22.09.2023
CRAA No.131/2010
State ...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. Raman Sharma, AAG
V/s
1. Abdul Hamid S/o Abdul Rahim Malik
R/o Chira
2. Taskeen Ahmad S/o Ghulam Hussain Wani
R/o Goyela.
3. Ayaz Ahmad S/o Sayeed Ahmad Wani
R/o Threnkal
...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. N.D.Qazi, Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. The State of Jammu and Kashmir (now Union Territory) is in appeal against the judgment of
acquittal dated 24th June, 2010 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Doda ["the trial
Court"] in file No.21/Sessions titled State v. Adul Hamid and others, whereby the
respondents-accused have been acquitted of the charge under Section 302, 307, 34 RPC.
2. Briefly put, the case set up by the prosecution for trial against the respondents-accused was that
on 24th August, 2004, the police of Police Station, Gandoh received a wireless message from
Incharge Police Post, Kahara that some unknown militants had hurled an RPG on police picket with
a view to killing CRPF personnel. The RPG, however, missed the target and blasted in the house of
one Mohd. Hanief due to which his two children, namely, Nassra Banu and Baber aged 1 ½ years
and 9 years respectively were injured and succumbed to the injuries on spot and that the wife of
Mohd. Hanief, namely Shahida Begum was seriously injured and taken to Thathri hospital for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 1
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
treatment. It was reported that Mohd. Hanief, too, was injured in the incident and was under
treatment at Kahara.
3. On the basis of this information, case FIR No.80/2004 for offences under Sections 302, 307, 34,
109 RPC and 7/27 Arms Act was registered in Police Station, Gandoh and the investigation taken up
by Sub-Inspector Manjit Singh Incharge Police Post. He visited the site, prepared the site plan, got
the post-mortem on the dead bodies conducted and handed over the same to the heirs against
proper receipt for performance of last rites. The Investigating Officer also recorded statements of
the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and injury form of the injured were filled up. Later,
investigation was handed over to one Irfan Wani, Sub-Inspector, who, too, visited the spot and after
enquiry recorded the statements of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. On the basis of the
evidence collected during investigation, case was found proved against the respondents-accused
and, accordingly, Final Report was laid before the Trial Court. The Trial Court, after considering the
material on record and hearing the prosecution and the accused-respondents, charged all the
accused for offences under Section 302, 307, 34 and 109 RPC. All the respondents- accused pleaded
not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried.
4. The prosecution led its evidence and examined all the cited prosecution witnesses except PW-19.
On the closure of the evidence by the prosecution, incriminating evidence and circumstances
appearing against the respondents-accused were put to them, which all of them denied as false
allegations. The trial Court heard the arguments under Section 273 Cr.P.C. and did not find it a case
for acquittal at that stage. Option was given to the respondents-accused to lead their evidence in
defence but they declined to do so.
5. The trial Court considered the evidence on record and came to the conclusion that the prosecution
had miserably failed to prove the charge against the respondents-accused beyond any reasonable
doubt. Vide order and judgment dated 24.06.2010, impugned in this appeal, trial Court acquitted all
the respondents-accused of the charges framed against them. It is this order/judgment of acquittal,
appellant is aggrieved of and has called in question on various grounds.
6. Mr. Raman Sharma, learned AAG appearing for the appellant, submits that the trial Court has not
appreciated the evidence in correct perspective and has landed in error in not believing a cogent and
very convincing evidence that had come on record in the shape of testimonies of PW-5, Mohd.
Hanief and PW-6, Shahida Begum and PW-15 Shams-ud-Din. He submits that the aforesaid three
witnesses were the eye witnesses to the commission of offence and had disclosed unequivocally the
involvement of the respondents-accused in the commission of offence. The witnesses in their
testimonies not only identified the respondents-accused, who had committed the murder of children
of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief and PW-6 Shahida Begum but they also disclosed the motive for commission
of the crime.
7. Per contra, Mr. N.D.Qazi, learned counsel appearing for the respondents-accused, submits that
the judgment passed by the trial Court is well reasoned and based on proper appreciation and
analysis of the prosecution evidence on record. He argues that scope of interference with the
judgment of trial Court by the Appellate Court is limited and circumscribed, in that, if on evaluation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 2
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
of the evidence on record, two views are possible, the Appellate Court would prefer to take the view
that favours the accused.
8. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the findings of fact recorded by the trial Court and the view taken by it in
the judgment impugned is legally correct and unexceptionable.
9. Out of the 18 cited witnesses examined, only three witnesses can be said to have deposed
something which can be called to be incriminating against the respondents-accused. Rest of the
witnesses have either turned hostile or deposed in a manner that runs contrary to the prosecution
version.
10. PW-1 Ghulam Nabi in his testimony stated that at the time of occurrence it was complete dark
and, therefore, nobody could be identified. He is only a witness to the fact that on 24 th August,
2004 at 8.30 pm there was a blast in the quarter of PW-Mohd. Hanief followed by firing in which
one girl and one boy had died.
11. PW-2 Shokat Ali has also made similar deposition. Though, he confirms the blast that took place
in the house of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief at 8.30 p.m. on 24th August, 2004, which claimed lives of two
children of PW-Mohd. Hanief but denies that he identified the assailants. He states that due to
presence of Army, CRPF, STF and Police personnel on patrolling, it was not possible for anybody to
enter the house of PW- 5 Mohd. Hanief during night. He further states that it was a complete dark
night and, therefore, it was impossible to identify anybody. He submits that he does not know the
accused present in the Court.
12. PW-3 Mehbood Ahmed also states that he does not know the accused persons but he heard the
sound of blast at 8.30 pm in the month of August, 2004. He went to the house of PW-5 Mohd.
Hanief and found his two children dead and their mother injured. He states that it was complete
dark night. He claims to be living at a distance of ½ kilometer from the house of PW-Mohd. Hanief.
13. PW-4 Irshad Hussain in his deposition says that he does not know the accused present in the
Court. He claims to have visited the place of blast after half an hour after hearing wailing in the
house of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief. He was told that a grenade had blasted inside the house of Mohd.
Hanief in which his wife Shahida Begum had been injured and two children died. He, however,
denies having known the persons, who hurled the grenade.
14. PW-7 Shokat Ali, another prosecution witness, in his testimony states that he was told by PW-15
Shamas Din that the accused persons had committed the crime. It was also told by Shamas Din that
his Commander Abdul Hamid had asked him to commit the occurrence, but he did not accompany
them. He states that he heard the firing sound at 8 pm but it was a dark night and he was advised by
VDC members not to go to the place of occurrence. His brother met him in the morning and told
that the assailants could not be identified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 3
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
15. PW-8 Mohd. Sharief is neighbor of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief but he feigns his ignorance about the
occurrence. He was declared hostile by the prosecution but nothing incriminating could be elicited
from him in the cross-examination conducted by the prosecution.
16. PW-9 Mohd. Aslam and PW-10 Mehboob Ahmed are categoric in their statements that they do
not know as to who committed the blast. PW-Mehboob Ahmed, however, states that he heard from
the people that the blast was handiwork of the militants.
17. PW-11 Constable Lal Din is a witness to seizure memos in respect of some weapons which he
submits were brought out from Police Station, Thathri and handed over to Kote Incharge Havildar
Shiv Kumar. PW-12 Dr. Mehmood Ahmed has conducted autopsy on the dead bodies of the
deceased children of PW-Mohd. Hanief. He opined that death of two children was due to excessive
pain as well as bloodshed which caused neurogenic shock.
18. The witnesses so far discussed herein above, clearly do not support the prosecution story. It was,
thus, only the testimonies of PW- 5 Mohd. Hanief and PW-6 Shahida Begum that needed proper
analysis and evaluation. The trial Court has done this job very effectively. The trial Court has rightly
found out total inconsistencies in the statements made to the police and the statements of PWs- 5
and 6 made in the Court.
19. Indisputably, the statements of these two witnesses were recorded by the police twice i.e.
statements of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief were recorded on 25.08.2004 and 30.05.2006, whereas
statements of PW-6 Shahida Begum were recorded on 06.12.2004 and 31.05.2006. Both these
witnesses, it may be remembered, are the parents of the deceased children. Both the witnesses in
their earlier statements i.e. the statements recorded on 25.087.2004 and 06.12.2004 respectively
have not indicated the names of the assailants, rather their statement is that the occurrence was
committed by unknown militants. However, in their statements recorded on 30.05.2006 and
31.05.2006 respectively both the witnesses have named the respondents-accused as assailants. The
only explanation tendered for naming the accused involved in the commission of crime after more
than one year and nine months is that they had been threatened by the accused party that in case
they deposed against them, their whole family would be eliminated. This aspect has also been
analyzed by the trial Court in its correct perspective. The trial Court has reasoned that had it been a
case of the witnesses being threatened of dire consequences, they would have atleast disclosed it to
their neighbourers, who immediately rushed to their house after hearing the sound of the blast.
20. The prosecution witnesses Mohd. hanief and his wife Shahida Begum had lost their two children
and, therefore, could not have allowed the real perpetrators remain unnamed in the FIR. To put it
precisely, the explanation tendered by PW-5 Mohd. Hanief and PW-6 Shahida Begum was not found
convincing and appealing to logic by the trial Court. We fully subscribe to the view taken by the trial
Court on this aspect.
21. PW-15 Shamas Din is not a trustworthy witness. He himself claims to be an associate of the
respondents-accused and was under a direction from his Commander to participate with the
accused- respondents to carry out the blast in the house of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief. Though, he submits
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 4
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
that he did not go with the respondents-accused and participate in the commission of crime yet he
says that he told PW- Mohd. Hanief that the blast that claimed the lives of his children was the
handiwork of the respondents-accused. Having regard to his credentials and the nature of
deposition he has made before the Court, it is not safe to rely upon his statement and hold the
respondents-accused guilty.
22. From the conspectus of evidence on record, it is clearly deducible that none of the witnesses had
seen the respondents-accused hurling grenade on the house of PW-Mohd. Hanief. It is because of
this reason, the FIR states that the occurrence of blast is committed by unknown militants. PW-5
Mohd. Hanief and PW-6 Shahida Begum, the parents of the deceased children, who, too, were
injured in the blast also did not disclose the names of respondents-accused when their statements
were first recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. They did not even claim to have disclosed the names of
the respondents-accused to their neibourers and relations, who had gathered in their house after
hearing sound of the blast. Some of the neighbourers of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief have been examined as
prosecution witnesses and in their deposition none of the neighbourers of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief has
even whispered that PW-5 Mohd. Hanief ever told them that the blast had been done by the
respondents-accused.
23. The other prosecution witnesses pertaining to seizure memos are not relevant when the identity
of the assailants, who threw grenade on the house of PW-5 Mohd. Hanief is not ascertained.
Evidence taken as a whole would only lead us to one conclusion that PW-5 Mohd. Hanief and his
wife were injured and their two children killed in a grenade attack carried out by unknown militants.
24. Investigating Officer, despite making some efforts and collecting evidence could not identify the
perpetrators of the crime. The witnesses cited by the Investigating Officer in the challan do not
support the prosecution case when they make their depositions before the trial Court. There seems
to be an attempt by the Investigating Officer to name the respondents by recording statements of
PW-5 Mohd. Hanief and PW-6 Shahida Begum under Section 161 Cr. P.C. once again after a gap of
more than one and half year. He even succeeded in his effort and got respondents-accused named as
assailants by the said witnesses. However, when the depositions were made before the trial Court,
the contradictions emerged putting the entire case set up by the prosecution in the realm of doubt
and suspicion.
25. For the foregoing reasons and also the reasons given in detail by the trial Court in the judgment
impugned, we do not find it a case for interference with the judgment of acquittal recorded by the
trial Court. Needless to emphasize that the scope of interference with the judgment of acquittal in
appeal is circumscribed and even if, on evaluation of the evidence on record, two views are possible,
the Appellate Court would take the view that favours the accused. It is cardinal principle of criminal
jurisprudence that accused is presumed to be innocent unless proven guilty and this presumption
gets fortified with the acquittal by the trial Court.
26. Viewed thus, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 5
State vs Abdul Hamid S/O Abdul Rahim Malik on 22 September, 2023
JAMMU
22.09.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132027051/ 6
