State Of J&K vs Rafiq Mohd on 14 March, 2023
State Of J&K vs Rafiq Mohd on 14 March, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
S. No. 5
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
SLA No. 237/2014
c/w
CRAA No. 225/2014
State of J&K .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, GA.
Vs
Rafiq Mohd. ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Vasharan Thakur, Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
ORDER
1. The applicant-UT is seeking leave to file appeal against the judgment of acquittal dated
30.04.2014 recorded by the court of learned Sessions Judge, Udhampur (hereinafter to be referred
as the trial court) in challan titled "State Vs. Rafiq Mohd." emanating out of FIR No. 91/2012 for
commission of offence under Section 306 RPC.
2. The respondent was charged for commission of offence under Section 306 RPC and during the
course of trial, prosecution examined 11 witnesses and 3 witnesses were given up. The allegation
against the respondent is that he abetted the commission of suicide by the deceased on 05.05.2012,
who hanged himself from a tree.
3. PW Shiv Dev Singh has deposed about dead body of Shakeel Mohd hanging with a mango tree. As
per him, the Police recovered a notebook of accounts and took the same with them and the Police
stated that there was suicide note in it, but in cross-examination he stated that he did not read the
suicide note and also the Police did not read the same in his presence.
4. PW Parveen Akhtar who is mother of the deceased stated that the deceased told her that Rafiq
was telling him to forsake the company of Yasmeen, otherwise he would not survive. She advised
him not to get perturbed and told him that the matter will be investigated. She further c/w deposed
that the deceased came to his house at 9'O Clock when she was there and on receiving a phone call
he went out, but thereafter he did not come back.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154761320/ 1
State Of J&K vs Rafiq Mohd on 14 March, 2023
5. PW Mohd. Rashid has simply stated about dead body of the deceased hanging with the tree. He
further stated that a scarf was tied around the throat. Clothes of the deceased were searched and Rs.
4220/- were recovered which were seized by the Police.
6. PW Farooq Mohd who is brother of the deceased stated that they waited for Shakeel during the
whole night on 06.05.2012 and his Uncle (Phoopha) had informed him that the deceased had died
in the House of Nazir-father of Yasmeen. Dead Body of the deceased was hanging with the tree. The
respondent often used to phone the deceased to forsake his relations with Yasmeen and that is why
he was depressed and committed suicide.
7. PW Rashpal Singh did not support the prosecution. He was declared hostile. Despite cross
examination, learned Public Prosecutor could not elicit anything incriminating from him.
8. PW Sudesh Kumar, PW Mangal Singh and PW Prem Singh were given up by the prosecution.
9. PW Rakesh Hangloo stated that the admitted writing did not contain sufficient details for
comparison with questioned documents.
10. PW Mohd. Rashid stated that Mohd. Rafiq is the son of his brother-in-law and he told him that
Shakeel expired due to hanging from a tree. He further stated that he had gone to the house of his
in-laws where he was told that Sonu used to threaten him.
11. PW Dr. R Nagar has proved the Post Mortem Report.
12. PW Akram Mohd who is brother of the deceased has deposed that the respondent used to
threaten the deceased to leave company of Yasmeen because he was engaged with her. Yasmeen was
not consenting for this marriage and she repeatedly phoned the deceased telling him that she c/w
wanted to marry with Rafiq. He also stated that dead body of the deceased was hanging behind the
house of the accused on 05.05.2012.
13. PW Ved Prakash Naib Tehsildar proved the resealing of three packets.
14. PW Arjun Prakash Sharma is the Investigating Officer.
15. From perusal of the material evidences brought on record, the only allegation against the
respondent is that he was threatening the deceased to forsake his relations with Yasmeen as a result
of which he was depressed and committed suicide. In order to convict a person for commission of
offence under Section 306 RPC there must be an act on the part of the accused so as to prompt the
deceased to commit suicide and the act must be proximate to the commission of suicide. From the
evidence on record, there is no evidence that the respondent/accused committed an act which
prompted the deceased to commit suicide. More so, the suicide note that was relied upon by the
prosecution has not been proved. Thus there is no evidence on record that needs appreciation by
this Court so as to find out whether the prosecution has been able to establish its case beyond any
reasonable doubt or not.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154761320/ 2
State Of J&K vs Rafiq Mohd on 14 March, 2023
16. In view of the above, no fruitful purpose shall be served in the event permission to the applicant
to file appeal against the well reasoned judgment of acquittal recorded by the learned trial court is
granted. As such, the present application is found to be misconceived and the same is dismissed
along with the appeal.
17. Record of the trial court be sent back forthwith.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 14.03.2023 Sahil Padha Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154761320/ 3
