State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad
on 25 July, 2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
CrlA (AD) No. 8/2019
Reserved on: 03.07.2025
Pronounced on: 25.07.2025
State of J&K Through SHO P/S Pahalgam
...Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. A. R. Malik, Sr.AAG.
VERSUS
1. Fayaz Ahmad Bajad
2. Mohammad Iqbal Bajad
Sons of Ali Bajad
3. Ali Jan Bajad
S/o Khazan Bajad
Residents of Thehru Tehsil Pooni, District Reasi.
...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Mir Reyaz, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJAY PARIHAR, JUDGE.
JUDGMENT
Sanjay Parihar, J:
1. Impugned in this appeal by the State is the judgment dated 06.11.2018 passed by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Anantnag, ('the Trial Court') in case titled
'State Vs. Fayaz Ahmad Bajad & Ors.', FIR No.08/2016 Police Station, Pahalgam for
the commission of offences Page |2 punishable under Sections 376/511, 451, 34, 302
RPC, by virtue of which the respondents herein have earned acquittal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 1
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
2. Before we deal with the grounds of challenge urged by the appellant in support of the appeal, it is
necessary to notice the prosecution case in short.
3. An application was received by SHO Pahalgam from SDPO Pahalgam, wherein the complainant
has stated that on 24.06.2015 the deceased Altaf Bajad entered into his own tent at Aadu at 1:00 PM
where he saw his wife (XXX) in a compromising position with the accused No. 1, resulting in the
quarrel between the deceased and accused No. 1. The accused No. 1 with the help of his family
members had killed the deceased and then spread the rumour that the deceased had died due to fall
from the tree. The accused persons have also threatened the prosecution witness No. 2 (XXX), who
happens to be the wife of the deceased, and that was the reason that she did not narrate her vows
before any person. Earlier, one more application was moved by the complainant on 30.06.2015,
where proceedings under Section 174 Cr.PC were initiated by the Executive Magistrate from
30thJuly 2015 and during inquest proceedings the statement of the witnesses were recorded and
then the deceased was again buried. As per the documents in the form of affidavit and as per the
report of the doctors, the death of the deceased was not natural and also was not due to fall from the
tree but actually the deceased was killed by the accused persons who were also residing near Page |3
the tent of the deceased. FIR No. 08/2016, in this regard, for the commission of offences punishable
under Sections 376/511, 302 RPC was registered and during investigation the statement of the
witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC and statements of some of the witnesses were also
recorded u/s 164-A Cr.PC. The site map was prepared and accordingly the charge sheet was
presented before the court of Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Aishmuqam against the accused persons
under Sections 376/511, 451, 302/34 RPC. The case was committed to the court of learned Principal
Sessions Judge, Anantnag who assigned the case to the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Anantnag for trial.
4. The trial court framed charges against the accused-respondents for offence under Sections
376/511, 451, 302/34 RPC. The respondents denied the charges framed against them and claimed to
be tried. The prosecution was allowed to produce its evidence and the evidence was closed on
30-06-2018 when the prosecution failed to produce its witness Nos. 6, 9, 12, 13, 21 and 22 despite
repeated directions in this regard. The incriminating circumstances appearing in the prosecution
evidence were put to the accused-respondents and their statements under Section 342 CrPC were
recorded. They denied the allegations levelled against them as also the incriminating circumstances
appearing in the prosecution evidence against them.
5. Based on the evidence produced by the prosecution, the trial court found that the prosecution had
desperately failed to produce the clinching Page |4 and trustworthy evidence against the accused
persons and, as such, the prosecution has failed to prove the case against the accused persons
beyond reasonable doubt. Accordingly, the case was dismissed and the accused persons were
acquitted from the charges levelled against them.
6. We have heard the learned counsel for both the sides and perused the record available on file.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant,during the course of arguments, has laid emphasis on the
argument which has also been taken before the trial court that, the trial court had not appreciated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 2
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
the evidence of prosecution witness No.2, who happens to be the wife of deceased and who stated
that she was alone in the tent when accused No.1 entered into her bedding, removed her trousers
and had sexual intercourse with her, in the meantime her husband (the deceased) came there and as
soon as he saw the accused No.1 quarrel started between them, and during the quarrel other two
accused persons entered into the tent and started thrashing the deceased by fists and also caught
hold of his neck. The said witness categorically stated that due to beating the deceased died. That,
the trial court has not applied its judicial mind while considering the prosecution evidence and has,
thus, adopted a hyper technical view while disbelieving the case of the prosecution; another limb of
the argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is relatable to the affidavit executed by
the accused persons before the 'Baradari' wherein the accused have confessed that they have
committed the offence. It is argued that in case the accused persons would Page |5 not have
committed the offence of murder then they would not have promised to pay an amount of Rs.4.00
lacs as compensation towards the complainant, but such important piece of evidence has not been
appreciated by the learned trial court. Further submission of learned counsel for the appellant is
that as per the settled position of law, the trial court was duty bound to take coercive measures so as
to ensure attendance of prosecution witnesses if the learned trial court has found that the
prosecution has failed to produce witnesses for recording their evidence, but without doing so the
learned trial court cannot arrive at a finding that the prosecution has not produced other witnesses
and that the prosecution had failed to examine all the witnesses. The further ground of challenge to
the judgment of acquittal is that, the impugned judgment has been delivered on technical grounds.
The larger picture whether the ingredients of the offence were fulfilled by the evidence led by the
prosecution has been ignored in toto by the trial court. When the evidence led by the prosecution
before the trial court is perused it inspires confidence that the accused persons have committed the
crime for which they deserve to be convicted.That, the prosecution has proved the guilt of the
respondents-accused beyond any reasonable doubt by leading cogent and trustworthy evidence
during the course of trial. There is a settled position of law that the standard of proof as epitomized
by the phrase 'beyond any reasonable doubt' need not to be over- stretched. It has been laid down in
various judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that while returning a finding as to whether a
particular fact stands proved, Page |6 disproved or not proved, the courts are required to apply the
test of man of ordinary prudence as envisaged under Section-3 of the Evidence Act. But the trial
court has completely failed to appreciate the said mandate of law and has grossly erred in law while
rendering the impugned judgment and that, the prosecution has succeeded to prove its case against
the respondents for having murdered the deceased Altaf Bajad and that, the medical opinion of the
doctor brought on record link the accused with the commission of offence. The statement of the
witnesses coupled with other evidence also shows that the prosecution has been able to prove its
case against the accused persons beyond any shadow of doubt; that, the impugned judgment is not
sustainable for the reason that the trial court has not rightly appreciated the evidence, which was
brought on record by the prosecution during the trial of the case. Lastly it was submitted that the
evidence and material produced by the prosecution has proven the guilt of the accused persons
beyond any shadow of doubt. Therefore, there was no option left to the learned trial court but to
record conviction, however, instead the accused-respondents have been acquitted of heinous charge
leveled against them.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 3
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
8. After going through the evidence on record and also having taken care to peruse the explanation
tendered by the respondents (accused) to the incriminating material to which they have tendered
explanation in terms of Section 342 Cr.PC, wherein they are found stating that though the case
against them is false and that they were made to sign an affidavit, but no-
Page |7 where in the said the affidavit they had admitted their involvement in the incident. That,
under the influence of police, the complainant party got the affidavit executed from them in order to
extract monetary consideration from the respondents which they refused to accede and that the
deceased, as per the version of his wife, had fallen from the tree and the respondents had nothing to
do with the incident. The respondent-Fayaz Ahmad Bajad had also denied having any intimacy with
the wife of the deceased (PW-2) and also denied having done any untoward incident with her. So, all
the respondents-accused have tendered explanation that they did not admit their involvement in the
incident before the "Baradari", as is being projected.
9. We had an occasion to examine the said affidavit, which is recorded as EXPW-II and bears thumb
impression of the respondents and appears to have been executed by accused-Ali Jan and Fayaz
Ahmad Bajad claiming to have been negligent and for that negligent act would be compensating the
complainant party by paying Rs.4.00 lacs. The said affidavit is claimed to have been executed in
presence of Chowdhary Abdul Majid Bajad, Haji Gull and Ghulam Rasool.
10. On close scrutiny of EXPW-II, it reveals that there is not even a whisper of the respondents to
have admitted their involvement in the incident dated 24.06.2015.
11. Be that as it is, the issue of this document stated to be in the nature of extra judicial confession,
as claimed by the prosecution, would be dealt at an appropriate stage.
Page |8
12. During the course of hearing, the appellants were fair enough to concede that it is PW-2 who is a
star witness and the trial court has failed to appreciate her testimony in its appropriate perspective
and has also not been able to appreciate that she was under threat of the respondents that prevented
her from divulging the incident to PW-1 when he came to know of the death of the deceased.
13. Given the incident, the prosecution case is that it was respondent- Fayaz Ahmad Bajad, who,
with an intention to commit illegal sexual intercourse on PW-2, forced his entry in the
premises/tent of the deceased where his wife (XXX) was alone, who subjected her to forcible sexual
intercourse and it was in that incident her husband suddenly came in the tent that resulted in the
fight between accused No.1 and deceased and former was joined by other accused also who
thereafter inflicted murderous assault on the deceased thereby killing him and thereafter placed his
body underneath a tree and then spread a rumor that he died due to fall.
14. This in a nutshell is the prosecution case and the manner in which the said incident took place.
Examination of the evidence would show that except PW-2 there is no other eye witness to the
incident.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 4
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
15. PW-Manzoor Ahmad Bajad, the informant and the brother of the deceased,who had fairly
conceded that he came on spot only after the deceased had expired and on enquiry he was told by
accused No.3 that the deceased has been killed by one Wazir, who was the paramour of PW-2- wife
of the deceased. When he enquired from the wife of the deceased, she Page |9 told him that the
deceased died because of fall but after she went to her parental house, there she told him that it was
the accused No.1 who had killed the deceased. On that basis he lodged a report. He fairly concedes
that the wife of the deceased has given the contradictory version and also is found stating that the
wife of the deceased was threatened by the accused of dire consequences.
16. PW-Abdul Aziz Bajad, Gul Mohammad Darsaroo, Ghulam Rasool Ganai,too are not witness to
the incident rather have been informed of the death of the deceased by PW-1 and thereafter they
came on spot.
17. So, from the testimony of aforesaid witnesses it is absolutely clear that none of the aforesaid have
witnessed the incident and even if they are found narrating that the accused persons have any role
to play in the death of the deceased that was on the strength of hearsay and nothing else.To that
extent, their evidence becomes unreliable.
18. Having said so, we now turn to the statement of PW-2 as the appellant has vehemently contested
the acquittal of accused on the strength of the finding being perverse.
19. PW 2-(XXX) in her statement, on the one hand says that it was between 11 AM to 12 noon when
she was in her tent and that it was accused No.1 who entered there and committed forcible sexual
intercourse with her, meanwhile, her husband returned back and on seeing her in compromising
position, the two had a fight which was joined by other accused later on. She also claims that even
the wives of accused Nos.2 and P a g e | 10 3 later also joined and that due to thrashing and beating
by accused, her husband died. She admits that she did not divulge the above narration to the brother
of the deceased or to the police after the later had come on spot to enquire. It is relevant to state
here that PW-1 on noticing about the death of the deceased and also the narration of this witness
believed that the deceased may have died because of fall, therefore, he was buried. Later on he states
to have been told by PW-2 that it was accused No.1 who committed the incident. In-fact what
transpires is that PW-Manzoor Ahmad Bajad had filed back to back complaints i.e., on 30.06.2015,
29.07.2015 as well as on 30.07.2015 requesting the police agency to investigate the suspicious death
of his brother, meaning thereby that initially complainant (PW-1) had believed the version of the
wife of the deceased that deceased had died because of fall. She claimed that after the incident of
death of the deceased she was handed over by her in-laws and send to the parental house, and it was
there she told to her parents about the incident dated 24.06.2015. None of her parents have been
examined as witness.
20. PW-3 Abdul Aziz Bajad had been found narrating that the wife of the deceased is an untruthful
witness who was never under any kind of threat or coercion and that she had changed her version a
number of times.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 5
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
21. On going through the testimony of PW-2, we could find that the witness in her testimony is not
consistent and it is highly unlikely that she would have remained a mute spectator to an incident
involving not only an act of forcible sexual assault upon her but followed by murderous assault on P
a g e | 11 her husband. She choose not to implicate the accused immediately after the incident, even
after the burial of deceased she remained silent. She was examined during inquest proceedings on
31-08-2015 wherein she is categorically found narrating that while it was raining her husband had
gone out carrying an axe along; she after washing the utensils had ventured out of the tent when she
saw her husband lying unconscious underneath a tree, she raised hue and cry that attracted the
other people who took him to the tent. There she reiterated that the deceased died because of fall. As
per PW-1, the exhumation of the body of deceased,under the orders of District Magistrate Anantnag
dated 17.08.2015, was conducted on 26.08.2015. Until that time there was nothing on the part of
PW-2 to have disclosed that the accused persons were the perpetrators of the incident. She is found
to be implicating the accused for the first time on 19.02.2016 when she was produced before JMIC,
Anantnag for making of statement under Section 164-A Cr.P.C. She categorically admits that the
statement she has made during the inquest proceedings is false and was wrongly recorded, she also
claimed that on one more occasion she was examined by the police, there also her statement has
been wrongly recorded, and that the true statement is the one which she is giving in the court.
22. No-where in her testimony, we are able to find even a whisper as to what kind of threat had been
extended to her by the accused persons, rather on going through the charge-sheet and the evidence,
it transpires that even the PW-2 is also alleged to have sworn an affidavit before the 'Baradari' on P a
g e | 12 28.06.2015 to the effect that the accused No.1 had forcibly entered into her premises and
subjected her to forcible sexual intercourse and when the deceased noticed that incident he and the
accused No.1 had a fight which was joined by others. In case the said affidavit is based on truth and
the incident having taken place on 24-06-2015 there was no occasion for PW-2 to have not given the
true statement of account during the inquest proceedings.When confronted with the allegation that
she was having illicit relation with accused No.1, she had flatly denied the same. At the cost of
repetition if she was the only person having the knowledge of the incident then she would not have
remained silent for such a long time. The narration of events appears to have been twisted in such a
way to make up a case against the respondents, rather the alleged incident of PW-2 being subjected
to forcible sexual act, is a narration that has been cooked up later on. When suggested by the
defence that whether she had killed her husband, she reverted that it was the accused who murdered
her husband. When asked whether she had executed an affidavit implicating the accused in the
incident, she flatly denied having executed such an affidavit and also went on to say that the said
affidavit was forcibly obtained from her, so it was without her consent. She denied having illegal
sexual relations with accused No.1.
23. On overall scrutiny of her testimony, when examined with the medical evidence, goes on to show
that though she claimed that the accused gave such a beating to her husband that resulted into his
death, whereas the P a g e | 13 medical examination only speaks that there were no external and
internal injuries except that the neck bone of the deceased had got broken. PW-1 had fairly conceded
that when the deceased was made to burial they did not come across or noticed any marks of
violence on the body of the deceased and that belied the version given by PW-2 that the deceased
died because of fall.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 6
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
24. Assuming for the sake of arguments that the deceased got furious on seeing his wife in
compromising position with accused No.1 and resultantly there was a fight, then the accused being
four in number and all were able bodied who in case had subjected the deceased to such type of
assault resulting into his death, then the nature of injuries on his body would be apparent which is
not the case which belies the version of the PW-2 that it was accused who had given beating to the
deceased. Since, PW 2 had changed her statement from time to time, her version cannot be believed
and her testimony falls in the category of a witness who is neither reliable nor unreliable.
25. Hon'ble Apex Court in a case titled "Sampath Kumar Vs. Inspector of Police
Krishnagiri"reported in (2012) 4 SCC 124, has observed that the discrepancies in testimony of a
witness cause by memory lapses are acceptable, but is unsafe to rely upon a version with material
improvement unless it is corroborated by some other independent evidence that may probabilise the
testimony. The Court has held as under:-
"...28. In the present case the testimony cannot be wholly reliable or wholly
unreliable. He is not a chance witness P a g e | 14 who had no reason to be found near
the deceased at the time of the occurrence. There is evidence to show that Palani (PW
7) used to sleep with the deceased Senthil in the verandah of the house. What makes
it suspect is that the witness has, despite being a natural witness, made a substantial
improvement in the version without there being any acceptable explanation for his
silence in regard to the fact and matters which were in his knowledge and which
would make all the difference in the case. The Court would, therefore, look for
independent corroboration to his version, which corroboration is not forthcoming.
All that is brought on record by the prosecution is the presence of a strong motive but
that by itself is not enough to support a conviction especially in a case where the
sentence can be capital punishment."
26. In "Mahavir Singh Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh"reported in (2016) 10 SCC 220, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed that a contradicted testimony of an interested witness cannot be
usually treated as conclusive and has held thus :-
"...22.The position of law in cases where there is a contradiction between medical
evidence and ocular evidence can be crystallized to the effect that though the ocular
testimony of a witness has greater evidentiary value vis-à-vis medical evidence, when
medical evidence makes the ocular testimony improbable, that becomes a relevant
factor in the process of the evaluationof evidence. However, where the medical
evidence goes so far that it completely rules out all possibility of the ocular evidence
being true, the ocular evidence may be disbelieved."
27. Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Kirpal Singh Vs. State of Punjab"
reported in 2024 SCC OnLine 549, while directing acquittal of appellant P a g e | 15
therein by giving him the benefit of doubt, has observed that 'the inherent
improbabilities and loopholes in the evidence completely destroy the fabric of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 7
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
prosecution case which is full of holes and holes which are impossible to be stitched
together'.
28. The trial Court has thoroughly discussed the statement of PW-2 and found that in case PW-2 is
found to have given true statement of account, then there would have been marks of injury on the
body of the deceased, even the alleged use of 'pheran' in affecting strangulation of the deceased that
too would have resulted into laying of a ligature mark around his neck, whereas the medical
examination of the deceased clearly reveals that there was no ligature mark present on the neck of
the deceased. The trial court has also found that the beating would have resulted in injuries to
abdomen or other vital parts of the body, however, that aspect also is negated from the medical
evidence.
29. We agree with the finding returned by the trial court that given the nature of the testimony of
PW-2, the same was not only shaky but full of inconsistencies, wherein the witness has changed her
narration from time to time, thereby making her an untruthful witness which cannot be believed on
its intrinsic character that too in a case involving an offence of murder.
30. It was pointed out by the appellant that the respondents have executed affidavit admitting their
involvement in the incident. In this regard we have already observed in the aforesaid paras that the
document (EXPW- II) no-where shows or depicts that the respondents have made any P a g e | 16
inculpatory statement against them admitting their involvement in the incident.
31. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents, during the course of arguments has
submitted that the evidence led in this regard is also shaky because neither PW-Ghulam
Muhammad Darsaroo nor PW-Ghulam Rasool Ganai have supported the prosecution in the context
of respondents having admitted or made any kind of extra judicial confession. He further contends
that even on the face of it the said document only speaks of that the respondents claimed to be
admitting some act of carelessness to which they have been asked to compensate the complainant.
In the statement recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C also, the respondents have reiterated that they
were forced to sign the document under the 'Baradari' pressure. During the investigation, no
evidence has been collected as to when in-fact such an extra judicial confession was made, whether
during the course of inquest proceedings or immediately thereafter.
32. Be that as it is, since, PW-2 has alleged that she had been subjected to forcible sexual
intercourse, there was every probability that the respondents were apprehending that they may be
falsely implicated by her. There is also probability that PW-2 might have been having any kind of
intimacy with accused No.1, which we find to be premise from her own version because she
no-where is found narrating that she offered any kind of resistance to accused No.1 when he was
forcing himself upon her to subject her to forcible sexual intercourse. In-fact what is gathered from
the P a g e | 17 police case is that she was found in a compromising position with accused No.1 which
had infuriated the deceased. In that background where the respondents have no-where in the said
document admitted their involvement in the incident merely because they are found admitting to be
paying some amount for damages or compensation to the complainant, that all could have been for
the reason that they apprehended false implication from PW-2 that is why in order to save
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 8
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
themselves such an affidavit might have been got executed by them.
33. The testimony of PW-2, has been found to be unreliable and given the medical evidence when
the deceased was laid to burial none of the witnesses including the brother of the deceased (PW-1)
were found narrating to have observed any kind of injury. According to medical opinion, which only
noticed dislocation of atlanto-axial joint (neck joint) which the medical expert claim to have been
also possible on account of fall as well. It is difficult to believe the narration of PW-2 that the
deceased had been subjected to murderous assault by the accused when the former found her in
compromising position with accused No.1.
34. No doubt, it is trite law that a reasonable doubt is essentially a serious doubt in the case of the
prosecution and minor inconsistencies are not to be elevated to the status of a reasonable doubt. A
reasonable doubt is one which renders the possibility of guilt as highly doubtful. It is also
noteworthy that the purpose of criminal trial is not only to ensure that an innocent person is not
punished, but it is also to ensure that the guilty does not escape P a g e | 18 unpunished. Every case,
wherein a guilty person goes unpunished due to any lacuna on the part of the investigating agency,
prosecution or otherwise, shakes the conscience of the society at large and diminishes the value of
the rule of law.
35. It is no more res-integra that an extra judicial confession must be accepted with great care and
caution. If it is not supported by other evidence on record, it fails to inspire confidence and in such a
case, it shall not be treated as a strong piece of evidence for the purpose of arriving at the conclusion
of guilt. Furthermore, the extent of acceptability of an extra judicial confession depends on the
trustworthiness of the witness before whom it is given and the circumstances in which it was given.
The prosecution must establish that a confession was indeed made by the accused, that it was
voluntary in nature and that the contents of the confession were true. The standard required for
proving an extra judicial confession to the satisfaction of the Court is on the higher side and these
essential ingredients must be established beyond any reasonable doubt. The standard becomes even
higher when the entire case of the prosecution necessarily rests on the extra judicial confession.
36. In "Chandrapal v. State of Chattisgarh" reported in (2022) SCC OnLine 705 , Hon'ble the
Supreme Court has reiterated the evidentiary value of an extra judicial confession in the following
manner:-
"11. At this juncture, it may be noted that as per Section 30 of the Evidence Act, when
more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession
made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is
proved, the court may take into P a g e | 19 consideration such confession as against
such other person as well as against the person who makes such confession.
However, this court has consistently held that an extra judicial confession is a weak
kind of evidence and unless it inspires confidence or is fully corroborated by some
other evidence of clinching nature, ordinarily conviction for the offence of murder
should not be made only on the evidence of extra judicial confession. As held in case
of State of M.P. Through CBI v. Paltan Mallah, the extra judicial confession made by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 9
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
the co-accused could be admitted in evidence only as a corroborative piece of
evidence. In absence of any substantive evidence against the accused, the extra
judicial confession allegedly made by the co-accused loses its significance and there
cannot be any conviction based on such extra judicial confession of the co accused."
37. Again in 'Subramanya Vs. State of Karnataka' (2023) 11 SCC 255, the Hon'ble Apex Court had
made the observation that conviction can be based on a voluntary confession, but the rule of
prudence requires that wherever possible it should be corroborated by independent evidence,
however, extra judicial confession of accused need not in all cases be corroborated. The Court has
held that :-
"52. An extra judicial confession, if voluntary and true and made in a fit state of
mind, can be relied upon by the Court. The confession will have to be proved like any
other fact. The value of the evidence as to confession, like any other evidence,
depends upon the veracity of the witness to whom it has been made. The value of the
evidence as to the confession depends on the reliability of the witness who gives the
evidence. It is not open to any court to start with a presumption that extra judicial
confession is a weak type of evidence. It would depend on the nature of the
circumstances, the time when the confession was made and the credibility of the
witnesses who speak to such a confession. Such a confession can be relied upon and
conviction can be founded thereon if the evidence about the confession comes from
the mouth of witnesses who appear to be unbiased, not even remotely inimical to the
accused, and in respect of whom nothing is brought out which may tend to indicate
that he may have a motive for attributing an untruthful statement to the accused, the
words spoken to by the witness are clear, unambiguous and unmistakably convey
that the accused is the perpetrator of the crime and nothing is omitted by the witness
which may militate against it. After subjecting P a g e | 20 the evidence of the witness
to a rigorous test on the touchstone of credibility, the extra judicial confession can be
accepted and can be the basis of a conviction if it passes the test of credibility.
53. Extra judicial confession is a weak piece of evidence and the court must ensure
that the same inspires confidence and is corroborated by other prosecution evidence.
It is considered to be a weak piece of evidence as it can be easily procured whenever
direct evidence is not available. In order to accept extra judicial confession, it must be
voluntary and must inspire confidence. If the court is satisfied that the extra judicial
confession is voluntary, it can be acted upon to base the conviction.
55. It is well settled that conviction can be based on a voluntarily confession but the
rule of prudence requires that wherever possible it should be corroborated by
independent evidence. Extra judicial confession of accused need not in all cases be
corroborated. In Madan Gopal Kakkad v. Naval Dubey and Another, (1992) 3 SCC
204, this Court after referring to Piara Singh and Others v. State of Punjab, (1977) 4
SCC 452, held that the law does not require that the evidence of an extra judicial
confession should in all cases be corroborated. The rule of prudence does not require
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 10
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
that each and every circumstance mentioned in the confession must be separately
and independently corroborated."
38. The appellant, during the course of hearing, is found conceding that there were variations in the
statement given by the witnesses, and that such variations were natural to occur with the passage of
time. We do not see such a thing in this case because the star witness of the prosecution (PW-2) has
faired badly before the trial court, therefore, is highly unreliable witness, and once her testimony is
taken out of the prosecution case, its whole edifice laid against the accused, crumbles like pack of
cards.
39. We have examined the detailed judgement of the trial court and find that it has thoroughly
appreciated the testimony of all the witnesses including that of PW-2 and has reached to the only
conclusion regarding non-culpability of the respondents. The set of witnesses laid against the P a g e
| 21 respondents, was not only weak but inherently lacking the credibility and the appellant has not
been able to point out any perversity in the judgement impugned. The evidence led by the
prosecution on the touchstone of reliance on the statement of PW-2 and so-called extra judicial
confession, as being claimed before the 'Baradari', both suffer from inherent weak probability, thus,
do not inspire confidence. The trial court has examined the evidence in detail. The respondents
herein are presumed to be innocent until they are convicted by the competent court after
full-fledged trial. Here the trial has ended into acquittal. Though the appellate court has a power to
review, re-appreciate and re-consider the evidence, both on facts and law, upon which the order of
acquittal is passed but the appellate court has to be very cautious in interfering with the order of
acquittal unless there are compelling and substantial grounds of interference with the order of
acquittal. There cannot be a straightjacket formula as to under what circumstances the appellate
court can interfere, and here we have thoroughly examined the record of the trial court and we are
persuaded to take only view which the trial court has taken. We find that the appellant has not been
able to point out any kind of perversity in the impugned judgment. The prosecution has miserably
failed in proving the charge against the respondents.
40. On the conspectus of evidence and material on record, we are of the considered opinion that the
judgment of acquittal impugned in this appeal is perfectly legal and valid and, thus does not call for
any interference.
P a g e | 22 Otherwise also, the jurisdiction of the appellate Court hearing an acquittal appeal is well
circumscribed and where on evaluation of evidence and material on record, two views are possible,
the view which favour the accused has to be preferred.
41. As a result of above discussion, we see no reason to interfere with the finding of the trial court.
Consequently the appeal does not succeed and, is, accordingly, dismissed. The impugned judgment
and order of acquittal is hereby confirmed.
(Sanjay Parihar) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
SRINAGAR:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 11
State Of J&K Through Sho P/S Pahalgam vs Fayaz Ahmad Bajad on 25 July, 2025
25.07.2025
Muzammil. Q
Whether the Judgment /Order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181438695/ 12
