State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
Author: Rajiv Gupta
Bench: Rajiv Gupta, Subhash Chandra Sharma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
Judgment reserved on: 19.03.2025
Judgment delivered on: 10.04.2025
Neutral Citation No. - 2025 : AHC : 48915 - DB
Court No. - 46
Case :- GOVERNMENT APPEAL No. - 1762 of 1988
Appellant :- State of U.P.
Respondent :- Sudama Singh and Others
Counsel for Appellant :- A.G.A., Raghubhans Sahai
Counsel for Respondent :- S. Shukla, Kameshwar Singh, Manoj Kumar Singh, Virendra Pratap Pal
Hon'ble Rajiv Gupta, J.
Hon'ble Subhash Chandra Sharma, J.
(Delivered by Hon'ble Rajiv Gupta, J.)
1. The instant government appeal under Section 378(3) CrPC has been preferred against the
judgment and order dated 21.04.1988 passed by 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Ballia in Sessions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 1
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
Trial No. 232 of 1985 (State of U.P. Vs. Sudama Singh and Others), arising out of Case Crime No.
186 of 1984, under Sections 307, 323 IPC, Police Station Garhwar, District Ballia, by which, all the
four accused-respondents have been acquitted of all the charges framed against them.
2. Learned AGA has filed compliance affidavit on behalf of the State today in Court, which is taken
on record. In paragraph nos. 3 & 4 of the said affidavit, it has been stated that accused- respondent
no.1 Sudama Singh has already passed away on 20.04.2024, while other co-accused- respondents,
namely, Uday Singh, Parshu Ram and Shyama Singh are alive and as such, he prayed that instant
government appeal qua the accused- respondent no.1 Sudama Singh be dismissed as abated, which
is accordingly dismissed as abated and the instant government appeal is being decided on behalf of
remaining three surviving accused- respondents.
3. The prosecution story in nutshell as narrated in the FIR lodged by one Suresh Ram is that there
has been a civil dispute between the first informant Suresh Ram on one hand and the accused-
respondents Sudama Singh, Parshu Ram, Uday Singh and Shyam Singh on the other, which was
pending in the Civil Court, Ballia, in which, next date 17.01.1985 was fixed. The proceedings under
Sections 107/116 CrPC were also in progress before the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Ballia and a
Complaint Case is also shown to be pending between the parties, in which, next date 01.01.1985 was
fixed. In the backdrop of the said inimical terms, on 24.12.1984 at about 5:30 AM in the morning,
accused- respondent Sudama Singh, armed with licencee gun, whereas other accused-respondents,
namely, Parshu Ram, Uday Singh and Shyam Singh, armed with lathis, reached at the doorstep of
the first informant Suresh Ram and stated that they have removed his Charni (Cattle Drum), as
such, they would not permit his Palani (Chappar) to remain there and started demolishing it,
consequent to which, first informant Suresh Ram tried to stop them and raised alarm. Hearing the
alarm, villagers Kanhai, Rama Kant, Uma, Bhagelu and others along with number of male, female
and children rushed towards the scene of the incident. Seeing them, accused-respondent Sudama
Singh started firing from his licencee gun, consequent to which, the first informant Suresh Ram and
other persons took shelter in the house and Palani (Chappar). On account of firing and assault made
by lathi, the accused-respondents, first informant Suresh Ram, his brother Thag, Shiv Parsana, his
mother Smt. Tetari, his sister Lakshminiya, Bachani, Jiriya and Durgawati have received injuries.
4. On the basis of the said allegations, a written report was drawn, which has been proved and
marked as Ext. Ka-1 and FIR was registered at Police Station Garhwar, District Ballia vide Case
Crime No. 186 of 1984, under Sections 307, 323 IPC at 7:10 AM, a copy of which has been proved
and marked as Ext. Ka-15.
5. After registration of the FIR, victims-injured were taken to the District Hospital, Ballia by their
respective relatives and they are shown to be medically examined by P.W.-5 Dr. A.K. Sareen,
Medical Officer and their injury reports have been proved and marked as Ext. Ka-2 to Ext. Ka-8.
Their respective X-Ray Reports have also been prepared and proved by P.W.-6 R. N. Singh, X-Ray
Technician, which have been proved and marked as Ext. Ka-9 to Ext. Ka-14. Material Exhibit, being
X-Ray plates, has also been proved as Material Ext.-1 to Material Ext-10 and X-Ray plate as Material
Ext.-11.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 2
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
6. After completing the necessary formalities, the Investigating Officer submitted the charge-sheet
against the accused-respondents. After submission of the charge-sheet, the case was committed to
the court of Sessions, where the charges were framed against the surviving accused-respondents
under Sections 307/34, 323/34 and 325/34 IPC, to which, they denied and insisted to be tried.
7. Thereafter, the trial started and during the course of trial, the prosecution produced as many as
four prosecution witnesses; P.W.-1 Suresh Ram, first informant, P.W.-2 Thag Ram, real brother of
the first informant, P.W.-3 Bhagelu and P.W.4 Bachani, as witnesses of fact, whereas P.W.-5 Dr.
A.K. Sareen was examined as Medical Officer, who examined the injuries of the victims-injured and
noted the same. P.W.-6 R.N. Singh was examined as Radiologist. P.W.-7 Constable Banke Bihari,
who had drawn the chik FIR and proved the same, P.W.-8 Inspector R.P. Sinha was examined as
Investigating Officer. In addition to this, the prosecution has also produced number of documents,
which were proved and duly exhibited.
8. After conclusion of the prosecution evidence, incriminating evidence and circumstances were put
to the accused-respondents in their statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. The accused-respondents
alleged the prosecution story to be false and fabricated but did not examine any witness in their
defence.
9. Learned IInd Additional Sessions Judge, Ballia after thrashing the evidence and critically
analysing it, acquitted all the accused-respondents from all the charges framed against them and set
them at liberty.
10. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the said judgment and order dated 21.04.1988, the instant
Government Appeal under Section 378(3) CrPC on behalf of the State/appellant has been preferred.
11. Heard Shri Purushottam Upadhyay, learned AGA for the State/ appellant, Shri Virendra Pratap
Pal, learned counsel for the accused-respondents and perused the material available on record.
12. Learned State counsel, relying upon the prosecution witnesses, has submitted that the trial court
has miserably failed to appreciate the material and evidence available on record in true perspective
and has illegally recorded the finding of acquittal in favour of the accused-respondents.
13. Learned State counsel has further submitted that findings recorded by the trial court in the
impugned judgment and order are perverse and against the material and evidence available on
record, warranting interference by this Court.
14. The said submissions have been vehemently countered by learned counsel for the
accused-respondents.
15. In support of his submissions, Shri Virendra Pratap Pal, learned counsel for the
accused-respondents has placed implicit reliance upon the celebrated judgment of the Privy Council
in the case of Mahbub Shah Vs. Emperor reported in AIR 1945 PC 118, and has categorically
submitted that looking to the general, vague and omnibus role assigned to the surviving
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 3
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
accused-respondents, it cannot be said that they had a common intention to cause injury to the
victim Lakshminiya, who is said to have received lathi injury on her head, which is superficial in
nature and on the basis of which, common intention on the part of the surviving
accused-respondents cannot be drawn and has thus supported the impugned judgment and order
dated 21.04.1988 passed by the trial court and has submitted that in the light of the principles of
law, discussed in the aforementioned case, the view taken by the trial court cannot be said to be
perverse and illegal and is a plausible view, which needs no interference by this Court and therefore,
the instant Government Appeal so far as the surviving accused-respondents are concerned, is liable
to be dismissed.
16. Since, the instant Government Appeal is against the judgment and order of acquittal, it would be
relevant to note the principles of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court with regard to the
appreciation of evidence and approach to be adopted while dealing with an appeal against acquittal.
17. In Jafarudheen and others vs. State of Kerala, 2022 SCC Online SC 495, reiterating the principle
on the subject the Hon'ble Apex Court reminded to the Courts as extracted below:
"25. While dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking Section 378 of the
Cr.PC, the Appellate Court has to consider whether the Trial Court's view can be
termed as a possible one, particularly when evidence on record has been analysed.
The reason is that an order of acquittal adds up to the presumption of innocence in
favour of the accused. Thus, the Appellate Court has to be relatively slow in reversing
the order of the Trial Court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the presumption in favour
of the accused does not get weakened but only strengthened. Such a double
presumption that enures in favour of the accused has to be disturbed only by
thorough scrutiny on the accepted legal parameters."
18. In Mohan alias Srinivas alias Seena alias Tailor Seena vs. State of Karnataka, (2022) 12 SCC 619,
the Hon'ble Apex Court held as hereunder:
"20. Section 378 CrPC enables the State to prefer an appeal against an order of
acquittal Section 384 CrPC speaks of the powers that can be exercised by the
Appellate Court. When the trial court renders its decision by acquitting the accused,
presumption of innocence gathers strength before the Appellate Court. As a
consequence, the onus on the prosecution becomes more burdensome as there is a
double presumption of innocence. Certainly, the Court of first instance has its own
advantages in delivering its verdict, which is to see the witnesses in person while they
depose The Appellate Court is expected to involve itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny
of not only the evidence before it, but is duty bound to satisfy itself whether the
decision of the trial court is both possible and plausible view When two views are
possible, the one taken by the trial court in a case of acquittal is to be followed on the
touchstone of liberty along with the advantage of having seen the witnesses. Article 21
of the Constitution of India also aids the accused after acquittal in a certain way,
though not absolute. Suffice it is to state that the Appellate Court shall remind itself
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 4
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
of the role required to play, while dealing with a case of an acquittal.
19. In Atley v. State of U.P., 1955 Cri. LJ 1653, the approach of the appellate court while considering
a judgment of acquittal was discussed and it was observed that unless the appellate court comes to
the conclusion that the judgment of the acquittal was perverse, it could not set aside the same.
20. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Bannareddy v. State of Karnataka, (2018) 5 SCC 790, has
considered the power and jurisdiction of the High Court while interfering in an appeal against
acquittal and held as under:
"26. The High Court should not have re-appreciated the evidence in its entirety,
especially when there existed no grave infirmity in the findings of the trial Court.
There exists no justification behind setting aside the order of acquittal passed by the
trial Court, especially when the prosecution case suffers from several contradictions
and infirmities".
21. In Ramesh Babulal Doshi vs. State of Gujarat, (1996) 9 SCC 225, the Hon'ble Apex Court
observed vis-a-vis the powers of an appellate court while dealing with a judgment of acquittal and
held as under:
"7. While sitting in judgment over an acquittal the appellate court is first required to
seek an answer to the question whether the findings of the trial court are palpably
wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable. If the appellate court
answers the above question in the negative the order of acquittal is not to be
disturbed. Conversely, if the appellate court holds, for reasons to be recorded, that
the order of acquittal cannot at all be sustained in view of any of the above infirmities
it can then and then only reappraise the evidence to arrive at its own conclusions."
22. In the light of the submissions made by learned counsel for both the sides, we have carefully
gone through the evidence available on record, analysis and appreciation thereof and conclusion
arrived at by the trial court in the impugned judgment and order dated 21.04.1988.
23. The crux of the prosecution story is that from the averments made in the FIR itself and the
evidence adduced therein, it is clear that several civil and criminal litigations were pending between
the parties and on the day of the incident, Sudama (Now dead) armed with gun and other surviving
accused-respondents, said to be armed with lathis, are alleged to have reached the place of the
incident and by stating that since they have removed their Charni (Cattle Drum), they would
demolish their Palani (Chappar) and started demolishing the same and when the first informant
Suresh Ram, his brother Thag Ram and other villagers rushed to rescue, the three
accused-respondents, armed with lathi, started the assault causing injuries to him and his sister
Lakshminiya and when they retrieved, accused-respondent Sudama Singh fired upon the victims by
his licencee gun, causing firearm injuries to Bachani, Shiv Parsana, Durgawati, Thag Ram, Jiriya
and Tetri.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 5
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
24. However, when we go through the injury reports of the injured persons, we find that all the
injured persons have received stray pallet injuries, which even, according to the prosecution own
case, are said to have fired by accused-respondent Sudama Singh from his gun. There is only one
lacerated wound shown to be caused to the victim Lakshminiya, which too is superficial in nature in
the form of lacerated wound of 1 c.m. x 0.5 c.m. bone deep on forehead, which has been noted to be
simple in nature caused by some blunt object and no internal damage has been noted in the said
injury report.
25. It is germane to point out here that though the first informant Suresh Ram in the FIR as well as
in his testimony recorded during the course of trial has categorically stated that the three
accused-respondent armed with lathi also assaulted him, however, from the careful perusal of the
record and the injury reports, we find that he has not received any lathi injury and has not even been
medically examined, his testimony to this extent becomes unreliable.
26. Furthermore, during the course of recording the testimony of the four prosecution witnesses, the
author of the single injury, alleged to be caused to Lakshminiya, has not been pointed out at all by
any of the said witnesses.
27. In view thereof, the three surviving accused-respondents, all armed with lathies, have been
acquitted by the trial court.
28. Even, when we go through the testimonies of P.W.-1, P.W.-2, P.W.-3 and P.W.-4, there is not a
whisper in any of the statement of the aforesaid witnesses that in what manner, a superficial
lacerated wound was caused to the victim Lakshminiya and looking to the nature of the injuries
caused to her and in the backdrop of the law laid down by the Privi Council in the celebrated
decision in the case of Mahbub Shah (supra), wherein discussing the Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code, it has been held that:
Under Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, the essence of the liability is to be found
in the existence of a common intention animating the accused leading to the doing of
a criminal act in furtherance of such intention. To invoke the aid of Section 34 IPC
successfully, it must be shown that the criminal act complained against was done by
one of the accused persons in furtherance of the common intention of all; if this is so,
then liability for the crime may be imposed on any one of the persons in the same
manner as if the act were done by him alone. This being the principle, it is clear that
common intention within the meaning of the section implies a pre-arranged plan,
and to convict the accused of an offence applying the section it should be proved that
the criminal act was done in concert pursuant to the pre-arranged plan. It is no doubt
difficult if not impossible, to procure direct evidence to prove the intention of an
individual, and in most cases it has to be inferred from his act or conduct or other
relevant circumstances. Where evidence falls far short of showing that the accused
ever entered into a pre-meditated concert to commit murder in carrying out their
intention of rescuing a kinsman, care must be taken not to confuse same or similar
intention with common intention. The partition which divides their bounds is often
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 6
State vs Sudama Singh on 10 April, 2025
very thin; nevertheless the distinction is real and substantial and if overlooked will
result in miscarriage of justice. The inference of common intention within the
meaning of the term in Section 34 IPC should never be reached unless it is a
necessary inference deducible from the circumstances of the case.
29. In view thereof, it cannot be said that the said offence has been committed in furtherance of the
common intention and makes the prosecution story doubtful. Further, from the evidence aduced
during the course of trial, it is crystal clear that the parties were on inimical terms and the possibility
of false implication cannot be ruled out.
30. Thus, keeping in view the aforesaid principle of law laid down in the aforesaid case and applying
the principle of an appeal filed against the acquittal, as already discussed above, we are of the
considered opinion that the trial court has rightly acquitted the surviving accused-respondent nos.
2, 3 and 4 and the view taken by the trial court is a plausible view, for which, learned trial court has
given cogent and logical finding in the impugned judgment and order, which is just, proper and
reasonable and carries no perversity therein, hence, it does not warrant any interference by this
Court. The reasoning adopted by the learned Trial Judge is based upon proper application of judicial
mind. No illegality or infirmity is found in the impugned judgment and order and therefore, it needs
no interference by this Court.
31. In view of the foregoing discussions, we are of the opinion that the instant Government Appeal
lacks merit and the same is accordingly dismissed upholding the impugned judgment and order
dated 21.04.1988.
32. Let a copy of this judgment and order be forwarded to the court concerned alongwith trial court
record for information and necessary compliance.
Order Date:- 10.04.2025.
Nadim
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/96873450/ 7
