State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August,
2020
Author: M.Nirmal Kumar
Bench: M.Nirmal Kumar
Crl.A(MD)No.6 of 2015
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
RESERVED ON : 17.12.2019
PRONOUNCED ON : 28.08.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.NIRMAL KUMAR
Crl.A(MD)No.6 of 2015
State of Tamil Nadu rep. by,
The Public Prosecutor,
High Court,
Madras – 600 140. ... Appellant
Vs.
N.Vijayakumar ... Respondent
Prayer: Criminal Appeal filed under Section 378 of Cr.P.C., praying to
allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of acquittal passed by the
Special Judge for trial of Prevention of Corruption Act, Cases, Madurai
in Spl.C.C.No.49 of 2011, dated 25.02.2014 and convict and sentence the
respondent/accused.
For Appellant : Mr.M.Chandrasekaran
Additional Public Prosecutor
For Respondent : Mr.V.Kathirvelu, Senior Counsel
for Mr.K.Prabhu
*****
JUDGMENT
This Criminal Appeal arises out of the judgment of acquittal rendered by the learned Special Judge,
Special Court for trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases, Madurai in Special C.C.No.49 of 2011
dated 25.02.2014.
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 1
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
2.The appellant filed a charge sheet against the respondent for offence under Sections 7 and 13(2)
r/w 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The trial Court on conclusion of trial,
acquitted the respondent by Judgment dated 25.02.2014 in Special C.C.No.49 of 2011.
3(i)The brief facts of the case is that the respondent was working as Sanitary Inspector in
Corporation of Madurai from July 2001 to 10.10.2003 and he was in-charge of Ward No.8.
M/s.Neat and Clean Service Squad (hereinafter called as “NACSS”), a private organization was
entrusted with the task of providing and engaging work for door to door collection and conveyance
of waste to the dumper binds. Every month, the corporation will pay wages for the workers
employed by the said NACSS at the rate of Rs.69/- per day. The work was entrusted on 04.05.2002
for one year upto March 2003. The Sanitary Inspector, Ward No.8 and the Circle Sanitary Officer,
North Zone will coordinate with NACSS and work for the implementation of the scheme. After
executing the work, the bills for the period from 04.05.2002 to 31.03.2003 were submitted and
paid. The bill for the month of April and May 2003 http://www.judis.nic.in amounting to
Rs.20,800/- and Rs.21,390/- respectively were not paid by the Corporation, though claims have
been made by the said NACSS. This amount was not paid, since the extension for work period was
not issued. Further, for the representation of NACSS, the same was forwarded to the Assistant
Commissioner and Chief Health Officer Corporation of Madurai who had forwarded the same to the
respondent, Sanitary Inspector, Ward No.8 for his recommendation and to certify the proof of work.
On 09.10.2003, at about 11.00 a.m., PW2/defacto complainant and his co-worker
Ravikumaran/PW5 approached the respondent, at that time the respondent made a demand of
Rs.500/- and a mobile phone for expeditiously processing and giving recommendation. PW2
informed that NACSS being a service organization and they will not be in a position to meet out the
demand. The respondent reiterated his demand and stated that unless the demand is paid by
10.10.2003 evening, the file would not be processed.
(ii)PW2 informed his Manager/PW6, who informed the same to President of the Organization/PW7,
who instructed them to lodged a complaint to the Vigilance and Anti Corruption. Thereafter, PW2,
his co-worker/PW5 and Manager/PW6 had gone to the Vigilance and Anti http://www.judis.nic.in
Corruption office on 10.10.2003 at about 12.30 p.m., lodged a complaint with PW11, who after
verifying the credentials of the complaint and the respondent, registered an FIR [Ex.P6] and
enlisted the service of PW3 and one Natarajan. Thereafter, the importance of the trap and
phenolphthalein test were explained. The trap team reached the office of the respondent at about
04.45 p.m., at that time the respondent was not available. After the respondent reached the office at
about 05.45 p.m., PW2, PW3 and PW5 entered the office and requested the respondent to process
the file expeditiously. The respondent reiterated the demand, PW2 handed over the bribe amount of
Rs.500/- and a mobile phone which was received by the respondent, counted the money and kept
the bribe money and mobile phone in his right side table drawer.
(iii)Thereafter, PW5 came out and gave pre-arranged signal. PW11 along with his trap team entered
into the office of the respondent. PW2 and PW3 identified the respondent and the place where the
bribe amount and cell phone were kept. Thereafter, PW4 and another officer, who are superiors to
the respondent were summoned. In their presence, the respondent's hands were subjected to
phenolphthalein test which turned positive. The hand wash was collected in a bottle. Thereafter, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 2
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in bribe amount [MO1] and cell phone [MO2] were produced by the
respondent which were seized and Recovery Mahazar [Ex.P10] and Rough Sketch [Ex.P11] were
prepared. The respondent was arrested at about 07.10 p.m. and his house was also searched and
some seizures were made. The investigation was handed over by PW11/TLO to PW12, who after
examination of witnesses, collection of documents, receiving forensic reports and sanction for
prosecution from PW1, filed the charge sheet before the trial Court.
(iv)During trial, the prosecution had examined PW1 to PW12, marked the documents Ex.P1 to
Ex.P17 and material objects MO1 to MO4. On the side of the defence, no witness was examined, the
respondent, marked Ex.D1 to Ex.D3. The learned trial Judge on conclusion of trial found the
appellant had not proved the case against the respondent beyond reasonable doubt and acquitted
the respondent from the above case, against which the present appeal is filed by the appellant.
http://www.judis.nic.in 4(i)The contention of the learned Additional Public Prosecutor is that the
trial Court failed to consider the evidence of PW2 and PW5, who have clearly proved the earlier
demand made by the respondent on 09.10.2003. On 10.10.2003 in the presence of PW2, PW3 and
PW5, the respondent again reiterated his demand and received the bribe amount of Rs.500/- [MO1]
and a mobile phone [MO2] from PW2. Thereafter, kept the money and the cell phone in his right
side table drawer. PW11 along with trap team after getting pre-arranged signal entered the office of
the respondent and in presence of PW3 and PW4, PW11 prepared Seizure Mahazar [Ex.P10] and
conducted phenolphthalein test on the hands of the respondent, which proved positive and the same
has been confirmed by the Forensic Department. Hence, in this case the demand, acceptance and
recovery of bribe amount have been clearly proved by cogent evidence both by oral and
documentary. Despite the same, the trial Court acquitted the respondent, which is not as per
established principles of law.
(ii)It is further contended by the learned Additional Public Prosecutor that the conclusion of trial
Court that PW3 and PW5 are dependent and not independent witnesses is without any material.
PW3 http://www.judis.nic.in was working as P.A to Principal of the Government Polytechnic
College, Madurai and he is an independent witness, his evidence to be accepted. PW3 has
categorically stated about the demand and receipt of bribe amount by the respondent. Further the
recovery proceedings have been conducted in the presence of PW3 as well as PW4. PW4 is the Circle
Sanitary Officer of Madurai Corporation, a Superior Officer to the respondent and witness for
recovery, has got no axe to grinde against the respondent. Thus the entrustment receipt and
recovery are proved in this case, on the contrary, the trial Court has given a wrong finding as though
the demand and recovery are not proved.
(iii)Further the trial Court failed to look into the fact that the presumption under Section 20 of the
Prevention of Corruption, 1988 is against the respondent. The respondent had not probablized his
defence in this case. The trial Court placed heavy reliance on the violations of the Vigilance manual,
failing to look into the fact that the Vigilance manual is only for the officer of the Vigilance
Department which does not have force of law. The Hon'ble Apex Court as well as High Courts in
catena of judgments time and again stated that the violation of Vigilance manual may lead to action
against the erring officers and it could not be http://www.judis.nic.in construed as violation in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 3
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
investigation. Hence, the finding of the trial Court is erroneous, perverse and is not sustainable both
on facts and in law.
(iv)The trial Court had given a finding that PW2, the decoy witness had given inconsistent version
with regard to the meeting of the respondent prior to the first demand, which is of no significance.
Further without any material the trial Court had given a finding that PW2 was ill- treated by the
respondent several times and hence, there was motive against the respondent. The trial Court had
misread the evidence and given a finding that TLO/PW11 asked the respondent to handle the bribe
amount and cell phone kept in the right side table drawer and thereafter, the phenolphthalein test
was conducted on the hands of the respondent. The phenolphthalein test turned positive on the
hand wash of the respondent which was brushed aside by the trial Court is not proper. PW3, PW4
and PW9 have categorically stated that the phenolphthalein test was conducted first in the hand of
the respondent and thereafter, only the respondent was asked to produce the tainted money [MO1]
and cell phone [MO2], which is also recorded in Recovery Mahazar [Ex.P10].
http://www.judis.nic.in
(v)Further the lower Court on a wrong premise given a finding that the demand in this case was not
proved and further given a reasoning that on the basis of recovery alone the respondent cannot be
convicted. This finding is contrary to the evidence of PW2, PW3 and PW5. The cogent evidences of
PW2, PW3, PW4, PW5, PW9 and PW11 proved the demand, acceptance and recovery of tainted
money [MO1] and cell phone [MO2]. The respondent had not dislodged the statutory presumption
in any manner. Further the lower Court had given undue weightage and importance for minor
discrepancies which only proves that the witnesses were natural and truthful. In view of the
evidence available both oral and documentary against the respondent, the lower Court ought to have
convicted the respondent. Hence, the judgement of acquittal to be set-aside.
(vi)In support of his contention, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor relied upon the following
citations:-
● Krishna Ram Versus State of Rajasthan reported in (2009) 11 Supreme Court Cases
708.
● State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance and Anti
Corruption, Tirunelveli.
http://www.judis.nic.in ● Guruviah Versus the State represented by the Inspector of
Police. ● State of Gujarat Versus Navinbhai Chandrakant Joshi and others reported
in (2018) 9 SCC 242.
● Mukhtiar singh Versus State of Punjab.
● State of Andhra Pradesh Versus P.Venkateshwarlu reported in
(2015) 7 SCC 283.
● M.Narsinga Rao Versus State of Andhra Pradesh reported in
(2001) 1 SCC 691.
● S.Nagoor Hussain Mohaideen Versus State represented by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 4
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Thoothukudi. ● State of Madhya
Pradesh Versus Shambhu Dayal Nagar reported in CDJ 2006 SC 900.
● K.Selvaraj and others Versus the State reported in 2004 SCC OnLine Mad 931.
● Duraimurugan Versus State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Vellore reported in 2013 SCC OnLine Mad 30.
● Thyagarajan Versus State by the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption
City Special Unit-III, Chennai reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 4620.
● Ramalingam Versus State represented by the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and
Anti Corruption, Nagapattinam reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 23740.
5(i)The learned senior counsel for the respondent/accused http://www.judis.nic.in
submitted that the Hon'ble Apex Court in catena of judicial pronouncements had laid
down the broad guidelines with regard to approach in acquittal appeals. Thus when
the view taken by the Court below is a possible view and it could be reasonable or
arrived at basis of evidence and materials it does not call for any interference even if
the other view is possible. The use of the expression “possible view” is concious and
not without good reasons, which is in contradistinction to expression such as
“erroneous view” or “wrong view”. A “possible view” denotes an opinion which can
exist or be formed irrespective of the correctness or otherwise of such an opinion. A
conclusion of the higher Court would not take the view rendered by the subordinate
Court outside the arena of a possible view. The view taken by the trial Court cannot
be interdicted and supplanted over and above the view of the trial Court.
(ii)The learned senior counsel for the respondent placed reliance on the judgment of
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of “Ghurey Lal Versus State of Uttar Pradesh”
reported in “2008 10 SCC 450 and submitted that the Appellate Court may only
overrule or otherwise disturb the trial court's acquittal if it has "very substantial and
http://www.judis.nic.in compelling reasons" for doing so and the very substantial
compelling reasons exist when:-
(i) The trial court's conclusion with regard to the facts is palpably wrong; The trial
court's decision was based on an erroneous view of law;
(iii) The trial court's judgment is likely to result in “grave miscarriage of justice”;
(iv) The entire approach of the trial court in dealing with the evidence was patently
illegal;
(v) The trial court's judgment was manifestly unjust and unreasonable;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 5
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
(vi) The trial court has ignored the evidence or misread the material evidence or has
ignored material documents like dying declarations/report of the ballistic expert, etc.
(vii) This list is intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive.
(iii)The Appellate Court must always give proper weight and consideration to the
findings of the trial Court. The learned senior counsel for the respondent further
reiterated that if two reasonable views http://www.judis.nic.in can be reached-one
that leads to acquittal, the other to conviction-the High Courts/appellate Courts must
rule in favour of the accused. The appellate Court not to ignore the fact that the
presumption of innocence in favour of the respondent/accused is further
strengthened by an order of acquittal. On the above background, the learned senior
counsel further submitted that in this case, there is motive between PW2 and the
respondent, which is admitted by PW2. PW5 is a witness to the trap, who is none
other than the co-employee of PW2. PW3 though projected as independent witness,
he is not aware of the motive and the source of trap money [MO1] and mobile phone
[MO2]. PW3 merely stated that he was directed by his Principal to report before the
Vigilance and Anti Corruption Office and he did so. PW3 part of raiding party and he
is not an independent witness. Further there is clear violation of Vigilance manual
and its guidelines. PW3 is a witness fetched by PW11/TLO.
Hence, PW2 and PW5, a co-employee of PW2 are motivated and interested witnesses and their
testimony cannot be relied upon. Further the presumption under Section 20 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act is not an inviolable one, it can be rebutted either through cross examination of the
witness or by adducing reliable evidence.
(iv)The learned senior counsel for the respondent further http://www.judis.nic.in submitted that
the principles of law is that to prove the allegation of demand and acceptance of bribe by the accused
person, the evidence of complainant/decoy cannot be safely acted upon in the absence of some
independent corroborative evidence. In such a situation, the bribe giver is normally treated as no
better than an accomplice and so his evidence needs corroboration form an independent source. The
same is to be attached to the evidence of the shadow witness especially when he is not proved to be
an independent witness. Independent corroboration to the evidence of such witness is generally
required by the Court, if not as a rule of law, then at least as a rule of caution and prudence. In
support of his contention he relied upon the decision in “Gurucharan Singh Versus the State of
Haryana reported in 1994 Crl.L.J 1710.”
(v)In this case, the appointment of PW2 and PW5 in NACSS is not proved. It is admitted by PW2
and PW5 that no documents have been produced by them to show that they are employees of
NACSS. PW2 admitted that Exs.P2 & P3, attendance register extract of NACSS employees, is not
signed or authenticated by him. In the complaint [Ex.P5], there is no mention about on which dates,
he had earlier met the respondent with regard to process the file expeditiously for work period
http://www.judis.nic.in extension. In Ex.P4, the letter dated 19.06.2003, PW2 has not signed. The
letter which is addressed to the Commissioner of Corporation is PW6. PW2 admitted that there was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 6
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
some animosity with the respondent. In view of the same, the probability of making demand of
money from PW2 is highly impossible.
(vi)It is admitted by the appellant that the payment from 04.05.2003 to March 2003 has been
made. Only for the period of April and May 2003, the payment could not be made, since the
extension work order has not been issued. It is further admitted that the extension work order has to
be issued by the Commissioner of Corporation and the respondent is not authority for the same.
(vii)The learned senior counsel for the respondent further submitted that though NACSS has stated
that the conservancy work for Ward No.6, Ward No.8 and Chithra Street was allotted to them,
except for Chithra Street, the work was not extended for other wards. The respondent was posted in
the Government Rajiv Gandhi Hospital for issuance of birth and death certificate and ward No.8 is
looked by him as additional charge from May 2003. PW2 admitted that the submission of
http://www.judis.nic.in bills and communication with regard to the same are the Assistant
Commissioner office and the Corporation Commissioner and it is not his duty. PW2's duty is to
supervise the ten conservancy workers engaged by NACSS in ward No.8. In view of the same, the
meeting of PW2 and PW5 on 09.10.2003 and the alleged demand made by the respondent is highly
improbable. It is admitted that on 10.10.2003 when PW2, PW3 and PW5 reached the office of the
respondent, the respondent was not available in the seat and after one hour later, he had come to
the office at about 05.45 p.m. It is admitted that during the absence of the respondent, there was
unrestricted movement of people in and out of the office, the probability of planting MO1 and MO2
in the drawer of the respondent is probable. At about 06.10 p.m., when PW11 and other trap team
members entered the room of the respondent no time was given for any explanation. It is admitted
that the explanation of the respondent was not recorded. From Ex.P11, the Rough Sketch it is seen
that except starmark denoting the scene of occurrence, there are no details available which is in
violation of Vigilance Manual. Further though the trap team entered into the office of the
respondent till arrival of PW4 at about 07.00 p.m., no steps was taken for recovery, which is against
the normal conduct. For almost 50 minutes what was the investigation done, no explanation
http://www.judis.nic.in or reason given for the same.
(viii)It is the case of the respondent that MO1 had been implanted in his absence and the respondent
was forced to handle the tainted money. Hence the hand wash of the respondent turned positive.
The payment for the month of April and May 2003 had been made. The evidence of PW8 is that
there is no time limit fixed to process the files, NACSS is in the habit of presenting their bills
belatedly. In this case the delay in payment is only due to belated presentation of bills. The delay in
issuance of work period extension order was not due to the respondent. It was not within the powers
of the respondent to grant period of extension order. The evidence of PW6 & PW7 are contradictory
to the evidence of PW2. PW6 admitted MO1 and MO2 belongs to NACSS, on the other hand PW2
stated that MO1 was his personal money and MO2 was handed over by PW6. PW6 though had
signed in Ex.P5 as witness, for what reason he left the Vigilance and Anti Corruption after lodging
the complaint. PW2 was compelled by PW6 and PW7 to lodge a complaint and depose against the
respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 7
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
(ix)PW7 stated that he asked PW6 to lodge a complaint. PW6 http://www.judis.nic.in stated that he
had come along with PW2 and PW5 while lodging the complaint. PW6 and PW7 admitted that they
were not given extension of work and the extension of work order is to be given only by the
Commissioner of Corporation and not by the respondent. PW12 the investigation officer admitted
that PW2 has given exaggerated version and there have been lot of improvement and contradiction
in his statement. PW2 to cause prejudice and to project the respondent in a bad light has given a
exaggerated version, which PW12 also admitted the same. Thus, it would prove that PW2 is a
motivated witness against the respondent. PW11 admitted that he had not followed the Vigilance
Manual. The guidelines in Vigilance Manual is to have a check and control and to safeguard the
public servant from motivated complaint for oblique reasons. That is the reason immediately after
the trap, the explanation offered by the respondent has to be recorded. Further a photographic
recording of what transpired before and during handing over of the bribe amount, the seating
position have to be clearly recorded in rough sketch. In Ex.P11, there is no mention of these facts.
More so, MO1 and MO2 had been taken from the table drawer and not from the person. Added to it,
PW11 admitted that for nearly one hour, the respondent was not available in the office and they were
keeping a http://www.judis.nic.in watch. During that time, lot of people used to be in and out of the
office of the respondent. Hence, planting of MO1 and MO2 is possible. The recovery proceedings
was not commenced immediately waiting for arrival of PW4, which is uncalled for.
(x)PW3 is categorical that he is not aware for what reason MO1 and MO2 were handed over. PW4,
the witness for the recovery stated that he reached the respondent's office at 07.00 p.m and he was
not aware what transpired before his arrival. PW8, the Assistant Commissioner of Corporation
stated that the delay in processing of bills of NACSS is only due to their belated presentation and the
files and bills have to pass through various officers and the respondent is not the authority for
extending the work period. The trial Court on considering all these aspects on a proper scrutiny both
oral and documentary evidence which had the benefit of examining the witnesses in person and
after detailed analysis, rendered the judgment of acquittal which need not be interfered with.
(xi)In support of his contention, the learned senior counsel for http://www.judis.nic.in the
respondent relied upon the following citations:-
● M.Rajendran Versus State, rep. by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance
and Anti Corruption, Cuddalore reported in 2011 (1) MWN (Cr.) 602.
● Mohammed Akhtar @ Kari @ Ors. Versus State of Bihar @ Anr.
reported in 2019 SAR (Criminal) 221 Supreme Court. ● State of Gujarat Versus Dahyabhai Hirabhai
Solanki. ● Abdul Kathar Versus State, represented by Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti
Corruption, Nagercoil, Kanyakumari District reported in (2019) 1 MLJ (Crl) 122.
● Som Prakash Versus State of Punjab reported in AIR 1992 SC 665. ● C.M.Girish Babu Versus CBI,
Cochin, High Court of Kerala. ● G.Kothandan Versus State, rep. by the Inspector of Police, Vigilance
and Anti Corruption, Chennai City Circle-II reported in (2019) 1 MLJ (Crl) 357.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 8
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
● G.Sithivinayagamoorthy and Anr. Versus State through the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti
Corruption Unit, Virudhunagar District reported in (2019) 1 MLJ (Crl) 61. ● State represented by
the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption Wing, Tiruchirapalli reported in (2019) 3
MLJ (Crl) ● K.P.Kolanthai Versus State by Inspector of Police, Anti Corruption Wing, Dharmapuri
reported in (2019) 3 MLJ (Crl) 713. ● A.S.Kannan Versus State by the Inspector of Police, Vigilance
and Anti Corruption, Chennai City II Detachment, Chennai. http://www.judis.nic.in
6.This Court considered the rival submissions and perused the materials available on record.
(i)In this case, PW1 is the Commissioner, Corporation of Madurai and accorded Ex.P1, Sanction
order. PW2 is the decoy witness. PW3 is the accompanying official witness. PW5 is the co-employee
of PW2. PW6 is the Manager and PW7 is the President of PW2's Organization. PW4 is the Circle
Sanitary Inspector and PW8 is the Assistant Commissioner and they are superior officers of the
respondent. PW9 is the Scientific Officer from the Forensic Department. PW10 is the Head Clerk of
the Special Court for trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases, Madurai. PW11 is the Trap Laying
Officer and PW12 is the Investigating Officer.
(ii)The respondent, Sanitary Inspector of Madurai Corporation was given incharge of Ward No.8.
PW2's organization NACSS was entrusted with the work of door to door collection and conveyance
of waste to the dumper binds, for which they were paid by the Corporation. PW2 was the supervisor
for Ward No.8 and under him ten conservancy http://www.judis.nic.in workers were executing the
work. Their attendance extract is submitted to the Corporation officials, who on verification would
pay accordingly. The respondent a Sanitary Inspector has to oversee the conservancy work executed
by NACSS. The payment for the work from 04.05.2002 to March 2003 was paid. Since the
corporation had not given any order to stop the work, NACSS continued with the conservancy work.
The bills for the month of April and May 2003 were presented which could not be processed for the
reason, work period extension order was not obtained by them. NACSS made several
representations to the Commissioner of Corporation, Madurai and one such representation is Ex.P4,
dated 09.06.2003, which was forwarded to the Assistant Commissioner office, who has to give his
recommendation and certificate. Since it got delayed, PW2 and PW5 approached the respondent on
09.10.2003, at that time the respondent demanded Rs.500/- as bribe and a mobile phone for
expeditiously processing the file.
(iii)PW2 informed NACSS is a Service Oriented Organization and they would not be in a position to
meet the demand. The respondent was categorical that unless the demand is fulfilled, the file would
not be processed. PW2 informed his Manager PW6 who in turn informed PW7,
http://www.judis.nic.in the President of the Organization. On instructions of PW7, PW2
accompanied by PW5 and PW6 approached the respondent, lodged a complaint on 10.10.2003 at
about 12.30 p.m to PW11. PW11 made discrete enquiry on the credentials of PW2 and the
respondent. Thereafter, on informing his superior officers registered an FIR, enlisted the official
witnesses PW3 and one Natarajan. Thereafter, entrustment proceedings were demonstrated and
recorded in Mahazar Ex.P7. Thereafter, the trap team left to the office of the respondent. Since the
respondent was not available, PW2, PW3 and PW5 waited for him. At about 05.45 p.m., the
respondent reached the office. PW2, PW3 and PW5 approached him at that time, the respondent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 9
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
again reiterated his demand and PW2 handed over the tainted money [MO1] and mobile phone
[MO2] to the respondent who received the same, counted the cash by both hands and kept the same
in his right side table drawer. As instructed earlier, PW5 came out and gave pre-arranged signal at
about 06.10 p.m. On seeing the same, PW11 along with trap team entered the office of the
respondent, PW2, PW3 identified the respondent to whom the bribe amount was paid and also the
place where MO1 and MO2 were kept. Thereafter PW2 and PW5 were asked to leave the office. PW3
confirmed the version given by PW2 and thereafter, PW4 superior of the http://www.judis.nic.in
respondent was summoned to be witness for recovery. PW4 along with another officer had come
and recovery proceedings commenced at about 07.00 p.m. On arrival of PW4 in presence of PW3
and trap team, the hand wash of the respondent was taken, which turned pink in colour, confirming
the respondent had received MO1 and MO2. The hand wash was sent to Forensic examination, PW9
examined the same and given report Ex.P17. The respondent was asked to produce MO1 and MO2,
which he did so. Thereafter, the recovery mahazar Ex.P10 was prepared and he was arrested and his
house was searched. PW11 handed over the investigation to PW12. PW6 and PW7, the Manager and
President of NACSS have stated about the work allotted to them and they were awaiting the
extension order which was to be recommended by the respondent and the demand made by the
respondent, which was informed by PW2 not willing to pay the bribe. PW7 instructed PW2 and PW6
to lodge a complaint. Thus in this case, the demand made by the respondent to PW2 on 09.09.2003
in the presence of PW5 had been proved. Thereafter, the receipt of bribe amount MO1 and mobile
phone MO2 in presence of PW2, PW3 and PW5 have been proved by these witnesses. Though
elaborate cross examination of prosecution witnesses has been made during trial, the respondent
could not discredit and make http://www.judis.nic.in out a case. On the other hand, the evidence of
PW2, PW3 and PW5 are cogent, reliable and clearly proved the fact that the respondent had made
the demand and accepted the bribe. Thereafter, the recovery has been proved by the evidence of
PW3, PW4 and PW11. Thus, by cogent evidence both oral and documentary, the prosecution had
proved the demand, acceptance and recovery.
(iv)The contention of the learned senior counsel for the respondent that the Commissioner is the
authority for issuance of work period extension order cannot be countenanced for the reason that
PW4 and PW8 clearly stated that the recommendation has to be made by the concerned Sanitary
Inspector and further it is proved that the recommendation till the date of the trap was not made by
the respondent. From Exs.P12 to P14, this fact is further confirmed. The other contention of the
learned senior counsel for the respondent that Ex.D1, dated 06.06.2003 is a certificate with regard
to clearance of garbage for the month of May 2003. Ex.D2 is a letter dated 29.10.2003 seeking
extension of work order and Ex.D3 dated 31.07.2002 is a requisition for payment for the month of
May, June and July 2003. Exs.D1 to D3 no way improves the case of the respondent.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(v)The further contention of the respondent that Ex.P11, the Rough Sketch is without particulars
and further no statement was recorded from the respondent after the trap. In the absence of
showing any prejudice caused and further this Court on several occasions had held that the
Vigilance Manual is only Directory and not Mandatory and violation of not following the manual,
action is to be taken against the violating officer and nothing more.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 10
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
(vi)The respondent during questioning under Section 313 Cr.P.C., for all the questions, he had given
a formal denial and finally, he had given explanation that he was only holding Additional Charge of
Ward No.8 as Sanitary Inspector and since NACSS was continuing the conservancy work even after
the period allotted to them, which was informed by him to his superior officers and hence, they had
motive for this reason, he had been framed in a false case, as though he had demanded and received
MO1 and MO2. Other than this explanation he had not given any explanation with regard to the
prejudice caused to him in not following the vigilance manual and also the alleged motive against
him.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(vii)The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of M.Narsinga Rao Versus the State of A.P reported in
(2001) 1 SCC 691, had analysed and given a finding with regard to compulsory presumption
envisaged in Section 20 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, it would be gain said to extract
the same:-
“8. Mr L. Nageswara Rao, learned counsel for the appellant adopted a twin
contention. First is that the presumption under Section 20 of the Act could be drawn
only when the prosecution succeeded in establishing with direct evidence that the
delinquent public servant accepted or obtained gratification. That premise cannot
depend on an inference for affording foundation for the legal presumption envisaged
in Section 20 of the Act, according to the learned counsel. The second limb of his
contention is that it is not enough that some currency notes were handed over to the
public servant to make it acceptance of gratification. Prosecution has a further duty
to prove that what was paid amounted to gratification, contended the counsel.
9. In support of the first contention, learned counsel relied on the decision of a
two-Judge Bench of this Court in Sita Ram v. State of Rajasthan [(1975) 2 SCC 227 :
1975 SCC (Cri) 491] . It was held by the Bench that:
http://www.judis.nic.in (SCC p. 232, para 10) “On mere recovery of certain money
from the person of an accused without the proof of its payment by or on behalf of
some person to whom official favour was to be shown the presumption cannot arise.”
10. The said observation was made in the background of a finding made by the High
Court in that case that the evidence of the witnesses was not reliable and particularly
because “so many jerks and jolts seem to have been given to the prosecution case by
contradictory and hostile statements of the witnesses that a good part of it had to be
rejected by the High Court”. (SCC p. 231, para 9) That decision and the observation
could thus confine to the facts of that case, and no legal principle for future
application could be discerned therefrom.
11. Learned counsel then relied on another decision of a two-Judge Bench of this
Court in Suraj Mal v. State (Delhi Admn.) [(1979) 4 SCC 725 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 159]
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 11
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
wherein the Bench observed that: (SCC p. 727, para 2) “In our opinion, mere recovery
of money divorced from the circumstances under which it is paid is not sufficient to
convict the accused when the substantive evidence in the case is not reliable.”
http://www.judis.nic.in In that case also the said finding depended upon the veracity
of the testimony of the witnesses. But the contention raised by the learned counsel in
this case on the point canvassed by him cannot find any support from the said
decision either.
12. While adverting to the first contention of the learned counsel we may reproduce
Section 20(1) of the Act.
[That sub-section is virtually the same as Section 4(1) of the predecessor Act of 1947.] “20.
(1)Presumption where public servant accepts gratification other than legal remuneration.—(1)
Where, in any trial of an offence punishable under Section 7 or Section 11 or clause (a) or clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of Section 13 it is proved that an accused person has accepted or obtained or has
agreed to accept or attempted to obtain for himself, or for any other any person, any gratification
(other than legal remuneration) or any valuable thing from any person, it shall be presumed, unless
the contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained or agreed to accept or attempted to obtain that
gratification or that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a motive or reward such as is mentioned
in Section 7 or, as the case may be, without consideration or for a consideration which he knows to
be inadequate.”
13. Before proceeding further, we may point out that the expressions “may presume” and “shall
presume” are defined in Section 4 of the Evidence Act. The presumptions falling under the former
category are compendiously known as “factual presumptions” or http://www.judis.nic.in
“discretionary presumptions” and those falling under the latter as “legal presumptions” or
“compulsory presumptions”. When the expression “shall be presumed” is employed in Section 20(1)
of the Act it must have the same import of compulsion.
14. When the sub-section deals with legal presumption it is to be understood as in terrorem i.e. in
tone of a command that it has to be presumed that the accused accepted the gratification as a motive
or reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act etc., if the condition envisaged in the former
part of the section is satisfied. The only condition for drawing such a legal presumption under
Section 20 is that during trial it should be proved that the accused has accepted or agreed to accept
any gratification. The section does not say that the said condition should be satisfied through direct
evidence. Its only requirement is that it must be proved that the accused has accepted or agreed to
accept gratification. Direct evidence is one of the modes through which a fact can be proved. But
that is not the only mode envisaged in the Evidence Act.
15. The word “proof” need be understood in the sense in which it is defined in the Evidence Act
because proof depends upon the admissibility of evidence. A fact is said to be proved when, after
considering the matters before it, the court either believes it to exist, or considers its
http://www.judis.nic.in existence so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of
the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists. This is the definition given for the word
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 12
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
“proved” in the Evidence Act. What is required is production of such materials on which the court
can reasonably act to reach the supposition that a fact exists. Proof of the fact depends upon the
degree of probability of its having existed. The standard required for reaching the supposition is that
of a prudent man acting in any important matter concerning him. Fletcher Moulton L.J. in Hawkins
v. Powells Tillery Steam Coal Co. Ltd. [(1911) 1 KB 988 : 1911 WN 53] observed like this:
“Proof does not mean proof to rigid mathematical demonstration, because that is
impossible; it must mean such evidence as would induce a reasonable man to come to
a particular conclusion.”
16. The said observation has stood the test of time and can now be followed as the standard of proof.
In reaching the conclusion the court can use the process of inferences to be drawn from facts
produced or proved. Such inferences are akin to presumptions in law. Law gives absolute discretion
to the court to presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened. In that
process the court may have regard to common course of natural events, human conduct, public or
private business http://www.judis.nic.in vis-à-vis the facts of the particular case. The discretion is
clearly envisaged in Section 114 of the Evidence Act.
17.Presumption is an inference of a certain fact drawn from other proved facts. While inferring the
existence of a fact from another, the court is only applying a process of intelligent reasoning which
the mind of a prudent man would do under similar circumstances. Presumption is not the final
conclusion to be drawn from other facts. But it could as well be final if it remains undisturbed later.
Presumption in law of evidence is a rule indicating the stage of shifting the burden of proof. From a
certain fact or facts the court can draw an inference and that would remain until such inference is
either disproved or dispelled.
18. For the purpose of reaching one conclusion the court can rely on a factual presumption. Unless
the presumption is disproved or dispelled or rebutted, the court can treat the presumption as
tantamounting to proof. However, as a caution of prudence we have to observe that it may be unsafe
to use that presumption to draw yet another discretionary presumption unless there is a statutory
compulsion. This Court has indicated so in Suresh Budharmal Kalani v. State of Maharashtra
[(1998) 7 SCC 337 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1625] : (SCC p. 339, para 5) “A presumption can be drawn only
from facts — and not from other presumptions — by a process of probable and logical
http://www.judis.nic.in reasoning.”
19. Illustration (a) to Section 114 of the Evidence Act says that the court may presume that “a man
who is in the possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either the thief or has received the
goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession”. That illustration can
profitably be used in the present context as well when prosecution brought reliable materials that
the appellant's pocket contained phenolphthalein-smeared currency notes for Rs 500 when he was
searched by PW 7 DSP of Anti-Corruption Bureau. That by itself may not or need not necessarily
lead to a presumption that he accepted that amount from somebody else because there is a
possibility of somebody else either stuffing those currency notes into his pocket or stealthily
inserting the same therein. But the other circumstances which have been proved in this case and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 13
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
those preceding and succeeding the searching out of the tainted currency notes, are relevant and
useful to help the court to draw a factual presumption that the appellant had willingly received the
currency notes.
20. PW 7 DSP said that PW 1 approached him on the previous day and lodged Ext. P-2 complaint
stating that the appellant was persistently demanding Rs 500 from him. The currency notes were
actually prepared by PW 7 by smearing them with phenolphthalein powder. When the
http://www.judis.nic.in appellant was caught red-handed with those currency notes he never
demurred to PW 7 that those notes were not received by him. In fact, the story that such currency
notes were stuffed into his pocket was concocted by the appellant only after lapse of a period of 4
years and that too when the appellant faced the trial in the court.
21. From those proved facts the court can legitimately draw a presumption that the appellant
received or accepted the said currency notes on his own volition. Of course, the said presumption is
not an inviolable one, as the appellant could rebut it either through cross-examination of the
witnesses cited against him or by adducing reliable evidence. But if the appellant fails to disprove
the presumption the same would stick and then it can be held by the court that the prosecution has
proved that the appellant received the said amount.” On the facts and circumstances of the case in
hand, it is not the case that MO1 and MO2 were stuffed or forcibly thrusted in the hands of the
respondent. Further there is no plausible explanation to dispel and shifting the burden of proof.
(viii)This Court in K.Selvaraj and others Versus the State http://www.judis.nic.in reported in 2004
SCC OnLine Mad 931; Duraimurugan Versus State represented by the Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Vellore reported in 2013 SCC OnLine Mad 30; Thyagarajan
Versus State by the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption City Special Unit-III, Chennai
reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 4620; Ramalingam Versus State represented by the Inspector of
Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Nagapattinam reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 23740 have
clearly held that the guidelines are directory and not mandatory.
(ix)The other contention of the learned senior counsel for the respondent that there was some
animosity between PW2 and the respondent. In connivance with the officials of NACSS, the trap has
been laid to implicate the respondent, by setting up the trap seems to be far-fetched. The respondent
had not successfully rebutted the presumption under Section 20 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988. The prosecution on the other hand had clearly established the demand, acceptance of the
tainted money and recovery.
(x)Taking guidelines from the case of Krishna Ram Versus State of Rajasthan reported in (2009) 11
SCC 708:-
http://www.judis.nic.in “There cannot be any quarrel with the settled propositions of
law that if on appraisal of the evidence and on considering relevant attending
circumstances it is found that two views are possible one as held by the trial court for
acquitting the accused and the other for convicting the accused, in such a situation,
the rule of prudence should guide the High Court not to disturb the order of acquittal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 14
State Of Tamil Nadu Rep. By vs N.Vijayakumar on 28 August, 2020
made by the trial court. It is also equally well settled that where the material on
record leads to a sole and inescapable conclusion of guilt of the accused, the
judgment of acquittal will call for interference by the appellate court.”
(xi)Thus from the evidence available and on the above discussion, this Court finds
that the trial Court decision was erroneous and the approach of the trial Court was
patently, manifestly unreasonable. The trial Court ignored the evidence, misread the
materials and evidence of PW2, PW3, PW4, PW5, PW9 and PW11, who have clearly
proved the fact of demand, acceptance and recovery of MO1 and MO2 from the
respondent, leading to inescapable conclusion that the respondent had committed
the offence.
http://www.judis.nic.in
7.The reasoning given by the trial Court cannot stand the test of scrutiny in view of the available
evidence and materials. The appeal is allowed and the judgment of acquittal awarded by the trial
Court is set- aside, convicting the respondent for the offence under Sections 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
8.The learned counsel for the respondent shall inform the respondent to personally remain present
before this Court on 14.09.2020. This Court adjourns the case for hearing the respondent on the
question of sentence. If on that day, he fails to appear before this Court, the counsel for the
respondent will be heard on the question of sentence.
9.For hearing of the respondent on the quantum of sentence, Registry is directed to list the appeal
on 14.09.2020, under the caption, “for the appearance of the respondent”.
28.08.2020 Speaking Order / Non-Speaking Order Internet : Yes / No Index : Yes / No vv2 To
http://www.judis.nic.in
1.The Special Judge, Special Court for trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases, Madurai.
2.The Public Prosecutor, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai.
http://www.judis.nic.in M.NIRMAL KUMAR, J.
vv2 PRE-DELIVERY JUDGMENT IN 28.08.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/120263382/ 15
