State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRAA No. 88/2010
Reserved on: 13.04.2023
Pronounced on: 26.04.2023
State of J&K ... Appellant(s)
Through: - Mr. R. S. Jamwal, AAG vice
Mr. Amit Gupta, AAG
v.
Sham Lal ...Respondent(s)
Through: - None.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Rajesh Sekhri-J
1. Challenge in this appeal has been thrown to judgment dated 26.04.2010 passed by learned 2nd
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu ('trial court' for short) in file No. 121/S and FIR No. 114 of 2001
of Police Station, R. S. Pura under Sections 20/29 of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance
Act, 1985 (for short 'NDPS Act'), read with 3/25 of Arms Act, vide which, respondents have been
acquitted of charges.
2. The case of the appellant/prosecution in the trial Court, in brief, is that on 01.07.2001, while
SDPO (Sub Division) R. S. Pura and S.P. Border, Jammu, during investigation of FIR No. 20 of
2001, were on their way to Chakrawati R.S. Pura, they arrested accused-Yousuf Massi, who made a
disclosure that he had concealed one 3.15 pistol, six live cartridges in his house in a box and he had
also concealed 09 packets of heroine in the land of respondent-accused which they had brought
from Pakistan. The said accused further disclosed that other nine packets of heroine were lying with
the respondent/accused-Sham Lal. The disclosure statement of accused Yousuf Massi was reduced
into writing and consequent thereupon, a pistol and nine packets of heroine were recovered and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 1
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
aforesaid FIR came to be registered and investigation came into vogue. The heroine seized on the
disclosure statement of said Yousuf Massi was found to be carrying the mark 'Samunder 8888/96
Shah Azam Factory' and out of said packets, 50 grams each were segregated and sealed as samples.
Respondent was also taken into custody, who made disclosure about the remaining 09 packets of
heroine lying in a bag in his house and consequent thereupon, the said 09 packets of heroine were
recovered at the instance of the respondent lying underneath a heap of bricks in his house. Said 09
packets of heroine were also bearing the same mark 'Samunder 8888/96 Shah Azam Factory' and
out of said packets, samples were taken, seized and sealed on the spot. All the samples were sent to
FSL for chemical analysis. As per report of the chemical analyst, said samples were found to contain
heroine. Accordingly, on the conclusion of investigation, a final report in terms of section 173 of
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C. for short) was filed in the trial court for offences under
Sections 20/29 of NDPS Act and 3/25 of the Arms Act. Accused were charged sheeted by the trial
court on 10.01.2002 whereby they pleaded innocence and claimed trial, prompting the trial court to
ask for the evidence. It is pertinent to mention that accused-Yousuf Massi absconded during trial
and proceedings under Section 512 of Cr. P.C. were initiated against him on 20.04.2009.
3. Prosecution has examined as many as 16 witnesses to bring home the guilt of respondent. On
conclusion of the prosecution evidence, statement of the respondent under Section 342 Cr.P.C. was
recorded whereby he denied the incriminating evidence against him by pleading false implication
and did not lead any evidence in defence.
4. On appreciation of the prosecution evidence, learned trial court has concluded that prosecution
case in the trial court was not only replete with material contradictions and discrepant on material
aspects, but mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act have been observed in breech, therefore, learned
trial Court vide impugned judgment has acquitted the respondent.
5. The impugned judgment has been assailed by the appellant-State inter alia on the grounds that
learned trial Court has failed to appreciate the prosecution evidence in the right perspective and has
misconstrued the law applicable to the present case. According to the appellant, learned trial Court
has fallen in grave error of law resulting in the acquittal of respondent despite the prosecution
having succeeded to make out allegations against the respondent.
6. Instead of giving a detailed resume of the prosecution evidence, it is proposed to refer to the
relevant depositions of the prosecution witnesses, as, when and where required.
7. An overview of the prosecution case is that accused-Yousuf Massi (since absconding) was
apprehended by SDPO, R.S.Pura in FIR No. 20/2001, who made a disclosure with respect to a
pistol, 06 live cartridges in his house as also concealment of 09 packets of heroine in the land of the
respondent brought from Pakistan. As per the prosecution, information was received from
Directorate Revenue Intelligence by PW-1 R.R. Swain that accused were involved in transborder
smuggling. Accordingly, PW-1 directed S.P. Border PW M. K. Sinah to apprehend persons involved
in the transborder smuggling. It is further case of the prosecution that at the time when accused
Yousuf Massi was apprehended, respondent-Sham Lal was in the custody of Crime and Railways.
This version of the prosecution case has been corroborated by PW-1 R.R. Swain and pertinently said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 2
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
witness has also stated that custody of respondent-Sham Lal was handed over to S.P. Border, during
which, he made disclosure with respect to the contraband i.e. heroine in question. As per the
disclosure made by the respondent, he had concealed a bag containing 09 packets of heroine
underneath a heap of bricks lying in the compound of his house. It is pertinent to mention that this
disclosure has been made by the respondent to SDPO, R. S. Pura in the presence of PWs-Munish
Kishore and Kushwant Singh.
8. The pristine question, which falls for consideration of this Court, is that when respondent was
admittedly in the custody of Crime and Railways, whether his custody was handed over to the
investigating agency in the present case or not.
9. PW-Munish Sinah has stated that as per information received from Directorate Revenue
Intelligence by PW-1 that accused were involved in the transborder smuggling of heroine and
charas, he was directed to investigate the matter. He further states that two teams were constituted
for arrest of both accused persons. Accused-Yousuf Massi was arrested by SDPO R.S.Pura, on whose
disclosure, 09 packets of heroine from a field belonging to respondent and one pistol (Katta) lying in
his house were recovered. The witness goes on to state that respondent was brought by SSP, Jammu
who disclosed that he had concealed 09 packets of heroine underneath the bricks near his house and
consequent recovery was effected on the basis of said disclosure and at the instance of the
respondent.
10. PW R. R. Swain has stated that respondent was in the custody of Crime and Railways in a
narcotic case and his custody was handed over to S.P. Border and SDPO, R.S. Pura, during which,
respondent made a disclosure that he had concealed 09 packets of heroine in the compound of his
house under a heap of bricks. This witness has also stated that on the receipt of information from
the Directorate of Revenue intelligence, both the accused persons came to be arrested. It is pertinent
to mention that according to PW-R. R. Swain, respondent was in the custody of Crime and Railways
and PW-Munish Sinah has deposed that respondent-Sham Lal was brought by SSP, Jammu,
however, there is nothing on the record to suggest about the custody of the respondent with Crime
and Railways as also to indicate that when his custody was handed over to the Investigating Officer
in the present case. The prosecution case is absolutely silent about the fact that when respondent
was in the custody of Crime and Railways and in which FIR and for the commission of which
offence(s). Neither there is anything on the record nor any evidence led by the prosecution in the
trial court to establish custody of the respondent with the Crime and Railways as also with respect to
shifting of his custody in the present case. It needs a specific mention that it is none of the
prosecution case that respondent was apprehended by the Police team, rather it is positive case of
the prosecution that custody of the respondent was obtained from the Crime and Railways. But
there is no proof adduced by the appellant/prosecution in the trial court in this respect. It is a
serious lapse on the part of the investigating agency as also the prosecution.
11. Now coming to the disclosure statement attributed to the respondent and consequent recovery of
the contraband, it is trite that in terms of legislative mandate ingrained in the Evidence Act, no
confession made to a police officer, whether in custody or not, can be proved against the accused.
Section 27 in a way is a proviso to these provisions, inasmuch as, a statement made even by way of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 3
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
confession is admissible, as evidence under Section 27 distinctly relates to fact discovered. (See AIR
1972 SC 3)
12. In the aforesaid backdrop, we find ourselves in agreement with the observation of learned trial
court that disclosure made while in custody, in consequence of which, the fact is discovered, is an
incriminating evidence, which when established beyond doubt, is to be explained by the accused. In
order to avail the benefit of section 27 of the Evidence Act, two conditions are required to be
satisfied: (i) information must be such as has caused discovery of the fact and (ii) information must
be distinct to the fact discovered.
13. Section 27 of the Evidence Act cannot be invoked, but for the co- existence of aforesaid two
conditions. It is evident, as such, that prosecution is obliged to establish that accused was in custody
and while in custody he made the disclosure. It is only after said disclosure made by the accused,
while in the custody of the police that prosecution is obliged to prove that subsequent recovery is
effected in the present case. As already stated, appellant/prosecution in the trial court has failed to
prove custody of the respondent in the present case from Crime and Railways, therefore, the
recovery and seizures of the contraband, pales into insignificance.
14. Be that as it may, the disclosure and recovery, in the present case, is otherwise discrepant in
character. PW-3 Gian Chand has stated that on 30.07.2001, he was called by Senior Superintendent
of Police (SSP) to his residence and was directed to hand over a letter to SDPO, R. S. Pura. He
handed over the said letter to SDPO, R.S. Pura, who constituted two teams; one under the
supervision of the S. P. Border and the second under the supervision of SDPO R. S. Pura. Accused
Yousuf Massi was arrested, who made a disclosure in Police Station, R.S. Pura that he had concealed
09 packets of heroine under a dump of sand and had concealed one pistol (katta) in his house and
consequently, the recoveries and seizures were effected at his instance. However, independent
witnesses to the disclosure of PWs- Janak Raj and Choudhary Sham Lal have not supported the
prosecution version in this respect. Consequent recovery is stated to have been effected in the
presence of PWs-Bhushan Lal and Rajinder Kumar who are independent witnesses and both these
witnesses have also turned hostile, though other two witnesses, namely, Khuswant Singh & Munish
Kishore, who are police officials, have admitted the recovery memo. Therefore, all the independent
witnesses i.e. PWs 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9, having turned hostile, have not supported the prosecution case.
15. Another vital aspect of the case is with respect to placement of the seized contraband in the safe
custody of Malkhana, re-sealing and forwarding of same to FSL for chemical analysis.
16. The prosecution has failed to prove that contraband recovered in the present case was kept in the
safe custody and forwarded to FSL in accordance with law and without any delay. It is pertinent to
note that in view of stringent provisions regarding punishment and grant of bail, the legislature in
its wisdom enacted section 55 of the NDPS Act to ensure that officer Incharge of Police Station shall
immediately take charge and keep the alleged contraband in safe custody, in order to rule out any
possibility of tampering with the contraband. Prosecution is obliged to prove that the contraband
after its recovery and seizure from the accused was kept in safe custody, in the Malkhana of the
concerned Police Station under proper entry in the Malkhana register. The prosecution is also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 4
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
obliged to prove that said sample of the contraband was forwarded to FSL without any delay.
17. Chhattisgarh High Court in Ganga Bhai v. State of M.P reported as 2012 (4) Crimes (HC) 687 in
a similar legal situation has made following observation:
"30. After having considered the evidence led by the prosecution in its entirety, I am
of the considered opinion that there is non compliance of the provisions of Sections
52 and 55 of the Act, 1985. Neither delay in delivering the sample at FSL has been
explained nor the Malkhana Register was produced in evidence. The prosecution did
not examine the officer-in-charge of Malkhana, Station House Officer and Constable
302 Shyam Sunder Chandrakar. Therefore, the report of FSl (Ex. P8) cannot form
basis of conviction of the appellant under Section 20B of the Act, 1985. In view of teh
above, the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside"
18. Similarly, in Prem Shahi v. State of Uttrakhand reported as (2013) Supreme (UK) 162,
Uttrakhand High Court has also held as below:
"Having perused the contents of Section 55 of the NDPS Act, I have no hesitation to
hold that contraband, so recovered from the accused, shall be forwarded to the officer
Incharge of the police station; who shall put the contraband and sample seal in a safe
custody and shall affix his seal to such articles before keeping them in the Malkhana.
Section 55 further authorizes Incharge of the police station to permit the
Investigating Officer or any other officer to take sample of the contraband in the
presence of Incharge of the police station and affix his own seal on the sample, so
drawn as well as on the packet, wherein rest of the contraband, is kept, after taking
the sample."
19. Reverting to the present case, PW-11 Sardari Lal posted in Police Station, R. S. Pura has
deposited packets along with papers in the Malkhana and entry to that effect was made in the
concerned Register. PW-12 Madan Lal is the incharge, Malkhana, who has stated that he received 09
packets and one pistol on 01.07.2001, i.e. on the date of occurrence itself at 12:40 at night and an
entry was made in the relevant Register and on the next day, i.e. on 02.07.2001 he also received 09
packets of heroine from SDPO R.S.Pura regarding which he made entries in Register No. 19 and
deposited the same in the Malkhana. Now, as per the prosecution story, accused-Sham Lal made
disclosure regarding heroine on 01.07.2001, the contraband was recovered and sealed on the same
date and were sent to the Executive Magistrate for re- sealing on 02.07.2001, same were re-sealed
on the said date, as evident from EXPW-SP. Now, it is pertinent to mention that said samples were
again produced before the Executive Magistrate on 23.07.2007 as same were required to be sent to
FSL Chandigarh. The samples were received by CFSL, Chandigarh on 25.07.2001. The question
which arises from this chronology of events is that when samples were re-deposited in the Malkhana
after same were obtained by the investigating agency for re-sealing and when they were taken back
by the investigating agency for forwarding to CFSL, Chandigarh. The prosecution case is absolutely
silent about the same and it vitiates the whole trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 5
State Of J&K vs Sham Lal on 26 April, 2023
20. It may also be noted that as per EXPW-NK the seal with which the heroine in question was
sealed was kept on the superdnama of PW Rajinder Kumar, but PW-Rajinder Kumar has denied this
fact, therefore, superdnama of the seal having not been established, the link evidence is also
missing.
21. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed above, we do not find any illegality
much less impropriety in the well reasoned impugned judgment of acquittal. Viewed thus, we have
not been persuaded to take a view different from the one taken by learned trial court. Hence present
appeal is dismissed and the impugned judgment is upheld. Respondent is discharged of his bail
bonds. Record of the trial court, if any, shall be returned.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
26.04.2023
Paramjeet
Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87683282/ 6
