State vs Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury And on 8 November, 2021
State vs Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury And on 8 November, 2021
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K. Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.A. No.411 of 2011
State .... Appellant
Mrs. Suman Pattanayak
Addl. Government Advocate
-versus-
Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury and .... Respondents
Another
None
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE A.K. MOHAPATRA
ORDER
Order No. 08.11.2021 Misc. Case No.851 of 2011
03. 1. This is an application for condonation of delay of over three years in filing the present appeal
in 2011 against an order dated 16th September, 2008 passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P.(C)
No.7049 of 2006.
2. There is no explanation offered in this application for the delay in filing the present appeal except
quoting the judgment in the case of State of Haryana v. Chandra Mani (1996) 3 SCC 132. It has been
stated in para 5 as under:
"5. That in the aforesaid premises, there is no deliberate laches nor any willful
negligence on the part of the appellant in not filing the appeal in time. The delay in
filing the appeal was bona fide, unintentional and the same has been caused due to
certain official/consultative processes which were beyond the control of the
appellant. Further the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time."
3. The Supreme Court has made it clear in a series of judgments, including the recent decision in
The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bherulal 2020 SCC OnLine SC 849, that there have to be proper and
convincing reasons for the delay in the state authorities filing appeals or petitions. In the said
decision the Supreme Court observed as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177383583/ 1
State vs Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury And on 8 November, 2021
"2. We are constrained to pen down a detailed order as it appears that all our
counseling to Government and Government authorities have fallen on deaf ears i.e.,
the Supreme Court of India cannot be a place for the 2 Governments to walk in when
they choose ignoring the period of limitation prescribed. We have raised the issue
that if the Government machinery is so inefficient and incapable of filing
appeals/petitions in time, the solution may lie in requesting the Legislature to expand
the time period for filing limitation for Government authorities because of their gross
incompetence. That is not so. Till the Statute subsists, the appeals/petitions have to
be filed as per the Statues prescribed.
3. No doubt, some leeway is given for the Government inefficiencies but the sad part
is that the authorities keep on relying on judicial pronouncements for a period of
time when technology had not advanced and a greater leeway was given to the
Government (Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag & Anr vs. Mst. Katiji & Ors.
(1987) 2 SCC 107). This position is more than elucidated by the judgment of this
Court in Office of the Chief Post Master General & Ors. v.Living Media India Ltd. &
Anr. (2012) 3 SCC 563 where the Court observed as under:
"12) It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were well aware or conversant
with the issues involved including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in 3 this Court. They cannot claim
that they have a separate period of limitation when the Department was possessed
with competent persons familiar with court proceedings.
In the absence of plausible and acceptable explanation, we are posing a question why the delay is to
be condoned mechanically merely because the Government or a wing of the Government is a party
before us. Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter of condonation of delay when there
was no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bonafide, a liberal concession has to be
adopted to advance substantial justice, we are of the view that in the facts and circumstances, the
Department cannot take advantage of various earlier decisions. The claim on account of impersonal
machinery and inherited bureaucratic methodology of making several notes cannot be accepted in
view of the modern technologies being used and available. The law of limitation undoubtedly binds
everybody including the Government.
13) In our view, it is the right time to inform all the government bodies, their agencies and
instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable and acceptable explanation for the delay and
there was bonafide effort, there is no need to accept the usual explanation that the file was kept
pending for several months/years 4 due to considerable degree of procedural red tape in the
process. The government departments are under a special obligation to ensure that they perform
their duties with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an exception and should not be
used as an anticipated benefit for government departments. The law shelters everyone under the
same light and should not be swirled for the benefit of a few. Considering the fact that there was no
proper explanation offered by the Department for the delay except mentioning of various dates,
according to us, the Department has miserably failed to give any acceptable and cogent reasons
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177383583/ 2
State vs Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury And on 8 November, 2021
sufficient to condone such a huge delay."
Eight years hence the judgment is still unheeded!
4. A reading of the aforesaid application shows that the reason for such an inordinate delay is stated
to be only "due to unavailability of the documents and the process of arranging the documents". In
paragraph 4 a reference has been made to "bureaucratic process works, it is inadvertent that delay
occurs".
5. A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that if there is some merit in the case, the
5 period of delay is to be given a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed in any case. It is
really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases. This does not, of course, take away the
jurisdiction of the Court in an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being adopted in what we have categorized
earlier as "certificate cases". The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of dismissal from the
Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue and thus, say that nothing could be done because the
highest Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality and save the skin of officers
who may be at default that such a process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no improvement. The purpose of coming
to this Court is not to obtain such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time when
the concerned officer responsible for the same bears the consequences. The irony is that in none of
the cases any action is taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It is presumed
that this Court will condone the delay and even in making submissions, straight away counsels
appear to 6 address on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as happened in this
case till we pointed out to the counsel that he must first address us on the question of limitation.
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to do in all matters today, where there
are such inordinate delays that the Government or State authorities coming before us must pay for
wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such costs can be recovered from the officers
responsible.
8. Looking to the period of delay and the casual manner in which the application has been worded,
we consider appropriate to impose costs on the petitioner-State of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty five
thousand) to be deposited with the Mediation and Conciliation Project Committee. The amount be
deposited in four weeks. The amount be recovered from the officers responsible for the delay in
filing the special leave petition and a certificate of recovery of the said amount be also filed in this
Court within the said period of time.
9. The special leave petition is dismissed as time barred in terms aforesaid."
4. The Supreme Court has recently in a series of matters reiterated that the explanation usually
offered by the State and its entities for the delay on account of administrative exigencies should not
be accepted unless they are shown to be justified. A sampling of such orders is as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177383583/ 3
State vs Sasanka Sekhar Choudhury And on 8 November, 2021
(i) Order dated 13th January 2021 in SLP No.17559 of 2020 (State of Gujarat v.
Tushar Jagdish Chandra Vyas & Anr.)
(ii) Order dated 22nd January 2021 in SLP No.11989 of 2020 (The Commissioner of
Public Instruction & Ors. v. Shamshuddin)
(iii) Order dated 22nd January 2021 in SLP No.25743 of 2020 (State of Uttar Pradesh
& Ors v. Sabha Narain & Ors.)
(iv) Order dated 4th February 2021 in SLP No.19846 of 2020 (Union of India v.
Central Tibetan Schools Admin & Ors)
(v) Order dated 11th January 2021 in SLP No.22605 of 2020 (The State of Odisha &
Ors v. Sunanda Mahakuda)
5. It is seen that by the last order dated 11th January 2021 in SLP No.22605 of 2020 (The State of
Odisha & Ors v. Sunanda Mahakuda) filed by the State of Odisha itself, the Supreme Court
dismissed the SLP imposing costs of Rs.25,000/- for filing a belated SLP without offering any
credible explanation.
6. In the present case, the delay is over a period of three years. Consequently, the Court is not
inclined to condone the delay. The Misc. Case is dismissed.
7. Accordingly, the writ appeal is dismissed.
(Dr. S. Muralidhar) Chief Justice (A.K. Mohapatra) Judge S.K. Jena/P.A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177383583/ 4
