State Of U.P. vs Dheer Singh on 1 May, 2025
State Of U.P. vs Dheer Singh on 1 May, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68785-DB
Court No. - 47
Case :- GOVERNMENT APPEAL No. - 177 of 2025
Appellant :- State of U.P.
Respondent :- Dheer Singh
Counsel for Appellant :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Hon'ble Ms. Nand Prabha Shukla,J.
Order on Criminal Misc. (Leave to Appeal) Application No. of 2019
1. Heard Sri Sushil Kumar Pandey, learned AGA-Ist for the State-appellant and perused the material
on record.
2. The above noted leave to appeal application has been filed praying for grant of leave to the
appellant to prefer appeal against the judgement and order of acquittal dated 22.10.2018 passed by
Additional Sessions Judge, District Muzaffar Nagar, in Sessions Trial No.1084 of 2009 (State Vs.
Dheer Singh).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131439360/ 1
State Of U.P. vs Dheer Singh on 1 May, 2025
3. By the aforesaid judgement and order, the accused-respondent has been acquitted of all charges
under Sections 323, 304, 504, 506 IPC, which was registered as Case Crime No.301 of 2009 at
Police Station Kakrauli, District Muzaffar Nagar.
4. The prosecution story in brief is that complainant, Lakhmira, gave an information on 29.05.2009
at Police Station Kakrauli stating therein that on 20.05.2009 at about 2:00 p.m. his son, Harendra
and son of accused, Dheer Singh, were playing and quarrel took place between them wherein the
accused-respondent interfered and abused his son, Harendra and beaten him. He received injuries
whereupon complainant's wife Smt. Mesho and one Bhikari s/o Buddhu and others reached there
and witnessed the incident. The accused-respondent also threatened complainant of dire
consequences. As the complainant had gone for treatment of his son to Delhi, after returning from
there, he informed about the incident at police station whereupon an N.C.R. No. 13/2009 was
registered under Section 323, 504, 506 IPC. On 05.06.2009 the complainant submitted a written
Tehrir that his son Harendra died in Hospital at Chandigarh and his body was taken by him to his
house whereupon the aforesaid NCR No. 13/2009 was converted into Case Crime No. 301/2009 and
Section 304 IPC was added. After lodging of the FIR the investigating officer started investigation
and after completing all formalities and collecting sufficient materials evidences submitted
charge-sheet against the accused-respondent in the Court below.
5. Trial court framed charges against the respondent which he denied and sought trial.
6. The prosecution in order to prove its case has examined PW-1, Lkahmira (complainant); PW-2,
Mesho; PW-3, Bhikhari; PW-4, Constable Rajendra Singh; PW-5 Dr. R.P. Singh and PW-6 Dr. Arun
Kumar.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that trial court has acquitted the accused-
respondent holding that the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond all reasonable doubt and
as such the accused-respondent are entitled for acquittal.
8. The appellate Court is usually reluctant to interfere with a judgment acquitting an accused on the
principle that the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused is reinforced by such a
judgment. The above principle has been consistently followed by the Constitutional Court while
deciding appeals against acquittal by way of Article 136 of the Constitution or appeals filed under
Section 378 and 386 (a) Cr.P.C. in State of M.P. Vs. Sharad Goswami,(2021) 17 SCC 783; State of
Rajasthan Vs. Shera Ram, (2012) 1 SCC 602, Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade Vs. State of Maharastra,
(1973) 2 SCC 793.
9. The Supreme Court in the case of Ramesh Babulal Doshi Vs. State of Gujarat, (1996) 9 SCC 225
has observed that the High Court must examine the reasons given by the trial Court for recording
their acquittal before disturbing the same by re-appraising the evidence recorded by the trial court.
For clarity, para 7 is extracted herein below:
"Before proceeding further it will be pertinent to mention that the entire approach of
the High Court in dealing with the appeal was patently wrong for it did not at all
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131439360/ 2
State Of U.P. vs Dheer Singh on 1 May, 2025
address itself to the question as to whether the reasons which weighed with the trial
Court for recording the order of acquittal were proper or not. Instead thereof the
High Court made an independent reappraisal of the entire evidence to arrive at the
above quoted conclusions. This Court has repeatedly laid down that the mere fact
that a view other than the one taken by the trial Court can be legitimately arrived at
by the appellate Court on reappraisal of the evidence cannot constitute a valid and
sufficient ground to interfere with an order of acquittal unless it comes to the
conclusion that the entire approach of the trial Court in dealing with the evidence was
patently illegal or the conclusions arrived at by it were wholly untenable. While
sitting in judgment over an acquittal the appellant Court is first required to seek an
answer to the question whether the findings of the trial Court are palpably wrong,
manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable. If the appellant Court answers
the above question in the negative the order of acquittal is not to be disturbed.
Conversely, if the appellant Court holds, for reasons to be recorded, that the order of
acquittal cannot at all be sustained in view of any of the above infirmities it can then -
and then only - reappraise the evidence to arrive at its own conclusions. In keeping
with the above principles we have therefore to first ascertain whether the findings of
the trial Court are sustainable or not."
10. The Supreme Court in the case of Sadhu Saran Singh Vs. State of U.P., (2016) 4 SCC 357 has
observed that an appeal against acquittal has always been on an altogether different pedestal from
an appeal against conviction. In an appeal against acquittal, where the presumption of innocence in
favour of the accused is reinforced, the appellate court would interfere with the order of acquittal
only when there is perversity.
11. The Supreme Court in the case Basheera Begam Vs. Mohd. Ibrahim, (2020) 11 SCC 174 has held
that the burden of proving an accused guilty beyond all reasonable doubt lies on the prosecution. If,
upon analysis of evidence, two views are possible, one which points to the guilt of the accused and
the other which is inconsistent with the guilt of the accused, the latter must be preferred. Reversal of
a judgment and other of conviction and acquittal of the accused should not ordinarily be interfered
with unless such reversal/acquittal is vitiated by perversity. In other words, the court might reverse
an order of acquittal if the court finds that no person properly instructed in law could have, upon
analysis of the evidence on record, found the accused to be "not guilty". When circumstantial
evidence points to the guilt of the accused, it is necessary to prove a motive for the crime. However,
motive need not be proved where there is direct evidence. In this case, there is no direct evidence of
the crime.
12. The Supreme Court in the case of Kali Ram Vs. State of H.P., (1973) 2 SCC 808 has observed as
under:
"25. Another golden thread which runs through the web of the administration of
justice in criminal cases is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in
the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and other to his innocence, the view
which is favourable to the accused should be adopted. This principle has a special
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131439360/ 3
State Of U.P. vs Dheer Singh on 1 May, 2025
relevance in cases wherein the guilt of the accused is sought is to established by
circumstantial evidence."
13. The Supreme Court again examined in State of Odisha v. Banabihari Mohapatra & Ors, (2021) 15
SCC 268 the effect of the probability of two views in cases of appeal against acquittal and held that if
two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused,
and the other to his innocence, the view which is favourable to the accused should be adopted.
14. The Supreme Court in Sujit Biswas v. State of Assam, (2013) 12 SCC 406 has reiterated the
position that suspicion, however strong, cannot replace proof. An accused is presumed to be
innocent unless proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
15. In the background of the law discussed herein above, we will examine the trial court's findings
and evidence adduced during the trial by the witnesses to test the legality and validity of the
impugned order.
16. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and perused the material on record. We find
that in the statement of PW-2, it has come that respondent had beaten the deceased repeatedly by
throwing him on ground and also be legs and fists. PW-3 stated that respondent caught hold of the
neck of the deceased and threw him after picking him up on the ground 2-3 times as result of which
he suffered grievous head injuries but no such injury was found on the body or head of the deceased.
No injury at all was found on the body of the deceased. PW-1 has denied his presence on the place of
incident when he was present there. Hence lodging of report by PW-1 on the allegations made
therein is doubtful. Prosecution failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubts before the trial
court.
17. After considering the evidence on record, this Court does not finds any perversity in the findings
recorded by the trial court. The trial court's judgement is a well merited one, this Court need not
re-appreciate the evidence.
18. This leave to appeal application is rejected.
Order on Government Appeal Since leave to appeal application is rejected, therefore, the above
noted government appeal is, hereby, dismissed.
Let the record of the trial court be returned and this judgement to be notified to the trial court,
within two week.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 Ruchi Agrahari (Ms. Nand Prabha Shukla,J.) (Siddharth, J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131439360/ 4
