State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Javed Iqbal Wani
S. No.
Supp Cause List
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRAA No. 60/2012
Reserved on: 06.06.2023
Pronounced on:01.08.2023
State of J&K ...Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy.AG.
Vs.
Shalinder Singh and Ors. ...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr Sudesh Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
Per Javed Iqbal, J.
1. The instant criminal acquittal appeal has been filed by the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir
(now the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir) against the judgment dated 25.02.2012 (hereinafter
for short the impugned judgment) passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Udhampur,
(hereinafter for short the trial Court) in file No. 05/Sessions in case titled as "State Vs. Shalinder
Singh and Ors." arising out of FIR No. 309/2008 of Police Station Udhampur for offences under
Sections 302/120-B/212 RPC, 3/25 & 4/25 Arms Act, acquitting the accused respondents herein
facing trial while directing warrants issued against the absconding accused persons to remain in
force.
2. Brief Facts (cid:128) Upon completion of the investigation in FIR No 309/2008 supra the prosecution
presented challan for commission of offences under Sections 302, 120-B, 212 RPC and 3/25 and
4/25 of the Arms Act against 10 accused persons before the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate
Udhampur on 17.03.2009. The Chief Judicial Magistrate Udhampur vide order dated 17.03.2009
committed the said challan for trial to the learned Principal Sessions Judge Udhampur who
transferred the same to the learned Additional Sessions Judge Udhampur (hereinafter for short 'the
trial Court') for trial.
(cid:128) Challan was presented in presence of the respondents and one Mohd Shabir Ahmad who was also
an accused and the other accused persons who were absconding at the time of presentation of
challan and were proceeded against under Section 512 CrPC and a general arrest of warrant was
issued against them and in execution of such warrant accused Onkar Singh was arrested whereas
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 1
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
other accused persons were absconding till the conclusion of the trial. Particulars of all the accused
persons and the offences for which they were charged for brevity and convenience are provided
hereunder: -
(i) Shalinder Singh, (A1) charged under Sections 302/120-B RPC read with Section
3/25 of the Arms Act.
(ii) Pawam Kumar (A2) charged under Sections 302/120-B RPC read with Section
3/25 of the Arms Act.
(iii) Som Raj (A3) charged under Sectins 302/212 RPC read with Sections 4/25 of the
Arms Act.
(iv) Mohd Shabir, (A4) charged under Section 302/212 RPC.
(v) Onkar Singh, (A5) charged under Sections 302/120-B RPC.
(cid:128) The accused persons namely Mohd Shabir Ahmad, Onkar Singh A4 and A5 were acquitted under
Sections 273 Cr.PC on 17.04.2012 by the trial Court.
3. Case Setup by the Prosecution (cid:128) As per the challan, on 30.12.2008 at about 1:00 pm outside shop
of PW Jang Bahadur, opposite ICCI Bank Udhampur, the accused A1 to A3 giving effect to the
criminal conspiracy hatched by all the accused persons attacked one Varinder Singh @ Vicky
(hereinafter for short the deceased) with deadly weapons causing serious injury and thereafter fled
away and the said injured Vicky passed away while being shifted to the hospital. The accused
persons A1 & A2 attacked the deceased with country made pistols whereas, accused A3 attacked the
deceased with a Toka. (cid:128) During the course of investigation the police arrested 5 accused persons
collected evidence, recovered weapons of offences on the basis of disclosure statement made by the
accused person and upon conclusion of the investigation presented the challan against the accused
persons.
(cid:128) The charges under relevant sections came to be framed on 04.06.2009 by the trial Court to which
accused A1 to A3 pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
(cid:128) In order to bring home the charges against the accused A1 to A3, the prosecution besides
examining 55 witnesses cited in the challan, examined two more witnesses who were permitted to be
called and examined by the trial Court under Section 540 CrPC.
4. The instant criminal acquittal appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment on multiple
grounds and in order to advert to the said grounds, in the first instance the prosecution evidence led
before the trial court would be adverted to here under:
The prosecution had cited 5 witnesses namely Ishwinder Sharma, Jang Bahadur,
Bikramjit Singh, Nipun Sharma and Anil Dev Singh as eye witnesses. PW Ishwinder
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 2
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
Sharma and Jang Bahadur are respectively owners of the tea stall outside which the
alleged occurrence on 30.12.2008 took place when the deceased was allegedly
attacked by the accused persons.
PW Bikramjit Singh, Nipun Sharma and Anil Dev Singh were allegedly at the time of
occurrence with the deceased at the time of occurrence. Except PW Jang Bahadur
whose statement was recorded under Section 161 CrPC by the investigating officer,
the statement of other witnesses were got recorded under Section 164-A CrPC by the
investigating officer during the course of investigation.
(i) PW Ishwinder Singh, denied having seen accused however, admitted to have made
statement under Section 164-A CrPC under threat of police alleging to have been
threatened of his implication in the case if he did not make the desirable statement.
(ii) PW Jang Bahadur Singh, during the course of examination was declared hostile
and was subjected to cross examination by the prosecution, however nothing
concrete could be extracted from him by the prosecution as he denied to have been
knowing the accused or else had the knowledge of the occurrence.
(iii)PW Bikramjit Singh, denied that the accused persons attacked the deceased and
had further deposed that he did not see anybody running from the spot and though
he admitted to have made a statement under Section 164-A CrPC, yet deposed that
such statement was made by him under threat of implication in the case by the police
made by the police. He even did not identify the accused persons or stated anything
against them.
(iv)PW Nipun Sharma, nowhere stated that accused persons fired upon the deceased.
He even did not identify the accused persons and he too though admitted the
contents of the statement made under Section 164-A CrPC, yet stated that the same
was made by him under threat of his implication in the case extended by the police
and that he made the said statement as told by the police.
(v) PW Anil Dev Singh, stated to be friend of the deceased deposed that on the date of
occurrence he had come to Udhampur from Jammu, had breakfast with the deceased
in his house and thereafter went to tea stall with the deceased and there from went to
withdraw money from nearby ATM and upon his return there from saw the deceased
in injured condition and was shifted to Udhampur hospital. He stated that he did not
see anybody firing upon the deceased. He too admitted to have made the statement
under Section 164-A CrPC under the influence and threat of implication in the case
extended by the police.
As is seen from the testimonies of the aforesaid prosecution witnesses cited as eye witnesses none
have supported the prosecution case and in fact 4 of the said witnesses have categorically stated that
they have been threatened with false implication in the case by the police if they did not make the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 3
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
statement as desired by the police.
5. Having scanned and analyzed the evidence of the eye witnesses supra led by the prosecution in
the matter admittedly having not supported the prosecution case, it thus, became imperative to
examine and analyze the circumstantial evidence available on record, however, before proceeding to
advert to the same it would be appropriate to examine the law on the subject of circumstantial
evidence.
In law in a case based on circumstantial evidence there has to be a complete and unbreakable chain
of events to prove the guilt of the accused. Where a series of circumstances are dependent on one
another, they are to be read as one ingredient as a whole and not separately as it is not possible for a
Court to truncate and break the chain of circumstances as the very concept of proof of circumstantial
evidence would be defeated, in that event and where the circumstantial evidence consist of chain of
continued circumstances linked with one another, the Court has to take cumulative evidence of the
prosecution before acquitting or convicting the accused.
The Apex Court recently in case titled as "Mohd. Naushad Vs. State" (Govt of NCT of Delhi) reported
in 2023 SCC Online SC 784" dealt with the law relating to the circumstantial evidence at length and
noticed and observed in paras 92 to 95 as under;
92. A Constitution Bench of this Court in M.G. Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra (1963) 2 SCR 405
(5-Judge Bench) has observed as under:
"...It is a well-established rule in criminal jurisprudence that circumstantial evidence
can be reasonably made the basis of an accused person's conviction if it is of such a
character that it is wholly inconsistent with the innocence of the accused and is
consistent only with his guilt. If the circumstances proved in the case are consistent
either with the innocence of the accused or with his guilt, then the accused is entitled
to the benefit of doubt. There is no doubt or dispute about this position. But in
applying this principle, it is necessary to distinguish between facts which may be
called primary or basic on the one hand and inference of facts to be drawn from them
on the other. In regard to the proof of basic or primary facts, the court has to judge
the evidence in the ordinary way, and in the appreciation of evidence in respect of the
proof of these basic or primary facts there is no scope for the application of the
doctrine of benefit of doubt. The court considers the evidence and decides whether
that evidence proves a particular fact or not. When it is held that a certain fact is
proved, the question arises whether that fact leads to the inference of guilt of the
accused person or not, and in dealing with this aspect of the problem, the doctrine of
benefit of doubt would apply and an inference of guilt can be drawn only if the proved
fact is wholly inconsistent with the innocence of the accused and is consistent only
with his guilt. It is in the light of this legal position that the evidence in the present
case has to be appreciated."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 4
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
93. Further, on the point of as to whether the accused persons can be convicted or not on the basis
of circumstantial evidence is now evidently clear and we need not dilate on the issue any further,
save and except refer to the five golden principles curled out by this Court in Sharad Birdhichand
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116 (3-Judge Bench) which must be fulfilled before a
case against an accused can be said to be fully established on circumstantial evidence:
"(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt
of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis
except that the accused is guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive
nature and tendency, (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the
one to be proved, and (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
accused and must show that in all human probability, the act must have been done by
the accused."
94. [See also: Major Puran v. The State of Punjab AIR 1953 SC 459 (2 -Judge bench); Deonandan v.
State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 801 (3-Judge bench); E.G. Barsay v. State of Bombay AIR 1961 SC 1762
(2-Judge Bench); Bhagwan Swarup v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1965 SC 652 (3-Judge Bench); Yash
Pal Mittal v. State of Punjab (1977) 4 SCC 540 (3-Judge Bench); Firozuddin Basheeruddin & Ors. v.
State of Kerala, (2001) 7 SCC 596 (2-Judge Bench); Ram Singh (supra)].
95. On this point, the judgment of this Court in Mohd. Arif v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2011) 13 SCC
621, (2-Judge Bench), is also of relevance, wherein it has been observed:
"190. There can be no dispute that in a case entirely dependent on the circumstantial
evidence, the responsibility of the prosecution is more as compared to the case where
the ocular testimony or the direct evidence, as the case may be, is available. The
Court, before relying on the circumstantial evidence and convicting the accused
thereby has to satisfy itself completely that there is no other inference consistent with
the innocence of the accused possible nor is there any plausible explanation. The
Court must, therefore, make up its mind about the inferences to be drawn from each
proved circumstance and should also consider the cumulative effect thereof. In doing
this, the Court has to satisfy its conscience that it is not proceeding on the imaginary
inferences or its prejudices and that there could be no other inference possible
excepting the guilt on the part of the accused.
191. .... At times, there may be only a few circumstances available to reach a
conclusion of the guilt on the part of the accused and at times, even if there are large
numbers of circumstances proved, they may not be enough to reach the conclusion of
guilt on the part of the accused. It is the quality of each individual circumstance that
is material and that would essentially depend upon the quality of evidence. Fanciful
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 5
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
imagination in such cases has no place. Clear and irrefutable logic would be an
essential factor in arriving at the verdict of guilt on the basis of the proven
circumstances." (emphasis supplied) Keeping in mind the aforesaid principles and
position of law qua the subject of circumstantial evidence and reverting back to the
case in hand the prosecution has made an attempt to bring home the guilt of the
accused persons on the following circumstances:
(a) The disclosure statement of the accused/s leading to recovery of offences of
weapons.
(b) Resemblance of finger prints on the weapon/s with the specimen finger prints of
the accused/s
(c) Fleeing of the accused from Udhampur to Bhardewah in Alto Car bearing
registration No. JK03A-4461 immediately on the next date of occurrence.
(d) Identification of the accused in test identification test period.
(e)Call details of the cell phones of the accused/s to prove the conspiracy hatched by
the accused to commit the offences.
Circumstance (a) The instant circumstance relied upon by the prosecution is the recovery of the
weapons of offences on the basis of the confession made to the police officer. Section 27 of the
Evidence Act 1872 being an exception to the general rule that no confession made to the police
officer is admissible as evidence against the accused, provides that when any fact is deposed as
discovered in consequence of information received from the person accused of any offence, in the
custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether amounts to a confession or not, as
relates distinctly to the fact thereby may be proved.
Thus, the sine-qua-non for attracting the provisions of Section 27 of the Evidence Act is that the
confession must have been made to the police officer while being in police custody.
Coming back to the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses produced to prove this circumstances,
it can be seen that the very arrest of the accused A1 is under cloud as in the statement made by PW
Ravel Singh Choudhary, he had stated that he had deputed PW Jasbir Singh SI to arrest A1 however,
PW Jasbir Singh has denied to have arrested accused A1. Furthermore the PWs Adnan Bashir and
Jasbir Singh SI who were witnesses of disclosure statement with respect to all the accused persons
have stated in their respective statements that none of the accused persons made disclosure in their
presence and that none of the accused persons confessed to have concealed the weapons of offence.
Even the independent witness to the disclosure statements and recoveries have turned hostile and
not supported the prosecution case.
Even if the said disclosure statement are presumed to have been made by the accused A1 and A3, yet
the same does not attract the provisions of Section 27 of the Evidence Act to be used to be proved
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 6
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
the guilt of the accused as the statement claimed to have been made by the said accused persons led
to recovery of a simple fact and not a fact in issue. What is also worth noticing is that PW Jasbir
Singh SI who supported the prosecution version stated that after the disclosure statement, the
accused A1 was taken to the place of recovery from District Police Lines Udhampur and brought
back to Police Lines thereafter the other accused persons were taken one by one having nowhere
stated that all the accused persons were taken together to the housing colony where temporary
police camp was created and from there the accused persons were taken one by one to the place of
recovery as stated by the PW Raval Singh Choudhary being the author of disclosure as well as the
recovery and seizure memos. This position further makes the recovery of weapons doubtful. Besides
the said glaring contradiction statement of PW Mohd Arif Choudhary, incharge FSL team
Udhampur is also relevant who had stated that in the month of January 2008 one day he was called
at about 12 noon by the SHO Police Station Udhampur where from the SHO took the accused
persons to the place of recovery. This belies the statement of investigating Officer that the accused
persons made the disclosure statement in District Police Lines Udhamnpur and were taken to the
place of recovery there from only. The said witness identified A1, A2 and A5 whereas from A5 no
recovery was effected. The witnesses did not identify the A3 in the Court and as per him nothing was
recovered from the accused A3 whereas as per police report a Toka was recovered from him. Thus
the prosecution has failed to prove the first circumstances supra.
Circumstance (b) Prosecution has relied on the recovery of one revolver and one Toka from the
scene of occurrence and the police lifted finger prints from the revolver and the said finger prints
were sealed in a packet and marked as'A'and were reported to have submerged unfit for
examination. The finger prints lifted from double barrel improvised pistols allegedly recovered at
the instance of accused A1 and also reported to have submerged and unfit for examination. The
police did not seal the Toka recovered from the seen of occurrence nor lifted any fingerprints from
the said Toka. The fingerprints lifted from the single barrel improvised pistol recovered at the
instance of the accused A2 and fingerprints lifted from Toka allegedly recovered from accused A3
are reported to be identical with specimen right thumb impression of the accused A2 and A3
respectively. However the trial Court has rightly refused to rely upon the same to convict the
accused in absence of corroboration and in view of doubtful recovery of weapons, while placing
reliance upon the judgments of the Apex Court reported in [1995 supp (3) SCC 217] and 1996 (11)
SCC 685].
Circumstance (c) PW Nazakat Ali who allegedly transported the accused from Udhampur to
Bhaderwah in Alto Car bearing registration No. JK03-4461 has deposed before the trial Court that
the accused persons in the Court are not known to him and that he has seen them for the first time
in the Court. PW Sunny Duggal, a Constable in IRP 10th Bn, and posted with accused Mohd
Maqsood (absconding) alleged to have provided shelter to the accused did not identify the accused
to be the same persons who visited Bhardewah. Thus the movement of accused persons from
Udhampur to Bhardwah on 31.12.2008 in the Car in question has not been proved by the
prosecution.
Circumstance (d) Substantive evidence of the witness is his evidence in the Court but when the said
accused person is not previously known to the witnesses concerned then identification of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 7
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
accused by the witness soon after his arrest is of great importance. Since in the instant case the eye
witnesses cited by the prosecution allegedly knew the accused persons, therefore, there was no need
for the prosecution to have taken recourse to the test identification parade. Moreover the
identification of the accused persons during the identification parade has not been proved beyond
doubt as PW Sunny Duggal, a police personnel has deposed that the PSOs of SHO showed them
three boys disclosing their names and told him to identify these three persons. PW Nipun Sharma,
Ashwinder Sharma, Anil Dev Singh and Mohd Saleem being other witnesses of test identification
parade have admittedly turned hostile and have deposed that under the influence of police they put
their signatures on the memos of test identification parade. The Investigating Officer has also failed
to state as to who were the persons associated with the test identification parade. The Magistrate in
whose presence the parade was conducted has nowhere stated as to who were the witnesses to the
said parade who identified accused persons in his presence. In these circumstances, the trial Court
has rightly held that it would not be safe to rely upon the test identification parade conducted by the
police.
Circumstance (e) Before discussing the prosecution evidence led to prove the above circumstances,
it would be appropriate and advantageous to refer hereunder to paras 99 and 101 of the judgment of
the Apex Court passed in Mohd Naushad's case supra being relevant herein:
99. Conspiracy being a major charge, we take note of the legal position on the point of
conspiracy between accused persons, we place reliance on the judgment of this Court
in Kehar Singh & Ors. v. State (Delhi Administration), (1988) 3 SCC 609 (3-
Judge Bench), wherein this Court observed:
"271. Before considering the other matters against Balbir Singh, it will be useful to
consider the concept of criminal conspiracy under Sections 120-A and 120-B of IPC.
These provisions have brought the Law of Conspiracy in India in line with the English
law by making the overt act unessential when the conspiracy is to commit any
punishable offence. The English law on this matter is well settled. The following
passage from Russell on Crime (12th Edn., Vol. I, p. 202) may be usefully noted:
"The gist of the offence of conspiracy then lies, not in doing the act, or effecting the
purpose for which the conspiracy is formed, nor in attempting to do them, nor in
inciting others to do them, but in the forming of the scheme or agreement between
the parties. Agreement is essential. Mere knowledge, or even discussion, of the plan is
not, per se, enough."
274. It will be thus seen that the most important ingredient of the offence of conspiracy is the
agreement between two or more persons to do an illegal act. The illegal act may or may not be done
in pursuance of agreement, but the very agreement is an offence and is punishable. Reference to
Sections 120-A and 120-B IPC would make these aspects clear beyond doubt. Entering into an
agreement by two or more persons to do an illegal act or legal act by illegal means is the very
quintessence of the offence of conspiracy.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 8
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
101. Lastly, In Esher Singh v. State of A.P., (2004) 11 SCC 585, (2-Judge Bench), this Court
observed:
"The circumstances in a case, when taken together on their face value, should
indicate the meeting of minds between the conspirators for the intended object of
committing an illegal act or an act which is not illegal, by illegal means. A few bits
here and a few bits there on which the prosecution relies cannot be held to be
adequate for connecting the accused with the commission of the crime of criminal
conspiracy. It has to be shown that all means adopted and illegal acts done were in
furtherance of the object of conspiracy hatched. The circumstances relied on for the
purposes of drawing an inference should be prior in point of time than the actual
commission of the offence in furtherance of the alleged conspiracy.
6. Reverting Back to the case in hand in general and the circumstances supra in
particular, it is not in dispute that all the witnesses cited by the prosecution namely
PW Kuldeep Kumar S/o Girdhari Lal, Kuldeep Kumar S/o Krishan Chand and Umar
Jan turned hostile and nothing could be extracted from their cross examination by
the prosecution, thus there being no evidence of conspiracy, more so, when the
prosecution failed to even show as to which cell phones being used by the accused
persons before and after occurrence and whether there was any contact between the
accused persons inter-se it could safely be said that the prosecution failed to bring
home the guilt.
7. One more important aspect of the case is motive. In case based on circumstantial
evidence motive assumes great importance. In absence of a motive, it would be
difficult to complete the chain of events in order to prove the guilt of accused. PW
Natha Singh father of the deceased has categorically stated that accused persons had
no enmity with the deceased however, enmity has been attributed to the absconding
accused persons who are yet to face the trial. A reference in this regard to the
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court passed in case titled as "Pramod Kumar
Vs. state of J&K, reported in 2006 (2) JKJ 218"would be relevant and appropriate
wherein at paragraph 19 following came to be observed and held:-
19. It is a case of circumstantial evidence It is proved that there was no notice of
committing the murder. In a case of circumstantial evidence where no sufficient
motive for murder is proved, as the case herein that the prosecution has not proved
any motive for the murder, the ?Apex Court in case titled State (Delhi Admn.) Vs.
Gulzarilal, reported in AIR 1979 S.C 1382, while dealing such a case of circumstantial
evidence observed as under:
"...the entire prosecution case rests on purely circumstantial, evidence, and on the
question of motive, both the trial Court and the High Court have clearly held that no
sufficient motive for the murder had been proved. WE might also mention that
incases where the case of the prosecution rests purely on circumstantial evidence,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 9
State Of J&K vs Shalinder Singh And Ors on 1 August, 2023
motive undoubtedly plays an important part in order to tilt the scale against the
accused. It is also well settled that the accused can be convicted on circumstantial
evidence only if every other reasonable hypothesis of guilt is completely excluded and
the circumstances are wholly inconsistent with the innocence of the accused. In the
instant case, the prosecution has clearly fallen short of proving this fact as rightly
found by the High court"
8. Thus, what can be seen from the prosecution evidence read with law governing the field is that the
prosecution failed to form a complete chain, so complete that there is no escape from the conclusion
that within all human probability the crime was committed by the accused persons and none else.
9. The prosecution has not been able to lead evidence of definite character to bring home the case,
the respondents had been implicated in and that the trial Court had no option other than recording
acquittal of the respondents. On the conspectus of evidence and material on record, we are of the
firm opinion that the judgement of acquittal impugned in the instant appeal recorded by the trial
Court is perfectly legal and valid and thus does not call for any interference. Otherwise also the
jurisdiction of the appellate court hearing an acquittal appeal is well circumscribed and where on
evaluation of evidence and material on record, two views are possible, the view which favours the
accused has to be preferred.
10. Having regard to the aforesaid position, we hold that the appellant has failed to make out a case
for interference in the judgement of acquittal recorded by trial court. The appeal therefore is found
to be without any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
(JAVED IQBAL WANI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
SRINAGAR
01.08.2023
Ishaq
Whether approved for reporting Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35064316/ 10
