State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRAA No. 81/2011
Reserved on- 18.05.2023.
Pronounced on-26.05.2023.
State of J&K. .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Amit Gupta, AAG.
Vs
Ashok Kumar & Anr. ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Ms. Zainab Shamas Watali, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE.
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE.
JUDGMENT
Rajesh Sekhri-J
01. This appeal has been directed against judgment dated 05.03.2011, propounded by learned 2nd
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter referred to as "trial court") in file No. 12/Sessions
titled "State of J&K Vs. Ashok Kumar and Anr", vide FIR No. 177/2000 of Police Station Bahu Fort,
Jammu for offences under Sections 21/29 of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
("NDPS Act" for short), vide which, respondent has been acquitted.
02. The case set up by the prosecution in brief, is that on 05.06.2000 at about 7 P.M, a joint Naka of
Police Station, Bahu Fort led by S.P, and NCB was laid at Panama Chowk. A Scooter, without
registration number, on its way from Vikram Chowk to Railway Station was intercepted. While two
pillon riders were apprehended by the Naka party, driver of the Scooter succeeded to give a slip to
the Naka party and fled away. Accused apprehended on spot were found carrying a black colour bag.
As the said bag was giving smell of some substance, a notice was given to the accused for exercise of
option to be searched in presence of Magistrate or Gazetted Officer. Since they opted to be searched
in the presence of Maigstrate, Tehsildar JDA, through Constable Rajinder Kumar, was called on the
spot, in whose presence bag was searched and 10 bags of heroine were recovered. Higher Officers
were informed via wireless. The contraband was weighed on the spot with the help a weighing pan,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 1
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
taken from a shopkeeper namely, Des Raj, and each packet was found to contain 01 Kg of
contraband. One and a half gram of heroin each was drawn as samples from the 10 packets and
samples were sealed on the spot in the presence of Magistrate. Certificate of search was also
obtained from the Magistrate. Since accused were found in illegal possession of the Contraband, a
docket was flashed to the Police Station, through Shahid Parvez, for formal registration of FIR. The
aforesaid FIR came to be registered and investigation was entrusted to PW-Sham lal. After rituals of
formal investigation, including recovery and seizure of the contraband, preparation of samples and
forwarding of the same to FSL for chemical examination, since aforesaid offences were established
against accused, a final report in terms of Sections 173 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short "CrPC) was filed on 21.07.2000.
03. Respondent-Ashok Kumar was charge-sheeted by the trial court on 10.03.2001 for the aforesaid
offences, whereby he pleaded innocence and claimed trial, therefore prosecution was directed to
produce the evidence.
04. It is pertinent to mention that respondent no. 2-Balwant Raj absconded, during the trial and
proceedings under Section 512 CrPC were initiated against him on 21.10.2003
05. The prosecution has examined as many as 13 witnesses in the case. For the sake of brevity,
instead of a detailed resume of the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses, relevant part of their
testimonies are proposed to be resorted, as and when required. It is pertinent to mention that
respondent denied the incriminating imputations arrogated to him and opted not to enter the
defence.
06. Learned trial court, on appreciation of the prosecution evidence and hearing the rival sides, has
acquitted the respondent as noted at the outset.
07. Having heard the rival contentions and perused the impugned judgment, we find ourselves in
total agreement with the findings recorded by learned Trial Court.
08. The appellant-State has assailed the impugned judgment inter alia on the ground that learned
trial Court has failed to appreciate the evidence in the right perspective and impugned judgment has
been passed in a mechanical fashion despite sufficient material on record to sustain conviction of
the respondent.
09. Mr. Amit Gupta, learned AAG has reiterated the grounds urged in the memo of appeal.
10. However, on minute evaluation of the impugned judgment as also the prosecution evidence, we
are of the considered opinion that case of the appellant-state in the trial Court was not only
discrepant on material aspects and replete with contradictions but investigation agency has failed to
adhere to mandatory provisions ingrained in the NDPS Act.
11. Before a closer look at the grounds urged in memo of appeal, it may be recalled that since
offences under the NDPS Act, being heinous in nature, are visited with severe punishment and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 2
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
legislature, in its wisdom, has provided safeguards to be followed by the investigating agency,
various provisions, with respect to arrest, search and seizure have been incorporated in Chapter-V of
the NDPS Act to ensure that no innocent person is subjected to harassment.
12. Section 42 of the NDPS Act, is one of the salutary provisions, the investigating agency is obliged
to follow. It mandates that the investigating officer is obliged to reduce the information received by
him into writing and forward a copy thereof to his immediate superior officer within 72 hours.
13. Reverting to the present case, it is the case of the appellant and consistent testimonies of all the
material prosecution witnesses, including SP Sheikh Mehmood and SHO Shahid Parvez that they
had received source information and on the basis of said information, joint Naka was laid to
apprehend the accused persons. PW-Sheikh Mehmood, SP, has testified in clear terms that he had
received source information 2/3 hours prior to the occurrence and, therefore, Naka was laid at
Panama Chowk on the basis of said information. However, his statement is silent about the fact
whether such information was reduced into writing by him and communicated to superior officers
within statutory period of 72 hours or not. Similarly, PW-Nek Ram has testified that SHO had
received prior telephonic information from the SP that some boys were involved in Narco smuggling
in Jammu, on the basis of which joint Naka of Police, NCB and SOG was laid and the SHO,
PW-Shahid Parvez has also admitted in cross-examination that he was informed by the SP at about
4/5 p.m that Naka was to be laid at Panama Chowk. It is evident from the statement of these
material witnesses including SP and SHO that there was prior information with respect to the
occurrence. However, neither the said information was reduced into writing nor same was
communicated to the superior officers. The investigating agency, as such, has given a complete go
bye to the mandatory provisions of Section 42 of the NDPS Act.
14. In a similar fact situation, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Karnail Singh v. State of Haryana reported
as (2000) 2 SCC 513, has ruled that non-compliance of Section 42 of the NDPS Act vitiates the trial.
Relevant extract of the judgment reads thus:-
"Under Section 42(2) as it stood prior to amendment such empowered officer who
takes down any information in writing or records the grounds under proviso to
Section 42(1) should forthwith send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior.
If there is total non-compliance of this provision the same would adversely affect the
prosecution case and to that extent it is mandatory. But if there is delay whether it
was undue or whether the same has been explained or not, will be a question of fact
in each case, it is to be concluded that the mandatory enforcement of the provisions
of Section 42 of the Act non-compliance of which may vitiate a trial has been
restricted only to the provision of sending a copy of the information written down by
the empowered officer to immediate official superior and not to any other condition
of the Section."
(Emphasis supplied)
15. A similar view has been expressed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in 2009 AIR (Criminal) 401 SC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 3
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
16. It is manifest from the aforequoted case law that non-compliance of Section 42 NDPC Act,
vitiates the trial
17. Although learned counsel for the respondent as also the prosecution in the trial court also raised
the issue of infraction of Section 50 of NDPS Act, however, learned trial court has rightly observed
that Section 50 is attracted only in cases where search of person is conducted within the meaning of
sub-section (1) of section 50 NDPS Act and since in the present case, the recovery was effected from
the bags of accused. Section 50 is not applicable in the case. The reliance placed by learned Trial
Court on 2010 (1) RCR (Criminal ) 112 is well found, relevant extract whereof reads as:-
"So far as the conclusion regarding Section 50 recorded by trial court and the High
Court are concerned, they same are not in line with what this Court has said. Section
50 has application only when there was personal search. In the instant case the
samples were collected, after seizure, from her bag. Nevertheless, there has been
non-compliance with the requirement of Section 42 (2) as recorded both by the trial
court and the High Court. That being so there is no merit in this appeal"
18. Another violation of law underlined by learned Trial Court is with respect to non-association of
civilians, despite the prosecution case and the prosecution evidence that at the time Naka shops
were open and there were customers in the shops. It is none of the case of prosecution that since no
civilians were available on the spot, therefore, only official witnesses were associated with the
search, recovery and seizure of the contraband. It appears from the conspectus of the entire
prosecution evidence that no attempt was ever made by the Senior Police officers on the spot
including SP, PW-Sheikh Mehmood, SHO, PW-Shahid Parvez or the Investigating Officer PW-Sham
Lal to call the civilians on the spot and associate them with the search, recovery and seizure process.
The compliance with the procedural safeguard contained in the CrPC is intended to serve dual
purpose, i.e. to protect a person against false accusation and frivolous charges as also to lend
credibility to the search and seizure conducted by the authorized officer and where mandatory
provisions of CrPC are observed in breach and the error or illegality touching the procedure
committed by the authorized officer is so patent and obtrusive that it leaves and indelible stamp of
infirmity or vice which cannot be obliterated or cured, then it would be hazardous to place implicit
reliance on it, as observed in 2000 CrI.L.J. 2645.
19. It is pertinent to mention that, in the present case, source information was received by the Senior
Police Officers' 2/3 hours prior to the occurrence and, therefore, they had sufficient time to associate
any civilian or independent witness to search, recovery and seizure. It is not the case, where
information was suddenly received during the Naka duty that there was no such time to associate
independent witnesses to the recovery and seizure process. There was nothing on record to suggest
either that any request or an order in writing was made to any independent witness to cooperate
with the investigation for the purpose of search and seizure. It may happen that for a variety of
reasons, a civilian or a public witness may decline to associate with investigation and if a civilian or
independent witness declines to be associated with the investigation without justifiable reason he
will be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 187 IPC. It appears that there is
deliberate attempt to defeat the legislative safeguard in this respect as held in Rattan Lal Vs. State;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 4
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
[(1987) 2 Crimes 29 Delhi] and [2010 (1) RCR (Criminal) 589].
20. Another material aspect noticed by learned Trial Court is that it is also case of the prosecution
that 10 packets of heroin were recovered and seized on the spot and seizure memos were prepared.
All these documents/memos were produced before the IO, who seized the documents/memos vide
seizure memo EXPW-GC/1. However all the aforesaid seizure memos/documents, before their
seizure by the Investigating Officer, were bearing the FIR Number and the offences. The occurrence
in the present case is stated to have been taken place at 7 PM and according to the I.O, FIR was
lodged at 8.15 PM, on the basis of report forwarded by the SHO and he reached on spot at 8.35 PM.
It is obvious that aforesaid memos were prepared on the spot before registration of the FIR,
therefore, there could not be FIR number or mention of offences on the documents prepared before
registration of FIR. Learned trial court has rightly observed that this gives rise to two inferences that
either FIR was registered prior to the alleged search, recovery and seizure of the contraband or FIR
Number and offences were inserted in the aforesaid documents after registration of the FIR. In any
case, it reflects upon the credibility of the prosecution case and robes the efficacy and testimonial
potency of the official witnesses. Viewed thus, it shall be highly unsafe to place implicit reliance
upon the testimony of Police officials without corroboration from independent witnesses. As no
independent or civilian has been associated with the investigation or the search recovery and seizure
process as observed earlier, therefore, no such corroboration is coming forth in the present case and
it is sufficient to shake the very foundation of the prosecution story.
21. Be that as it may, learned trial Court has also noticed following material contradictions and
discrepancies in the prosecution evidence.
22. First and foremost, there is a variation with respect to the description of the instrument used for
weighing the contraband. PW-Nek Ram has stated that the weighing scale was having a stand,
whereas as per PW- Gian Chand, the instrument used for weighing the contraband was having an
iron bar with pans attached to it. The weighing instrument with iron bar and pans attached to it is
an instrument which is used to weigh an object by holding the iron bar with one hand, whereas the
instrument with a stand can be used by placing the same on a table. This contradiction creates a
doubt about the very presence of police witnesses on the spot.
23. Further, PW-Tersam Lal has deposed that driver of the Scooter fled from the spot and Police did
not chase him. PW-Nek Ram has also stated that he stopped the Scooter, driver of the Scooter fled
towards the railway track and he did not chase him. However, PW-Gian Chand has stated that 2/3
Constables of Police Station, Trikuta Nagar ran after the driver, who fled from the spot.
24. Another staggering circumstance to shake the credibility of the prosecution case is that when
accused persons exercised their option to be searched in the presence of Magistrate, Tehsildar (JDA)
was summoned on the spot through Rajinder Kumar Constable. Tehsildar came to the spot in a
Gypsy of Police Station, thereafter the bag of accused was searched and recovery and seizure were
effected. The material prosecution witnesses including SP, PW Sheikh Mehmood, SHO Sheikh
Parvez and PW-Nek Ram have testified on the same lines that when accused person exercised their
option to be searched in the presence of Magistrate, the Magistrate was called on the spot. However,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 5
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
the whole prosecution story and the claim of these material prosecution witnesses has been falsified
by none other than the Executive Magistrate himself. According to PW-Shamsher Singh, Tehsildar
JDA, he reached the Police Station at 10.30 P.M or 12 P.M, 10 packets were produced before him by
the Police and he resealed the packets. He has clarified in his cross- examination that packets were
not weighed in his presence and accused were searched in the room of a Police Station. This
statement of the Executive Magistrate alone is sufficient to dislodge the entire prosecution case.
25. Be that as it may, another lacuna, which has escaped the attention of learned trial Court is that
prosecution has failed to prove that contraband recovered in the present case was kept in the safe
custody and forwarded to FSL is inconsonance with provisions of law and without any delay. Be it
noted that in view of stringent provisions regarding punishment and grant of bail, the legislature in
its wisdom enacted Section 55 of the NDPS Act to ensure that officer Incharge of Police Station shall
immediately take charge and keep the alleged contraband in safe custody, in order to rule out any
possibility of tampering. Prosecution is obliged to prove that the contraband after its recovery and
seizure from the accused was kept in safe custody, in the Malkhana of the concerned Police Station
under proper entry in the Malkhana register and samples of the contraband were forwarded to FSL
without any delay.
26. Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Gurmail Singh reported as AIR 2005 SC 1578
has clearly ruled that if the link evidence adduced by the prosecution is not satisfactory and
Malkhana Register is not produced to prove that contraband was kept in the safe custody of the
Malkhana, the prosecution case shall be viewed doubtful. The relevant observation of the judgment
reads thus:-
"We have perused the judgment of the High Court. Apart from other reasons
recorded by the High Court, we find that the link evidence adduced by the
prosecution was not at all satisfactory. In the first instance, though the seized articles
are said to have been kept in the malkhana on 20th May, 1995, the Malkhana register
was not produced to prove that it was so kept in the malkhana till it was taken over by
PW-6 on June 5, 1995. We further find that no sample of the seal was sent along with
the sample to Excise Laboratory, Jodhpur for the purpose of comparing with the seal
appearing on the sample bottles.
Therefore, there is no evidence to prove satisfactorily that the seals found were in fact
the same seals as were put on the sample bottles immediately after seizure of the
contraband. These loopholes in the prosecution case have led the High Court to
acquit the respondent"
27. A similar view has been expressed by the Apex Court in State of Rajasthan v. Daulat Ram
reported as AIR 1980 SC 1314.
28. It is evident, therefore that failure on the part of prosecution to prove that the contraband after
its recovery and seizure and after proper sealing and resealing in accordance with law, was kept in
the safe custody of the Police Station and that samples were forwarded to the FSL without any delay,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 6
State Of J&K vs Ashok Kumar & Anr on 26 May, 2023
vitiates the trial
29. Having considered the evidence led by the prosecution in the trial Court in its entirety, we are of
the considered opinion that there is not only infraction of various mandatory provisions of NDPS
Act, but prosecution evidence is found discrepant on material factual aspects. In this backdrop,
there is no scope to raise hypothesis of guilt against the respondents for the commission of offences,
they have been charged with. Thus considered, we do not find any illegality, muchless, perversity in
the impugned judgment.
30. Viewed thus, the present appeal, being devoid of merit, is dismissed and impugned judgment is
upheld. Record of the trial court, if any, be returned forthwith. Respondents are discharged of their
bail bonds.
(Rajesh Sekhri) (Sanjay Dhar)
Judge Judge
Jammu
26.05.2023
Abinash
Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74928353/ 7
