State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU, KASHMIRAND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Reserved on : 13.07.2023
Pronounced on: 14 .08.2023
CRAA No. 160/2014
State of J&K
.....Petitioner(s)
Through:- Mr. P. D. Singh, Dy.AG
v/s
Ved Parkash .....Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. R. K. S Thakur, Advocate
Coram:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The appellant by way of instant Criminal Acquittal Appeal has impugned judgment dated
29.11.2013, passed by learned Sessions Judge, Udhampur, ( for brevity 'trial Court') in case titled
State vs. Ved Parkash alias Sanju vide which, respondent-Ved Parkash has been acquitted of the
charges under Section 306 RPC in FIR No. 49/2010 of Police Station, Ramnagar.
2. Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
On 12.03.2009 information was received by Police Station, Ramnagar that a dead
body of a woman was hanging on a tree which is that of one Shakuntia Devi, aged 25
years W/o Ved Parkash R/o Shatiyari, Ramnagar. The dead body was brought by the
family members of the deceased to their home. Police came to know about this
occurrence and proceeded under Section 174 CrPC. Mr. Javed Akhtar Inspector
visited the spot and took the photographs and sent the dead body for post mortem
and prepared the Farad Surate-hall of the deceased. He seized the plastic rope about
5 feet long which was produced by Ved Parkash. Site plan was prepared. Hair clip of
the deceased was also seized. The clothes of the dead body were seized by Police
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50593210/ 1
State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
Station, Ramnagar.
As per the investigation conducted by the Sr. Superintendent it was found that the
deceased was married to the accused-respondent according to the Hindu customs.
Their relation was normal and cordial. The accused-respondent was harassing the
deceased-
Shakuntla Devi and he used to have drinks and would not permit her to visit her
parental abode. The accused-respondent was in relations with some woman and due
to the said extra marital affair the relations between the spouses became bitter and
the deceased was forced to commit suicide because of such cruelty, which was
perpetrated upon her by the accused-respondent herein.
3. On this aforesaid report, case under Section 306 RPC under FIR No. 49/2010 was registered.
4. After investigation a challan for the offences punishable under Section 306 was filed against the
respondent before the Sub-Judge, Ramnagar, wherefrom the case was committed to the Court of
Sessions Judge, Udhampur. The accused-respondent was charged by the trial Court for offences
under Section 306 RPC, whereby he pleaded innocence and claimed trial, promoting the trial Court
to ask for the prosecution evidence.
5. Mr. P. D. Singh, learned Dy. A. G argued that the prosecution has produced sufficient evidence
and evidence so produced establishes the charge beyond doubt, but the trial Court has wrongly
appreciated the evidence and passed the impugned order of acquittal which is required to be set
aside and convict the respondent-accused, as there is sufficient evidence to prove commission of
offence.
6. Mr. R. K. S. Thakur, learned counsel for the respondent has primarily submitted that no case is
made out against the respondent as the allegations and the material collected during investigation
and evidence produced during trial, do not show that there was any act done by the respondent
vis-à-vis the deceased.
7. Heard learned counsel for the parties and carefully examined the material evidence on record.
8. The prosecution in order to prove the charges relied upon the statements of the following
witnesses; Bansi Lal, father of the deceased has stated That 7-8 years before the marriage of his
daughter took place with the accused-
respondent herein and he was informed on the day of the occurrence that his daughter had died. He
took 5-6 persons with him and went to the house of the accused where he saw the dead body of his
daughter kept in the kitchen. He found the marks around-his neck and village people told him that
she has committed suicide by hanging. He stated that deceased told him that her husband was given
to drinking and he had illicit relation with one woman and he was residing with that woman and he
did not now like her and because of the same fact that he was constant to commit suicide.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50593210/ 2
State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
In cross examination he stated that the deceased-Shakuntla Devi used to remain perturbed, and
there was dispute or quarrel in his presence. In cross-
examination he further stated that he did not have any suspicion for the accused and relation
between them was normal.
To the same extent is the statement of Guddu Devi, mother of the deceased-
Shakuntla Devi.
PW Baldev Singh has stated that on the date of occurrence he accompanied the complainant to the
house of the accused where he found the dead body or the deceased was lying in the kitchen. He
stated that deceased- Shakuntla Devi and accused-respondent herein were living happily and there
was no discord between them.
PW Vijay Kumar uncle of the deceased has stated that on 12.03.2008 he was informed that deceased
had been killed. Her dead body was lying in the house of her in laws and same was bearing mark of
ligature around her neck and she had been hanged. His younger sister told him that Shakuntia had
come on the shop and he recognized her and he called her and her physical condition was good at
that time.
PW Trilik Nath has stated that deceased died 4 years before and 16-17 years contracted the
marriage. When she was enquired she told that her in-laws have restrained her to go home to attend
the 4 years Barsi of her grandmother. No further statement was given by her.
Dr. Zakir Hussain who had conducted the autopsy of the deceased and who found that deceased was
died due to the Asphyxia and there was ligature mark around her neck which was well formed in
front of above Pomum Admi and right side of the neck and the margins of the ligature marks were
ecchymosed. It has also stated that the deceased had fracture of thyroid bone with dislocation of C2
vertebra and deceased died due to asphyxia.
9. It is settled principle of law that the judgment of acquittal cannot be disturbed by the Appellate
Court unless the same is found to be perverse. It has also to be seen that as to whether there is any
perversity in the judgment of acquittal. In case any infirmities or perversities are found in the
judgment on re-appreciation of the evidence, then this Court can set aside the judgment of acquittal.
10. In the context of the evidence of the aforesaid witnesses, the trial court has also rightly observed
that the evidence regarding the instigation, abetment and perpetration of violence physical, mental
are insufficient, weak which is not sufficient to bring home the guilt against the accused-respondent
herein. Further the trial Court has rightly observed that merely having extra marital affair is not the
factor for the laws to satisfy the ingredient that the accused-respondent instigated/incited the
deceased for taking the extreme act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50593210/ 3
State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
11. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Chitresh Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of
Delhi, reported in AIR 2010 SC 1446 had an occasion to deal with the aspect of abetment. In the said
case Supreme Court has opined that there should be an intention to provoke, incite or encourage the
doing of an act by the accused. It was further held that it is impossible to lay down any straitjacket
formula dealing with the cases of suicide and each case has to be decided on the basis of its own
facts and circumstances.
12. In the case of Amalendu Pal @ Jhantu v. State of West Bengal , (2010) 1 SCC 707, their
Lordships of the Supreme Court in order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306, IPC, has
held as under:-
"Thus, this Court has consistently taken the view that before holding an accused
guilty of an offence under Section 306 IPC, the court must scrupulously examine the
facts and circumstances of the case and also assess the evidence adduced before it in
order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to the victim had left
the victim with no other alternative but to put an end to her life. It is also to be borne
in mind that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or
indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
In order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 IPC there must be a case of
suicide and in the commission of the said offence, the person who is said to have
abetted the commission of suicide must have played an active role by an act of
instigation or by doing certain act to facilitate the commission of suicide. Therefore,
the act of abetment by the person charged with the said offence must be proved and
established by the prosecution before he could be convicted under Section 306 IPC."
13. In Gurcharan Singh v. State of Punjab reported as (2017) 1 SCC 433, the Supreme Court
observed as under:
"21. It is thus manifest that the offence punishable is one of abetment of the
commission of suicide by any person, predicating existence of a live link or nexus
between the two, abetment being the propelling causative factor. The basic
ingredients of this provision are suicidal death and the abetment thereof. To
constitute abetment, the intention and involvement of the accused to aid or instigate
the commission of suicide is imperative. Any severance or absence of any of this
constituent would militate against this indictment. Remoteness of the culpable acts
or omissions rooted in the intention of the accused to actualize the suicide would fall
short as well of the offence of abetment essential to attract the punitive mandate of
Section 306 IPC. Contiguity, continuity, culpability and complicity of the indictable
acts or omission are the concomitant indices of abetment. Section 306 IPC, thus
criminalises the sustained incitement for suicide."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50593210/ 4
State Of J&K vs Ved Parkash on 14 August, 2023
14. Again, in M. Arjunan v. State (Represented by Its Inspector of Police) reported as (2019) 3 SCC
315, the Supreme Court elucidated the essential ingredients of the offence under Section 306 IPC in
the following manner:
"7. The essential ingredients of the offence under Section 306 IPC are: (i) the
abetment; (ii) the intention of the accused to aid or instigate or abet the deceased to
commit suicide. The act of the accused, however, insulting the deceased by using
abusive language will not, by itself, constitute the abetment of suicide. There should
be evidence capable of suggesting that the accused intended by such act to instigate
the deceased to commit suicide. Unless the ingredients of instigation/abetment to
commit suicide are satisfied the
15 Reverting to the facts of the present case in light of principles of law laid down by their Lordships
of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgments (supra), it is quite vivid that the prosecution has
not made it clear in what way the accused-respondent herein was harassing or ill-treating
deceased-Shakuntla Devi. The father and mother of the deceased- Shakuntla Devi have stated that
accused-respondent was having extra marital affair, however, they have not attributed any act of
instigation to the accused-respondent. The statement of the uncle of the deceased, namely, Vijay
Kumar was recorded after 7-8 months of the occurrence. The other prosecution witnesses have
given the statement of the general nature stating that the accused-Ved Parkash wanted to contract
second marriage and was going to Delhi. 16 The Trial Court while appreciating the evidence on
record found number of infirmities and ultimately held that the prosecution has failed to prove the
case and acquitted the accused-respondents herein.
17 Further, the learned trial Court has properly and objectively considered the evidence to reach a
conclusion that the accused- respondent was not guilty of the offences charged. The crucial and
necessary ingredients that deceased-Shakuntla Devi was subjected to cruelty and harassment by the
accused-respondent has not been established. Under these circumstances the impugned judgment is
unassailable. It does not suffer from any infirmity or illegality. 18 In view of the aforesaid discussion,
I am of the opinion that the impugned judgment of acquittal dated 29.11.2013, passed by the learned
Sessions Judge, Udhampur calls for no interference by this Court in this appeal.
19 In the result, this appeal fails. It is hereby dismissed.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE Jammu 14.08.2023 Bir Whether approved for reporting?
Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50593210/ 5
