Stiff Khapudang vs Superintendent Of Police on 9 October, 2023
Stiff Khapudang vs Superintendent Of Police on 9 October, 2023
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
IN. 5-6
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
AB No. 30 of 2023
Stiff Khapudang ... Petitioner/s
Vs.
Superintendent of Police, CID & anr. ... Respondent/s
With Cril.M.C. No. 16 of 2023 B E F O R E HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
09-10-2023 Heard Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. A. Rommel, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioner and also Mr. M. Rarry, learned Special PP appearing for the
respondents. [2] Issue notice, returnable within two weeks.
[3] As Mr. M. Rarry, learned Special PP entered appearance and accepts notice on behalf of both the
respondents, no formal notice is called for.
[4] I have heard the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties at length
with regard to the prayer for passing interim order.
[5] The case of the petitioner is that a complaint was filed against him before the Manipur
Lokayukta and the said complaint was registered as Complaint Case No. 4 of 2020. Thereafter, on
the direction given by the Manipur Lokayukta, a preliminary inquiry was held by the Investigating
Authority and submitted a preliminary report dated 03-02-
AB No. 30 of 2023 Page 1 2022. After considering the said preliminary inquiry report and after
giving opportunity of being heard to the petitioner as well as the other accused persons, the Manipur
Lokayukta passed a judgment and order dated 18- 09-2023 in the said Complaint Case No. 4 of
2020 thereby directing, inter alia, to investigate with regard to the findings given in the said inquiry
report by treating it as oral ezahar. On the basis of the direction given by the Hon'ble Lokayukta, an
FIR being FIR No. 4(09) 2023 CB-PS U/S 7(b)/13 P.C. Act & 120-B/34 I.P.C. was registered against
the petitioner and other 32 persons.
[6] The offences alleged to have been committed by the petitioner as reflected in the said report are
as under :
"vi)Shri Stiff Khapudang, MCS, the then CEO, ADC, Senapati for the period from
13.07.2017 to 09.09.2019 and 11.10.2019 to 06.09.2021 (Now Additional Deputy
Commissioner, Noney District).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149732813/ 1
Stiff Khapudang vs Superintendent Of Police on 9 October, 2023
"During his tenure as CEO of the ADC, Senapati he had put up files to the Chairman
for passing bills for payment to the work agencies by overlooking his official capacity
to verify the completion reports submitted by the work agencies. He had never relied
on the official records/documents for passing the bills. The MB which is a very
important record book of works was never relied upon.
"Being a joint signatory with the Chairman of ADC, Senapati for the ADC account, he
had made payments to the work agencies. He had misused his official power by
making decisions based only on the reports submitted by the work agencies and not
on the official records/documents. Inspite of his knowledge about the non-execution
of the work/uncompleted works or non-maintenance of quality of the work,
payments of bills were made to the work agencies. His act has encouraged the work
agencies to submit their fictitious reports.
AB No. 30 of 2023 Page 2 "His act of signing on documents as CEO for the period in
which he is not assuming the charge of CEO creates doubtfulness/suspicion of the
authencity of the documents/records maintained at the office of ADC, Senapati.
"No call of tender for selecting the work agencies for execution of the work
programmes was done before the issuance of OM dated 09.11.2018, thus violating the
Rule No. 95 and Rule No. 97 of "The Manipur (Hill Areas) District Council rules,
1972".
"He made deductions from the sanctioned amount during the payment of bills to the
work agencies for unexplained reasons indicating irregular transactions between the
officials of ADC, Senapati and the work agencies."
[7] On apprehension of being arrested by the police in connection with the said FIR, the petitioner
approached this Court by filing the present Anticipatory Bail Application with a prayer for releasing
him on bail in the event of his arrest by the police in connection with the said FIR.
[8] Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner is a Manipur Civil Service Officer and presently posted as Additional Deputy
Commissioner, Noney District, Government of Manipur. It has further been submitted that the
petitioner is a high ranking government official and a responsible person and that he has no prior
criminal antecedents and there is no question of his absconding at all. It has also been submitted
that all the relevant documents in connection with the allegation made against the petitioner have
already been seized by the authorities from the office of the AB No. 30 of 2023 Page 3 Autonomous
District Council, Senapati and accordingly, there is no question of tempering with any of the
evidences. The learned senior counsel further submitted that the petitioner will cooperate with the
investigation at every stage of the investigation and there is no need or reason for detaining the
petitioner in police custody. The petitioner has also given an undertaking that he will make himself
available for interrogation by the IO (Investigating Officer) of the case as and when required and
that he will not directly or indirectly make any inducement threat or promise any person acquainted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149732813/ 2
Stiff Khapudang vs Superintendent Of Police on 9 October, 2023
with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him/her from disclosing such fact to the Court or any
Police Officer.
[9] The learned counsel, lastly, submitted that pending consideration of the present application, an
interim order be passed to release the petitioner on bail in the event of his arrest by the Police in
connection with the said FIR.
[10] Mr. M. Rarry, learned Special PP appearing for the respondents strenuously raised a strong
objection to the passing of any interim order. The learned counsel addressed this Court at length by
drawing attention of this Court to the relevant portions of the preliminary reports, the order passed
by the Manipur Lokayukta as well as the main pleadings made in the present bail application. The
learned Special PP also cited the case laws rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "P.
Chidambaram -vrs-. Directorate of Enforcement", reported in 2019(9) SCC 24 and judgment dated
17-03-2023 passed by the Hon'ble AB No. 30 of 2023 Page 4 Apex Court in Cril. Appeals No.
822/823 of 2023 in the case of "Ms. X - vrs.- The State of Maharashtra & anr.". The learned counsel
strenuously submitted that the offence alleged to have been committed by the petitioner is serious in
nature as it involves economic offences which is committed against the general public. It has also
been submitted that the petitioner is involved not only in the said FIR but also in two other FIRs
and that during his tenure as CEO of the ADC, Senapati, all the economic offices has been
committed and he is involved in the all the offences. Taking into consideration the serious nature of
the offences said to have been committed and the principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the above said two cases, the learned Special PP submitted that no interim order should be
passed granting anticipatory bail to the present petitioner.
[11] I have heard the submission advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties at length
and also examined the materials available on record. On examination of the offences alleged to have
been committed by the petitioner and the preliminary inquiry reports submitted by the Inquiry
Officer, it is ascertained that all the alleged offences were committed between 2017 to 2021 and that
a thorough investigation had been held and all the necessary documents had been seized and is in
the custody of the Manipur Lokayukta. In that view of the matter, there is no chance of tempering of
evidence by the accused. As the petitioner is now being posted at Noney District which is a different
hill district, there is also no chance of his inducing or threatening any person AB No. 30 of 2023
Page 5 acquainted with the facts of the case which happened in another hill District of Senapati. This
Court is also of the considered view that since the petitioner is a highly responsible Government
Officer, there is no chance of his absconding during the period of investigation. The petitioner has
also categorically given an undertaking in the present bail application that he will make himself
available for interrogation by the Investigating Officer of the case as and when required and that he
is ready to comply with any condition imposed by this Court. [12] As the respondents have not filed
any written objection and as the Special PP has failed to satisfy this Court about the requirement of
keeping the petitioner in police custody during the period of investigation, this Court is of the
considered view that it will be appropriate to give the respondents a chance of filing objection.
Accordingly, list this case again on 31-10-2023 for consideration of the prayer for passing any
interim order and in the meantime, the respondents are directed to file their written objection if so
advised.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149732813/ 3
Stiff Khapudang vs Superintendent Of Police on 9 October, 2023
[13] As an interim measure and till the next date, it is hereby directed that if the petitioner is
arrested by the police in connection with the said FIR before the next date of hearing, he shall be
released on bail on his submitting a bail bond of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand) with one
surely (Government employee) to the satisfaction of the Arresting Authority. It is also made clear
that the petitioner should cooperate with the investigation and he should make himself available for
interrogation by the IO of the case in connection with the said FIR as and when AB No. 30 of 2023
Page 6 required. The petitioner should not leave the State of Manipur without prior permission of
the arresting authority. It is further made clear that if the petitioner violates any of the conditions
given hereinabove, the respondents are at liberty to approach this Court for modification or
cancellation of this interim order.
JUDGE
Dhakeshori
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM
KPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2023.10.10
DA SINGH 10:22:56 +05'30'
AB No. 30 of 2023 Page 7
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149732813/ 4
