Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
Author: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
Bench: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
Sr.No. 17
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
OWP No.36/2013
CM No.8965/2021
IA Nos.2411/2013, 498/2014 &
41/2013
Subash Chander ....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through :- Mr. Sachin Sharma, Advocate.
V/s
State of J&K and ors. ....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. S.S. Nanda, Sr.AAG.
Mr. Sandeep Singh, Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI, JUDGE
ORDER
ORAL:
01. In the instant petition, the petitioner, herein, has challenged the order dated
21.12.2012, passed by respondent Nos.3 and 4 in case Appeal File No.37 titled Kewal
Krishan V/s Returning Officer and ors. with further direction to the official
respondents restraining them to permit respondent No.7 from working as Sarpanch
of Village Dheote constituency Panchayat Halqa 13-Dheote.
02. The petitioner has questioned the impugned order dated 21.12.2012 on the
grounds that:
a. Whether a statutory authority who is duty bound to hear an appeal in terms of the
provisions of Panchayati Raj Act and Representations of People Act can device a
procedure of its own, for hearing an appeal, which procedure is without any rationale
and logic and is in violation of the basic principles of natural justice and ultimately
condemn any of the party, unheard. b. Whether the allegations of Corrupt practice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 1
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
levied upon the petitioner by the respondent No. 7 has to be unequivocally proved by
the same, in view the fact that the Hon'ble Apex Court of India has already held that
allegations of corrupt practice is a criminal charge and level of proof required to
substantiate the same is as good as criminal charge.
c. Whether the Appellate Authority has not erred in holding the petitioner guilty of
Corrupt practice only on the basis of few affidavits filed by the respondent No. 7
(appellant therein), without affording any opportunity of cross examine those
persons who have sworn those alleged affidavits and also by rejecting an application
filed by petitioner, in limini, seeking permission to cross examine those persons and
all other applications.
d. Whether the appellate authority have further not erred in holding the petitioner guilty of corrupt
practice keeping in view the fact that the respondent No. 7 (appellant therein), has never specifically
levied any of the allegations of corrupt practice against the petitioner, as the respondent No. 7 has
only unequivocally alleged in its appeal that "there is bungling in casting votes in favour of
respondent No. 3 (petitioner herein)" and there is no specific allegations of corrupt practice or to the
effect that the petitioner was himself actively and effectively conducted any of the corrupt practice or
undue influence upon any of the voters, who has voted for or against the petitioner.
e. Whether the appellate authority has any jurisdiction to
cancel any of the votes which has been polled
keeping in view the provisions of Panchayati Raj Act
and Panchayati Raj Rules.
f. Whether the total number of 32 votes, which has been
deleted from the tally of petitioner is initially required to be specifically proved to have been polled
in favor of the petitioner by corrupt practice and undue influence and whether that the appellate
authority is duty bound to at least test the veracity of allegations against the petitioner by initially
checking from the concerned that whether the so called alleged votes have been polled or not.
g. Whether simple reading of the pleadings of the respondent No. 7 and affidavits filed by the same
does in any manner do result in to the judgment/order dated 21.12.2012, wherein the Appellate
authority have discussed all the allegations against the petitioner only on the basis of surmises and
conjunctures and on the basis of affidavits.
h. Whether the allegations of malafide alleged by the petitioner against the respondent No. 3 and 4,
in the present writ petition as well as in the earlier rounds of litigations have been substantially
proved by the petitioner and the conduct of the appellate authority have itself proved the same. i.
Whether the order impugned in the writ petition dated 21.12.2012 is sustainable keeping in view the
submissions and grounds of challenge to the same made herein below.
Brief facts of the case are as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 2
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
03. It is stated that the petitioner has worked for the upliftment of poor and
downtrodden and due to his hard work, he was voted to be elected as Sarpanch for
Village Dheote and was accordingly, declared elected as Sarpanch with a winning
margin of about 20 votes from one Kewal Krishan i.e. respondent No.7. It is stated
that in the village Dheote, Panchayat Halqa 13-Dheote, Tehsil and District Reasi,
there is an electoral consisting of 1660 votes and out of the said total number of
votes, only 1427 votes were polled. The petitioner had obtained 698 votes whereas
respondent No.7 had obtained 678 votes only. At the time of declaration of the result,
respondent No.7 made representations before the Returning officer for recounting of
votes and the said recounting of votes was conducted by the Returning Officer, i.e.
respondent No.5, twice at the instance of respondent No.7 and after attaining due
satisfaction of respondent No.7, the petitioner was declared as Sarpanch. Dheote
Constituency, Panchayat Halqa-13 Dheote.
04. It is stated that respondent No.7, preferred an appeal U/R 43 of the Panchayati
Raj Act, titled Kewal Krishan V/s Returning Officer, Panchayat Halqa-
13, Village Dheote and ors. before the Ld. Additional District Development Commissioner, Reasi
(Appellate Authority for Panchayati Elections 2011, Reasi) i.e, respondent No.3 and 4 whereby
challenging the election of the petitioner as Sarpanch on various grounds urged therein. It is stated
that the main plank of the challenge put forth by respondent No.7/appellant therein in the said
appeal is that there is a bungling in casting the votes in favour of the petitioner as few votes of
Defence Personnels have been polled against respondent No.7. Some votes of persons who are
already dead were polled against respondent No.7. The said appeal was resisted by the petitioner on
number of grounds urged before the Appellate Authority and also on the basis of written arguments
submitted by the petitioner but respondent Nos.3 and 4 who were hand in gloves with respondent
No.7 managed and misused the authority usurped to them under law and passed an order dated
12.08.2011, as such, respondent Nos.3 and 4, set aside the election of the petitioner as Sarpanch and
vide order dated 12.08.2011 also directed the deletion of some votes.
05. Being aggrieved of order dated 12.08.2011, the petitioner approached this Court by way of writ
petition bearing OWP No.1365/11 titled Subash Chander V/s State of J&K and ors. which was
disposed of as under;
"For the aforesaid reason, this petition is disposed of in the following manner:-
01. By issuance of writ of certiorari, order impugned dated 12th of Aug'11, is quashed.
Appellate Authority is directed to re-
consider the matter and pass appropriate order in accordance with the law after affording
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner as also the respondent No.6 and consider all such material
which is available for taking a correct legal view in the matter;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 3
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
02. Appellate Authority to consider and take a decision after affording opportunity of hearing to the
parties within the period prescribed by the Statute.
03. Parties to appear before the Appellate Authority on 11th of Sept'12.
Connected CMA's are also disposed of."
06. It is stated that the petitioner preferred another writ petition before this Court bearing OWP
No.41/2012 under Article 227 of the Constitution of India against proceedings conducted in
case/appeal titled Kewal Krishan V/s Returning Officer, Panchayat Halqa-13, Village Dheote and
ors. wherein, the petitioner again alleged serious malafide against respondent Nos.3 and 4 and the
same was disposed of as given below:
"The writ petition was disposed of with a direction to the Appellate Authority to
adhere to and comply with the directions issued by the Writ Court vide its order
dated 31.08.2012 in OWP No.1365/2011 requiring it to afford an opportunity of
hearing to the parties while dealing with the matter and while doing so, also take a
decision on the application claimed to have been filed by the petitioner."
07. It is stated that despite all the directions issued by this Court in terms of orders dated
31.08.2012, 19.11.2012, respondent No.3 again acted with ulterior motive to set aside the elections of
petitioner as Sarpanch and passed a non-speaking order dated 21.12.2012, which is against the
spirit, mandate and provisions of Panchayati Raj Act, that too without affording an opportunity of
being heard to the petitioner and also without considering allegations filed by the petitioner for
cross examination of the persons on whose depositions, respondent Nos.3 and 4 have relied upon.
08. The appeal filed by the petitioner was decided by learned Additional District Judge,
Reasi(Appellate Authority under the Panchayati Raj Act) on 10.10.2012;
"17. Heard rival contentions and considered. The moot questions in this appeal which
needs determination and return of finding are-:
i. whether respondent no. 3 used corrupt practices during polling of votes and ii.
whether the bogus votes, double votes, votes of dead persons and votes of those
persons who were not present in Panchayat at all on the date of voting were polled by
impersonation at the behest of respondent no. 3. iii. the answer of question (ii) is in
affirmative, whether such voting has materially affected the result of the election and
whether the same amounted to gross failure to comply with the provisions of
panchayati Raj Act or the rules framed thereunder.
iv. What would be effect of such corrupt practice which has materially affected the
result of election.
v. What relief can be granted in appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 4
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
35. In total 32 number of votes are found to have been polled by using corrupt
practice of impersonation or by double voting and for the reasons recorded supra and
it has also been found polling of these votes have been managed by the respondent
no. 3 in his favour and there is no denial or evidence either from respondent no. 3 or
other respondents. There is rather admission on the part of respondent no. 3 of this
fact when he produces the affidavits of some of the voters denying the allegations of
appellant regarding impersonation and also execution of affidavits. The respondent
no. 3 probably in connivance with the polling staff has managed polling of the votes
by impersonation and polling of double votes and polling of votes of persons who
were not present in the Panchayat/ village/ ward on the date of voting i.e.
08.05.2011. So this action has definitely affected the result of the election. The 32
votes which have been found polled by manoeuvring and manipulation by
respondent no. 3 in his favour and for the reasons stated herein before are required
to be subtracted from the total number of votes polled in favour of respondent No.3
and the result is required declared accordingly.
36. Total number of votes polled in favour of respondent no. 3 is 698 votes out of
which 32 votes are to be excluded so his total tally will come to 698-32=666 votes.
38. Thus this appeal succeeds. The appellant is found to have secured 678 valid votes
as against 666 valid votes of respondent no. 3. The appellant is required to be
declared as successful candidate for the post of Sarpanch of Panchayat Halqa 13-
Dehote. I order accordingly.
Respondent no. 1 Returning Officer (R.O) is directed to issue requisite certificate in favour of the
appellant and simultaneously he shall withdraw/ cancel the certificate issued in favour of
respondent no. 3. Returning Officer (R.O) shall report compliance by tomorrow i.e. 22.12.2012.
The appeal is thus disposed of as allowed. It shall be consigned to records after due compilation.
Before parting away it is provided that during the pendency of appeal, certified copy of order of
Honble High Court dated 19.11.2012 passed in Petition u/s 104 No.41/2012 and CMA No.44/2012
was received contents whereof reveal that some writ petition was filed by the respondent Subash
Chander seeking disposal of the appeal in accordance with the directions of Hon'ble High Court
passed in OWP No. 1365/2012 on 31.08.2012 and Hon'ble High Court has disposed of the petition
with a direction to this Authority to adhere to and comply with the directions of the Hon'ble High
court passed in OWP No.1365/2012 on 31.08.2012 by affording opportunity of being heard to the
partieswhile dealing with the matter and to take a decision on the application claimed to have been
filed by the petitioner (Subash Chander). This Authority has passed the present order in strict
compliance to the orders of the Hon'ble High Court passed in the petition mentioned supra. It is not
clear as to which application the respondent Subash Chander has mentioned in the petition of which
the mention has been made in the order of Hon'ble High Court. However, an endeavour has been
made to deal with all the applications filed by the parties during the pendency of the appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 5
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
Ordered accordingly."
09. Objections have been filed by respondent No.7 and it is stated that the declaration of the
petitioner as successful candidate was otherwise bad in the eyes of law as there was bogus voting in
respect of the electoral and respondent No .3 by adopting corrupt practices managed to get the votes
polled in his favour, as such, there is improper and illegal acceptance of votes.
Therefore, appellate authority has rightly held that the petitioner have adopted corrupt
practices/malpractices and has declared respondent No.3 to be elected as Sarpanch.
Arguments raised by learned counsel for the parties:
10. Learned counsel for the petitioner has laid emphasis on Rule 21, 24, 31, 36(c) of the Panchayati
Raj Rules and also on Section 2(c) and Section 123 of Representation of Peoples Act which are
reproduced as under:
2(c) "corrupt practice" means any of the practices specified in section 123.
123. Corrupt practices.--The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the
purposes of this Act:--
(1) "Bribery" that is to say--
(A) any gift, offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with
the consent of a candidate or his election agent of any gratification, to any person
whomsoever, with the object, directly or indirectly of inducing
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not to withdraw] from
being a candidate at an election, or
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a reward to--
(i) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for 5 having withdrawn or not having
withdrawn his candidature; or
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from voting; (B) the receipt of, or
agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a motive or a reward--
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for withdrawing or not
withdrawing from being, a candidate; or
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for voting or
refraining from voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any elector to vote or
refrain from voting, or any candidate to withdraw or not to withdraw his candidature.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 6
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
Explanation.--For the purposes of this clause the term "gratification" is not restricted to pecuniary
gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and it includes all forms of entertainment and all
forms of employment for reward but it does not include the payment of any expenses bona fide
incurred at, or for the purpose of, any election and duly entered in the account of election expenses
referred to in section 78.
(2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the
part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of the candidate or his
election agent, with the free exercise of any electoral right: Provided that--
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such person as is referred
to therein who--
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an elector is
interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and ex-communication or expulsion
from any caste or community; or
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any person in whom
he is interested, will become or will be rendered an object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure,
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or elector
within the meaning of this clause;
11. In terms of order passed by this Court dated 18.12.2013, the Deputy Commissioner, Reasi was
directed to conduct an enquiry. The Enquiry Report dated 12.10.2014 is on record and the same is
reproduced below:
"Out of 32 votes held invalid 10 votes did not tally, 9 votes were found cast in favour
of Sh. Subash Chander and 12 votes were reported to be not polled while one vote
found to be double entry. A detailed scrutiny of 43 votes called into question reveals
that a total of 14 votes have been polled in favour of Sh. Subash Chander and all of
which have been declared invalid as per rules."
12. Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued in terms of order dated 14.09.2012
which is also referred in the impugned order at para 17
(a). The petitioner had filed an application for cross examination of the persons who had filed
affidavit before the appellate authority but the application was rejected and the impugned order was
passed which is only based on assumptions and presumptions.
13. Learned counsel for the respondents states that the enquiry report conducted by the Deputy
Commissioner, Reasi specifically stated that 09 votes were found to be casted in favour of the
petitioner, as such, he was benefitted by way of double voting and, therefore, he has been held
responsible for the corrupt/malpractices of impersonation of double voting. On the other hand, the
petitioner specifically states that right to cross examine has to be granted to the person against
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 7
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
whom allegations have been leveled, in the present case, no opportunity of cross examination was
provided to the petitioner.
14. Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the following judgments:
15. This Court in 'Suraj Prakash vs. Returning Officer and others', AIR 2002 J&K 93, has held as
under:
"1. These petitions shall stand disposed of vide this common order. As to what should
be the procedure to be followed when election of a returned candidate is challenged is
a question which has acquired significance in view of the divergent stand taken by the
counsel for the petitioner and the respondents. Can a petition preferred calling upon
the election of a returned candidate under the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj
Act of 1989, be decided on the basis of pleadings in the application and the stand
taken by the respondents and thereafter on the basis of affidavits submitted by the
parties, without taking recourse to the method of vouchsafing of the authenticity of
the stand taken which according to the petitioner can be done only by subjecting the
person submitting the affidavit to cross-examination. The stand of the counsel for the
respondent No. 2 is that as such a procedure is not envisaged by the Act and Rules,
the petition preferred has to be decided on the basis of pleadings in the petition and
the affidavits which are filed on a later date.
2. If the authority which is to decide the matter has the trappings of the Court and if
the proceedings taken by the said authority have trappings of the judicial precedence,
then the further consequence is that the authority has the power of summoning and
enforcing attendance and compelling production of evidence. In such an eventuality,
the authority concerned is expected to observe the elementary and fundamental
principles of a judicial enquiry to comply with the rudiment requirements of fair play
and to safeguard the fundamental constitutional rights of the citizens. In the absence
of an express provision in the statute or statutory rule, such an authority would be at
liberty to device its own procedure. Even though, such an authority may not be bound
to follow the elaborate rules and procedure, but such an authority must follow some
procedure so that the lis before it comes to an orderly end and the determination
made by it is in consonance with the rules of fair play and justice. The question as to
what is meant by a 'Court' and what is meant by the term judicial power would be
adverted to again; first facts be noticed:
27. It be seen that the proper course for the authority which decided the issue was to
go into the matter in detail. It would have been apt to frame the issues. This is
essential so that the parties are made aware of the case. Thereafter, opportunity to
lead evidence should have been given. This apparently has not happened in this case.
Order dated 10th May, 2001 does not satisfy the test of a speaking order. In this
situation, order passed by the District Panchayat Officer acting as appellate authority
on 10-5-2001 is set aside. The said authority would pass a fresh order in accordance
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 8
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
with the law.
31. Before parting with this judgment, it would be apt to point out that the authority
deciding an election dispute must pass a speaking order. The requirement to pass a
speaking order was laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Bhagat Raja v.
Union of India, MANU/SC/0002/1967 : AIR 1967 SC 1606. The reasoning given was
that it is only when reasons are contained in the order, the superior authority can
examine as to whether order passed is on valid grounds. It is in these circumstances,
an order which is called a speaking order is supposed to be passed. The order should
give precise reasoning. In the present cases, as indicated above, the concerned
authority in OWP No. 502/2001, did not take the supplementary affidavits on the
record and did not give opportunity to the parties to cross-examine. Thus, a
procedure which is normally to be followed by a quasi-judicial authority has not been
followed in the present cases. Even though, such an authority comes to a conclusion
that no case is made out and on that basis, the prescribed authority is well within its
rights to reject the petition, but this opinion has not to be formed lightly. As the right
to contest election, no doubt, is not a fundamental right but a civil right which is
recognized by a statute and this right has to be safeguarded with a view to permit the
democratic institutions which institutions are the backbone of the system. The
establishment of Panchayati Raj is one of the cherished wishes of the framers of the
Constitution and finds mentioned in the Directive Principles of Constitution.
Therefore, if this Will of the Parliament is to be respected, then, this right is not to be taken away
lightly. The matter, as indicated above shall stand remanded to the prescribed authority who would
re- decide the same after affording proper opportunity of hearing to both the sides."
[
16. Similarly, in 'Tukaram S. Dighole vs. Manikrao Shivaji Kokate', AIR 2010 SC 965, the Hon'ble
Apex Court has held as under:
"11. Before we proceed to examine the controversy at hand, we deem it necessary to
reiterate that a charge of corrupt practice, envisaged by the Act, is equated with a
criminal charge and therefore, standard of proof therefore would not be
preponderance of probabilities as in a civil action but proof beyond reasonable doubt
as in a criminal trial. If a stringent test of proof is not applied, a serious prejudice is
likely to be caused to the successful candidate whose election would not only be set
aside, he may also incur disqualification to contest an election for a certain period,
adversely affecting his political career. Thus, a heavy onus lies on the election
petitioner to prove the charge of corrupt practice in the same way as a criminal
charge is proved.
12. Explaining the nature and extent of burden of proof in an election trial involving a
charge of corrupt practice, in Razik Ram Vs. Jaswant Singh Chouhan2, speaking for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 9
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
the Bench, Sarkaria, J. observed as under:
...It is well settled that a charge of corrupt practice is substantially akin to a criminal
charge. The commission of a corrupt practice entails serious penal consequences. It
not only vitiates the election of the candidate concerned but also disqualifies him
from taking part in elections for a considerably long time. Thus, the trial of an
election petition being in the nature of an accusation, bearing the indelible stamp of
quasi-criminal action, the standard of proof is the same as in a criminal trial. Just as
in a criminal case, so in an election petition, the respondent against whom the charge
of corrupt practice is levelled, is presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty. A
grave and heavy onus, therefore, rests on the accuser to establish each and every
ingredient of the charge by clear, unequivocal and unimpeachable evidence beyond
reasonable doubt."
13. In Jeet Mohinder Singh Vs. Harminder Singh Jassi3, a Bench of three judges of this Court,
summarizing the principles laid down by this Court from time to time in the field of election
jurisprudence; adumbrated the following legal principles, relevant for our purpose: to be kept in
view by the Election Tribunals and the Appellate Courts while dealing with election petitions and
appeals arising there from:
(1975) 4 SCC 769 (1999) 9 SCC 386 "(i) The success of a candidate who has won at an
election should not be lightly interfered with. Any petition seeking such interference
must strictly conform to the requirements of the law.
Though the purity of the election process has to be safeguarded and the Court shall be vigilant to see
that people do not get elected by flagrant breaches of law or by committing corrupt practices, the
setting aside of an election involves serious consequences not only for the returned candidate and
the constituency, but also for the public at large inasmuch as re-election involves an enormous load
on the public funds and administration.
(ii) Charge of corrupt practice is quasi-criminal in character. If substantiated, it leads not only to the
setting aside of the election of the successful candidate, but also of his being disqualified to contest
an election for a certain period. It may entail extinction of a person's public life and political career.
A trial of an election petition though within the realm of civil law is akin to trial on a criminal
charge. Two consequences follow. Firstly, the allegations relating to commission of a corrupt
practice should be sufficiently clear and stated precisely so as to afford the person charged a full
opportunity of meeting the same. Secondly, the charges when put to issue should be proved by clear,
cogent and credible evidence. To prove charge of corrupt practice a mere preponderance of
probabilities would not be enough. There would be a presumption of innocence available to the
person charged. The charge shall have to be proved to the hilt, the standard of proof being the same
as in a criminal trial.
(iii) The Appellate Court attaches great value to the opinion formed by the trial Judge more so when
the trial Judge recording findings of fact is the same who had recorded the evidence. The Appellate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 10
Subash Chander vs State Of J&K And Ors on 17 August, 2023
Court shall remember that the jurisdiction to try an election petition has been vested in a Judge of
the High Court. Secondly, the trial Judge may have had the benefit of watching the demeanour of
witnesses and forming first-hand opinion of them in the process of evaluation of evidence. The
Supreme Court may re- assess the evidence and come to its own conclusions on feeling satisfied that
in recording findings of fact the High Court has disregarded settled principles governing the
approach to evidence or committed grave or palpable errors."
14. In the backdrop of the afore-stated principles, we may now advert to the facts at hand to examine
if the finding recorded by the Tribunal in the judgment in appeal, holding that the appellant has
failed to prove that the respondent had committed corrupt practice, falling within the ambit of
sub-Section (3) of Section 123 of the Act, is justified or not."
17. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
18. In the impugned order at para 35, it has been held that the petitioner was found to be involved in
corrupt practices of impersonation or by double voting and the petitioner has been found to manage
the bogus voting. It is also stated that there is an admission on the part of the petitioner that he
produces the affidavits of some of the voters denying the allegations of appellant regarding
impersonation and also execution of affidavits. The appellate authority has also held that probably
in connivance with the polling staff, the petitioner has managed polling of the votes by
impersonation and by double voting of the persons who were not present in the Panchayat/
village/ward on the date of voting i.e. on 08.05.2011.
19. From the impugned order it appears that the appellate authority has given its finding on the
assumptions/presumptions and probabilities which is not permissible in the eyes of law. Nowhere in
the impugned order, it is established that the petitioner had indulged into the corrupt practices and
had managed the bogus voting by impersonation or by double voting. The appellate authority has
also denied the right of the petitioner to cross examine the persons who had filed affidavits for
which an application was filed by the petitioner on 14.11.2012. The application was rejected without
any reasonable justification.
20. In view of what has been stated above, the impugned order dated 21.12.2012 is quashed and the
matter is remanded back to the appellate authority (Additional District Development Commissioner,
Reasi) with a direction to provide the petitioner right to cross examine the persons who had filed
affidavits and also by providing an opportunity of being heard to both the parties. It is also directed
that respondent No.3 shall give a clear finding to the extent of corrupt practices/undue influence, if
at all proved against the petitioner.
21. Disposed of.
(MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI) JUDGE Jammu:
17.08.2023 Eva
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185792184/ 11
