Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June,
2024
LUCY Digitally
signed by
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
GURU LUCY
GURUMAYUM
AT IMPHAL
MAYU Date:
2024.06.18
M 12:48:30
+05'30'
Cril. Petition No. 12 of 2014
1. SudeepThakore, ex-Vice President, Marketing of M/s Mekaster
Engineering Limited, having its registered Office at Plot No. 32,
Sector 1, Parwanoo Industrial Estate, Solan District, Himachal
Pradesh - 173220, residing at G-101, 1st Floor, Galada Towers,
Begumpet, Hyderabad- 500016.
.... Petitioner
- Versus -
1. M/s Coastal Projects Limited, Imphal East, Mantripukhri, Second
Floor, near CRPF Camp, Manipur 795001, having its registered Office
at 237, 2nd Floor, Bapuji Nagar, Bhubaneswar, Orissa and its
Corporate office at Plot No. 303-O, Film Nagar, Jubilee Hills,
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh- 500033.
Represented by Shaik Moulali, aged about 41 years, S/o John Shab
of Coastal Projects Ltd., BikashBhavan, 2nd Floor, flat no. V and VI
Palace Compound Agartala- 799001, Tripura now serving as Regional
Head (NE).
.... Respondent
BEFORE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU For the petitioner : Mr. H. Kenajit,
Advocate For the respondent : Mr. T. Rajendra, Sr. Advocate Date of hearing : 04.04.2024 Date of
order : 14.06.2024 JUDGEMENT & ORDER (CAV) [1] Heard Mr. H. Kenajit, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner and Mr. T. Rajendra, learned sr. counsel appearing for the respondent.
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 1
[2] The present petition has been filed under section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 for quashing/ setting aside the impugned order dated
06.05.2014 passed by the Ld. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East, Manipur in connection with a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 1
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
complaint case which is registered as Cril. (C) Case No. 55 of 2014 (cognizance of offences under
section 417, 419,420 read with section 34 of the IPC is taken) and further proceedings of the said
complaint case with the following prayers;
i. To quash the impugned order dated 06.05.2014 (Annexure-C/5) and further proceedings of the
Cril.(C) Case No. 55 of 2014; and ii. For passing ex-parte interim order for staying the order dated
06.05.2014 of the Ld. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East, Manipur and to recall the warrant of
arrest issued to the petitioner and also to stay the further proceedings of the Cril. (C) Case No. 55 of
2014 before the Hon'ble Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East, Manipur during the pendency of the
present petition.
[3] According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the Ld. CJM, Imphal East has failed to apply
its judicious mind while issuing warrant of arrest against the petitioner/accused person in the
complaint case filed by the respondent/complainant which was registered as Cril. (C) Case No. 55 of
2014 (cognizance of offences under section 417, 419, 420 read with section 34 of the IPC) taken
against the petitioner. Since then the criminal proceedings against the petitioner is going on in full
swing.
[4] Chequered history of the petitioner leading to the filing of this petition u/s 482 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 is as follows:-
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 2 As the petitioner was working as a Vice-President, Marketing of
M/S Mekaster Engineering Pvt. Limited (in short MEL), of a Company registered under the
Company Act, 1956 having its registered Office at Plot No. 32, Sector 1, Parwanoo Industrial Estate,
Solan District, Himachal Pradesh- 173220. The petitioner has submitted his resignation on
12-03-2014 which was accepted by the MEL on 23-04-2014.
The respondent company and MEL was having its business relations over a decade for placing
orders and MEL was supplying the orders placed by the respondent company. On 07.12.2012, the
respondent Company and M/S Mekaster International Private Ltd. (one of the Mekaster Group of
Companies) entered into an agreement in Andhra Pradesh for placing a purchase order for the
supply of Road Header Machine, Model T 3.2Q to be delivered to its Rangit Hydro Electric Project at
Sikkim and an advance payment of Rs. 5 Crore only was made by the respondent company vide
Cheque No. 279207 dated 07-06-2011. Further, it was agreed in its agreement that instead of cash
refund of Rs. 4.40 Crore, the respondent company agreed to place an order for supply of three (3
Nos.) Shotcrete Machines PM 500 to the Second party.
Again on 20.12.2013, the respondent Company and the MEL entered into an amendment agreement
in Andhra Pradesh thereby amending the terms and conditions of the agreement dated 07.12.2012.
Original signed copy of the agreement is with the respondent Company.
The respondent filed a complaint case before the Ld. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East and the
Ld. Court took cognizance and registered it as Cril. (C) Case No. 55 of 2014 and issued warrant of
arrest against the petitioners vide order dated 06.05.2014.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 2
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 3
[5] According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the
Ld. Court of CJM, Imphal East had erred in taking cognizance u/s 417, 419, 420 read with section 34
of the IPC and issued warrant of arrest against the Petitioner without any jurisdiction and evidence
that the petitioner had either deceived or cheated on which the complainant is relying that cheating
had been caused to him.
[6] The learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the respondent/complainant had
filed the complaint case before the Ld. CJM, Imphal East for cheating by relying on certain
agreement but the said agreement were executed in Andhra Pradesh and the document which the
complainant is relying for jurisdiction of the Ld. Court is a purchase order placed by him to one
PutzeisterIberica, S.A. Camino de Hormigueras, 173, 28031- Madrib which is not the company of the
petitioner.
[7] The learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the Ld. Court while taking
cognizance, it has recorded statement of 2 (two) witnesses including the complainant and no where
the witnesses have stated that the petitioner have deceived or cheated him. Inspite of wanting more
evidence to take cognizance of the complaint, the Ld. Court had taken cognizance under section 417,
419, 420 read with section 34 of the IPC and registered it as a Cril. (C) Case No. 55 of 2014 and
issued a warrant of arrest to the petitioner vide order dated 06.02.2014 in a routine manner.
[8] The learned counsel for the petitioner further mentioned that there is no ingredient/ or any act
of the petitioner which would make his act liable to book him under the said provision. As the Ld.
Court had committed an error in taking cognizance and issuing the warrant of arrest to the
petitioner u/s 417, 419, 420 read with section 34 of the IPC. Having no alternative the petitioner has
approached this Hon'ble Court to quash/ set aside the impugned Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 4
order dated 06.05.2014 passed by the Hon'ble CJM, IE whereby a criminal complaint case is
continuing against the petitioner.
[9] The petitioner has filed the present petition on the following grounds;
a) The impugned order dated 06.05.2014 passed by the Hon'ble CJM, IE is bad in the eyes of law;
b) The Ld. Court had taken cognizance and issued warrant of arrest under section 417, 419, 420 read
with section 34 of the IPC without applying its judicious mind;
c) The complaint case has no materials to take cognizance u/s 417, 419, 420 read with section 34 of
the IPC against the petitioner;
d) The impugned order dated 06.05.2014 passed by the Hon'ble CJM, IE have help the complainant
to harass the petitioner without any valid reason;
e) The impugned order passed by the CJM, IE is contrary to the letter and spirit of the intention for
which the legislature had enacted the IPC;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 3
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
f) The complainant had approached the Hon'ble CJM, IE just to harass the petitioner by dragging in
criminal case;
g) The complainant is abusing the process of law to harass and torture the petitioner mentally,
physically and financially.
[10] Mr. T. Rajendra, the learned counsel for the respondent filed Counter Affidavit on behalf of the
respondent, in that the respondent submitted that "Except those which are specifically admitted
therein the Respondent/Complainant denies all the allegations made in the petition filed by the
petitioner/accused person.
Brief fact as per the respondent is that the respondent/petitioner made an order for supply of 01
(one) Road Header was placed with M/s Mekaster Engineering Limited (in short MEL) on
22-03-2011, for which advance payment of Rs. 5 Crores Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 5 (Rupees
five crore) has been made and as per provision in the purchase order, M/s MEL shall take back the
machine in case of non- performance of the machine as per the pre-determinated norms after
installation at the work-site and it was mutually decided that MEL has to refund Rs 4.4 Crores
(Rupees four point four crores) on taking back the under-performed machine. He further submit
that subsequently under the agreement dated 07.12.2012, the complainant is to place supply order
to purchase 03 (three) shotcrete machines from M/s MEL instead of refunding Rs 4.40 Crores
which was to be refunded by M/s MEL. As per the agreement, one machine is to be supplied in
December, 2012 and two in January, 2013 and that the balance amount of Rs. 2.84 Crores (Rupees
two point eight four crore) remains after delivery of 01(one) shotcrete machine.
[11] The learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that after the supply of the first
machine, by an agreement dated 20.11.2013, it was agreed mutually to supply two machines by the
MEL and a further amount of Rs. 1 (one) Crore only was released by the complainant to MEL and
that the delivery schedule of the first unit was within eight weeks on or after the receipt of advance
payment from the complainant and the second unit was within eight weeks on or after the receipt of
advance payment from the complainant. According to the learned counsel for the respondent, the
said approach of the accused was with a criminal mind and with an intention of deceiving the
complainant.
[12] The learned counsel for the respondent next submitted that on 20.11.2023 the complainant
placed a supply order for two machines to the manufacturer i.e. M/s Putzmeister Iberica, Madrid
directly as requested for by the MEL and the accused on their statement that it is required to carry
out High Sea Sales to make invoice in favour of the complainant Coastal Projects Limited.
Subsequently, on 17-12-2013, the Vice President of MEL namely Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 6
Sudeep Thakore informed that the first unit of the shotcrete machine will be delivered by December,
2013 and the second unit will be delivered in January, 2014, but has failed to deliver the machines
within the stipulated period.
[13] The learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that finding delay tactics of M/s MEL
for delivery of machines and suspicious of the real intention of the MEL on the issue, legal notice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 4
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
was served on 21-03-2014 intimating appropriate legal steps against M/s MEL in case of failure to
dispatch 02 (two) shotcrete machines within 7 (seven) days indicating specifically that the legal
action to be launched may include criminal prosecution as well as civil suits for which M/s MEL
shall be further liable for the cost and consequences of the litigations. But no response was received
from Shri Sudeep Thakore, Vice President (Marketing) and also finding the delay tactics of MEL, the
complainant company has taken up the matter with the manufacturer directly to ascertain the
factual position. The manufacturer M/s. Putzmeister Iberica, by a letter dated 06.08.2014, replied
that they have not been informed or involved in any negotiation and discussions that the
complainant may have had with the MEL with regard to the requirement of delivery of two
machines and that they have not received any payment with regard to the above order. As a result,
the complainant has filed the Criminal complaint case against Shri Sudeep Thakore, Vice President
of M/s MEL and one other on 06-05-2014 before the Hon'ble Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal
East, Manipur against which non-bailable warrant was issued by the court on 06-05-2014 by taking
statement of the complainant and one witness.
[14] The learned counsel for the respondent further argued/submitted that warrant of arrest was
issued not for convicting the accused, but only the first step of the criminal proceeding and due trial
of the case by producing evidence by both sides and the accused has enough chance to prove their
case. Since Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 7 the Chief Judicial Magistrate has got vast/ample power
to take cognizance of the offence and accordingly, after following the procedure, the Learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate has taken cognizance of the offence and therefore, there is no infirmity in it and
there is no necessity to invoke the provisions of Section 482 Cr.P.C to quash the said criminal
proceedings initiated by the respondent.
[15] The learned counsel for the respondent further submitted that a person is said to be cheated by
another person if he/she by deceiving that person fraudulently and dishonestly induces the person
so deceived to deliver any property, to any person or to consent that any person shall retain any
property or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he
would not do or omit if he was not so deceived and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause
damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property. Further whoever cheats and
thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person or to make,
alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security or anything which is signed or sealed and
which is being capable of converted into a valuable security is said to be cheated and dishonestly
induces delivery of property. The Petitioner/respondent along with another namely Shri Mohit
Khanna are the Vice President and CEO (Chief Executive Officer) of M/s Mekaster Engineering Ltd.
The petitioner and the said Mohit Khanna fraudulently and dishonestly induces the complainant to
make payment of a big amount running in crores which is morefully explained in the Complaint
petition for the supply of the said machines. The Petitioner/respondent and the said Mohit Khanna
had the clear intention of deceiving and dishonestly compelling the complainant to make the said
payment even though they had the clear intention of not supplying the machines so promised to be
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 8 delivered. In fact, the acts of the accused person fulfills the
ingredients of the offences for which cognizance was taken.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 5
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
The learned counsel further mentioned that the supply orders of the said machines are to be
delivered at Mantripukhri Imphal within Imphal East District, Manipur. Therefore the act of
deceivement has been undisputedly confirmed as the said machines are not delivered at the said
address of Imphal. Therefore the deceivement by the petitioner and Mohit Khana is a continuing
one including at Imphal where the said machines are to be delivered. Being so the Ld. Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Imphal East under whose jurisdiction at Mantripukhri the machines have to be
delivered have ample jurisdiction to entertain the complaint petition.
[16] The learned counsel for the petitioner further filed Reply affidavit on behalf of the petitioner to
the Additional Affidavit filed by the Respondent in which he denies all the allegations/averments
made in the additional affidavit except those which are specifically admitted therein and he further
contented that the submission of the respondent in the Additional Affidavit is afterthought and
making improvement of his case which is not valid in the eyes of law. Accordingly, the present
Criminal Petition No. 12 of 2014.
[17] After hearing both the learned counsels at length and on perusal of the materials placed before
me, it is seen and emerged the following;
I) The agreement mentioned by the parties were executed between the petitioners' company i.e M/s
Mekaster Engineering Limited and the respondents' company i.e M/s Coastal Projects Limited.
II) The company of the petitioner was not made
parties in the complaint case.
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 9
III) The petitioner was Ex-Vice President of the
company but already resigned from his post and the resignation was accepted by the company.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the allegation against the petitioner in the
complaint petition was that he was the Vice President of the company but the mentioned
agreements were entered into between the respondent company and petitioner company and all
payment have been made by the respondent company to the petitioner company. Further, the
learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that instead of filing the criminal proceeding civil case
should be filed against the petitioner's company, in the circumstances no case is made out against
the petitioner, as such the continuation of the criminal complaint against the petitioner is totally
abuse of process of law. In Sharad Kumar Sanghi Vs Sangit Rane, (2015) 12 SCC 781, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court at para 11 observed that;
"11. In the case at hand as the complainant's initial statement would reflect, the
allegations are against the Company, the Company has not been made a party and,
therefore, the allegations are restricted to the Managing Director. As we have noted
earlier, allegations are vague and in fact, principally the allegations are against
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 6
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
Managing Director. When a company has not been arrayed as a party, no proceeding
can be initiated against it even where vicarious liability is fastened under certain
statues. ..."
In this situation it is observed that except for stating that the petitioner had lied to the complainant
no details have been mentioned either in the complaint or in the statement given by the said two
witnesses made before the learned CJM, Imphal East to attract the criminal jurisdiction for taking
cognizance simply recording the statement of the complainant is not enough but there must be some
concrete satisfaction of the Court concerned for taking cognizance.
In the circumstances issuance of warrants either bailable or non-bailable with proper scrutiny of
mind. The Hon'ble Supreme Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 10 Court in Inder Mohan Goswami and
another v. State of Uttarachal and others, (2007) 12 SCC 1 at para 54 observed that;
"54. As far as possible, if the court is of the opinion that a summon will suffice in
getting the appearance of the accused in court, the summon or the bailable warrants
should be preferred. The warrants with bailable or non-bailable should never be
issued without proper scrunity of facts and complete application of mind, due to the
extremely serious consequences and ramifications which ensue on issuance of
warrants. The court must very carefully examine whether the criminal complaint or
FIR has not been filed with an oblique motive."
In the present case the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate after taking cognizance issued warrant of
arrest against the petitioner and co-accused even though the complainant failed to put forth its case
in proper perspective and involved in the said agreement has not been made a party. In the facts and
circumstances the CJM, Imphal East ought not to have issued the warrant of arrest.
[18] On further perusal of the materials placed before me, it is evident that the learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East when taking cognizance examined two witness namely Shaik
Moulali (Complainant) and Prem Kshetrimayum, it is seen and evident that both the witnesses
didn't mentioned about the mischief and wrongdoing of the petitioner in the execution of delivery of
the materials mentioned in the agreement but only about the company.
[19] Further as per the submissions made by both the learned counsels the relationship between the
petitioners' company and respondents' company are doing business for more than a decade the
respondent failed to mention the non-execution of agreement between the parties prior to the
present agreement. This shows the trust between the two companies in execution of their business.
[20] Out of the three shotcrete machines order, the petitioner company have already supplied one
machine, in the process it is found that the petitioner have already resigned from the company Cril.
Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 11 and his resignation was already accepted by the company. Since, the
allegation of the complainant was solely on the company not the petitioner individually the
complainant atleast should made the petitioners' company a party in the complaint case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 7
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
[21] On further perusal of the rival contention made by the parties and with the materials placed
before me, it is evident that the litigation if any it should be between the petitioners' company and
the respondents' company as the allegation against the petitioners' company is purely on account of
breach of contract between the two companies. In Sarabjit Kaur Vs Station of Punjab and Anr
(2023) 5 SCC 360, the Hon'ble Supreme Court at para 13 observed that;
"13. A breach of contract does not give rise to criminal procesution for cheating
unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right at the beginning of the
transaction. Merely on the allegation of failure to keep up promise will not be enough
to initiate criminal proceedings. From the facts available on record, it is evident that
Respondent 2 had improved his case ever since the first complaint was filed in which
there were no allegations against the appellant rather it was only against the property
dealers which was in subsequent complaints that the name of the appellant was
mentioned. On the first complaint, the only request was for return of the amount paid
by Respondent 2. When the offence was made out on the basis of the first complaint,
the second complaint was filed with improved version making allegations against the
appellant as well which was not there in the earlier complaint. The entire idea seems
to be to convert a civil dispute into criminal and put pressure on the appellant for
return of the amount allegedly paid. The criminal courts are not meant to be used for
settling scores or pressurize parties to settle civil disputes. Wherever ingredients of
criminal offences are made out, criminal courts have to take cognizance. The
complaint in question on the basis of which FIR was registered was filed nearly three
years after the last date fixed for registration of the sale deed. Allowing the
proceedings to continue would be an abuse of process of the Court."
[22] Learned counsel for the respondent as submitted above narrated/explained about the meaning
of cheating and submits that the petitioner cheated the respondents' company by not delivering the
agreed material to the respondents' company, but it is admitted position of fact that the petitioner is
the EX-Vice President of MEL and the said agreement was executed by the petitioners' company and
the respondent and subsequent development between the two Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 12
companies, it is the company answerable to the subsequent development post the said agreement, as
such, there is no question of cheating committed by the petitioner.
In Vijay Kumar Ghai Vs State of W.B (2022) 7 SCC 124, the Hon'ble Supreme Court at para no. 35 to
39 observed that;
"35. To establish the offence of cheating in inducing the delivery of property, the
following ingredients need to be proved:
i) The representation made by the person was false.
ii) The accused had prior knowledge that the representation he made was false.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 8
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
iii) The accused made false representation with dishonest intention in order to
deceive the person to whom it was made.
iv) The act where the accused induced the person to deliver the property or to
perform or to abstain from any act which the person would have not done or had
otherwise committed. "
36. As observed and held by this Court in R.K. Vijayasarathy Vs. Sudha Seetharam, the ingredients
to constitute an offence under Section 420 are as follows:
i) a person must commit the offence of cheating under Section 415; and
ii) the person cheated must be dishonestly induced to:
a) Deliver property to any person; or
b) Make, alter or destroy valuable security or anything signed or sealed and capable
of being converted into valuable security. Thus, cheating is an essential ingredient for
an act to constitute an offence under Section 420 IPC.
37. The following observation made by this Court in Uma Shankar Gopalika v. State of Bihar with
almost similar facts and circumstances may be relevant to note at this stage: (SCC pp. 338-39. paras
6-7) "6. Now the question to be examined by us is as to whether on the facts disclosed in the petition
of the complaint any criminal offence whatsoever is made out much less offences under Sections
420/120- B IPC. The only allegation in the complaint petition against the accused persons is that
they assured the complainant that when they receive the insurance claim amounting to Rs 4,20,000,
they would pay a sum of Rs 2,60,000 to the complainant out of that but the same has never been
paid.... It was pointed out on behalf of the complainant that the accused fraudulently persuaded the
complainant to agree so that the accused persons may take steps for moving the consumer forum in
relation to the claim of Rs 4,20,000. It is well settled that every breach of contract would not give
rise to an offence of cheating and only in those cases breach of contract would amount to cheating
where there was any deception played at the very inception. If the intention to cheat has developed
later on the same Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 13 cannot amount to cheating. In the present case,
it has nowhere been stated that at the very inception that there was intention on behalf of the
accused persons to cheat which is a condition precedent for an offence under Section 420 IPC.
7. In our view petition of complaint does not disclose any criminal offence at all much less any
offence either under Section 420 or Section 120-B IPC and the present case is a case of purely civil
dispute between the parties for which remedy lies before a civil court by filing a properly constituted
suit. In our opinion, in view of these facts allowing the police investigation to continue would
amount to an abuse of the process of court and to prevent the same it was just and expedient for the
High Court to quash the same by exercising the powers under Section 482 CrPC which it has
erroneously refused."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 9
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
38. There can be no doubt that a mere breach of contract is not in itself a criminal offence and gives
rise to the civil liability of damages. However, as held by this Court in Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma
v. State of Bihar, the distinction between mere breach of contract and cheating, which is criminal
offence, is a fine one. While breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating,
fraudulent or dishonest intention is the basis of the offence of cheating. In the case at hand,
complaint filed by Respondent 2 does not disclose dishonest or fraudulent intention of the
appellants.
39. In Vesa Holdings (P) Ltd. v. State of Kerala, this Court made the following observation: (SCC pp.
297-98, para 13) "13. It is true that a given set of facts may make out a civil wrong as also a criminal
offence and only because a civil remedy may be available to the complainant that itself cannot be
ground to quash a criminal proceeding. The real test is whether the allegations in the complaint
disclose the criminal offence of cheating or not. In the present case, there is nothing to show that at
the very inception there was any intention on behalf of the accused persons to cheat which is a
condition precedent for an offence under Section 420 IPC. In our view, the complaint does not
disclose any criminal offence at all. Criminal proceedings should not be encouraged when it is found
to be mala fide or otherwise an abuse of the process of the court. The superior courts while
exercising this power should also strive to serve the ends of justice. In our opinion, in view of these
facts allowing the police investigation to continue would amount to an abuse of the process of the
court and the High Court committed an error in refusing to exercise the power under Section 482
CrPC to quash the proceedings."
[23] For the aforesaid reasons and in view of the findings of the Hon'ble Supreme Court the facts
and circumstances of the present case and it is observed that the complaint made against the
petitioner, the complainant failed to make out the offence of cheating against the petitioner.
[24] Since there is no merit in taking cognizance of the offence against the petitioner by the Learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate and in view of the liquidation complaint case of the respondent having
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 14 become infructuous, the decisions relied upon by the
respondent/complainant are not applicable to its case. In any event, the allegations levelled by the
respondent in its complaint case can only be ascertained on the basis of the evidence and documents
by a Civil Court of the competent jurisdiction and not by way of criminal complaint.
[25] Even if all the allegations made in the complaint are taken to be correct, the case for
prosecution under Sections 417, 419, 420 and 34 IPC is not made out against the petitioner herein.
To prevent abuse of the process of the Court and to secure the ends of justice, it becomes imperative
to quash the Criminal Complaint Case No.55 of 2014 pending on the file of the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Imphal East and any further proceedings emanating therefrom in respect of the
petitioner.
[26] In the result,
(a) this Cril. Petition No.12 of 2014 is allowed;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 10
Sudeepthakore vs M/S Coastal Projects Limited on 14 June, 2024
(b) the Criminal Complaint Case No.55 of 2014 pending on the file of the Learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Imphal East and any further proceedings emanating therefrom in respect of the
petitioner is quashed. No costs.
[27] Send an extract copy of this order to the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal East,
Manipur.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
Lucy
Cril. Petn. No. 12 of 2014 Page 15
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104943345/ 11
