Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The
Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
Author: Manish Mathur
Bench: Manish Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Court No. - 13 Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:34988 A.F.R.
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 447 of 2025
Applicant :- Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. Ministry Of Home And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Pradeep Kumar,Adarsh Tripathi,Prabhat Kumar Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Manish Mathur,J.
1. Heard Mr. Prabhat Kumar Mishra learned counsel for applicant and Dr. V.K. Singh learned
Government Advocate assisted by Mr. Nikhil Singh learned Additional Government Advocate on
behalf of State. For better appreciation of controversy this Court has also heard Mr. S.K.Singh, Mr.
Atul Verma, Mr. Gaurav Mehrotra, Mr. Nadeem Murtza and Mr. Dilip Kumar Pandey, Advocates as
learned Amicus Curiae.
2. First Anticipatory bail application has been filed with regard to Section 22(c) of the NDPS Act
1985 registered in Police Station Kotwali, District Barabanki.
3. Earlier with regard to same case crime number, anticipatory bail had been granted to the
applicant under Sections 420, 467, 468 and 471 IPC in anticipatory bail application No. 1713 of
2024. The present anticipatory bail application has been filed with regard to added Section 22(c) of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 1
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
the NDPS Act.
4. At the very outset, learned counsel for State has raised a preliminary objection regarding
maintainability of anticipatory bail application in view of the fact that it pertains to NDPS Act and
therefore is not maintainable in terms of Section 438(6) Cr.P.C. It is submitted that earlier the
provisions of Section 438 Cr.P.C. pertaining to anticipatory bail were omitted for the State of U.P. by
means of U.P. Act No.16 of 1976 and were re-incorporated by means of U.P. Act No. 4 of 2019. It is
submitted that the aforesaid provisions of anticipatory bail were subject to embargo under Section
438(6) which clearly indicated that provisions of anticipatory bail would not be applicable in case of
NDPS Act. It is submitted that although Cr.P.C. has subsequently been repealed by the Bhartiya
Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita 2023, the provisions incorporated by means of amendment in Section 438
Cr.P.C. would continue in the same terms in view of Section 531(2)(b) of BNSS. Learned counsel has
also adverted to provisions of Sections 6, 6-A, 8 and 24 of the General Clauses Act 1897 to
substantiate his submission that in case where a Central Act has been amended by State legislature
by means of an enactment and has subsequently been granted assent by the President of India, the
State enactment would continue to govern the field in terms of Article 254(2) of the Constitution of
India and in such a situation the Repeal of Central Act would be immaterial. Learned counsel has
specifically emphasized upon Section 6-A of General Clauses Act to substantiate his pleading that
since different intention appears, the Repeal of Central Act would not affect the continuance of
amendment of Central Act which was made by the state enactment in the year 2019. Learned
counsel has also placed reliance on Section 2(p) BNSS 2023 to submit that the definition of
'notification' under Section 2(p) BNSS would be a notification published in the official gazette which
is in turn defined in Section 3(39) of the General Clauses Act. It is therefore submitted that the term
of 'notification' as appearing in Section 531(2)(b) BNSS would construe a saving clause of the
amendment made in the year 2019 by the state amendment in Section 438 Cr.P.C.
5. Learned counsel has placed reliance on following case laws:-
State of Punjab versus Harnek Singh (2002) 3 SCC 481; Vinay Kumar Pandey versus
State of U.P. and others, decided by Division Bench of this Court in Criminal Misc.
Writ Petition No. 13827 of 2024; Jitendra Pratap Singh versus State of U.P. a
Division Bench of this Court in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application No. 144
of 2024.
6. Learned counsel appearing for applicant and learned Amicus Curiae have refuted submissions
advanced by learned counsel for State with submission that it is in fact proviso to Article 254(2) of
the Constitution of India which would govern the field and not provisions of the General Clauses Act
which have been relied upon by learned Government Advocate. It is submitted that in the present
case, it is Section 6 of the General Clauses Act which would be applicable.
7. It has been further submitted that Section 531(2)(b) does not indicate any saving clause
pertaining to legislative power of the State Government and indicates only administrative orders
which do not come within realm of enactment in terms of Article 246 of the Constitution of India
and therefore repeal of the Central Act would in fact mean to be a repeal which obliterates the entire
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 2
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
Act including any State amendment made therein which would also include the State enactment
incorporated in Section 438 by the State enactment in the year 2019. Learned counsel has also
placed reliance on following judgments:-
State of U.P. versus Hirendra Pal Singh (2011) 5 SCC 305; State of Punjab versus
Mohar Singh (1954) 2 SCC 483; Manphul Singh Sharma versus Ahmadi Begum,
(1994) 5 SCC 456; Gajraj Singh and others versus State Transport Appellate Tribunal
and Others (1997) 1 SCC 650; Zaver Bhai Amaidas versus State of Bombay (1954) 2
SCC 345;Naeem Bano alias Gaindo versus Mohd Rahees & another, special leave
petition (c) No. 16460 of 2023
8. Upon consideration of submissions advanced by learned counsel for parties the following
questions arise for consideration:-
(i) Whether the provisions of Section 531(2)(b) BNSS can be considered to be a clause
saving provisions of U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 ?.
(ii) Whether the re-enactment of Section 438 Cr.P.C. as 482 BNSS as incorporated by
means of U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 would be saved in terms of Sections 6, 6-A, 8 and 24
of General Clauses Act ?
Question No.1
9. With regard to aforesaid aspect, provisions of Section 531(2)(b) BNSS are required to be
examined and are as follows:-
"(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms
provided by rules, local jurisdictions defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and
appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, made under the said
Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Sanhita,
shall be deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, specified,
defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of this Sanhita;
10. A perusal of aforesaid provision indicates the repeal and savings clause to the effect that all
notifications published etc. defining jurisdictions, sentences passed which were enforced
immediately before commencement of the Sanhita would be deemed to have been published, issued,
conferred, specified, defined, passed or made under the corresponding provisions of the Sanhita.
11. It is relevant that learned Government Advocate has placed specific reliance on the word
'notification published' to submit that U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 was in the nature of a notification in
terms of Section 2(p) BNSS and therefore would be saved in terms of Section 531(2)(b) BNSS. It is
further submitted that since the aforesaid Act was published in the official gazetted in terms of
Section 3(39) of the General Clauses Act, the said provision would specifically apply.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 3
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
12. It is however a relevant factor that U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 was promulgated under Article 246 of
the Constitution of India but does not indicate any specific date from which it would come into
effect. For the said purpose, it would be relevant to advert to Section 5 of the General Clauses Act
which is as follows:-
"5. Coming into operation of enactments-
.[(1) Where any Central Act is not expressed to come into operation on a particular
day, then it shall come into operation on the day on which it receives the assent,-
(a) in the case of a Central Act made before the commencement of the Constitution,
of the Governor-General, and
(b) in the case of an Act of Parliament, of the President.][* * * *] (3) Unless the
contrary is expressed, a 3[Central Act] or Regulation shall be construed as coming
into operation immediately on the expiration of the day preceding its
commencement."
13. In terms of aforesaid, the said U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 came into effect from the date it received
assent from the President of India and not from the date it was notified in the official gazette. In the
considered opinion of this Court, there is substantial difference in an enactment by State Legislature
in terms of Article 246 of Constitution of India and a notification which would require to be effective
from the date it is notified in the official gazette. The primary difference being that an enactment in
terms of Section 5 of General Clauses Act would come into effect from the date it received assent
either from the President of India or Governor of State respectively with its notification in the
official gazette being immaterial unless specifically indicated. It is only in case of specific orders
issued by the Central or State Government in terms of powers conferred by any statute which would
come within the term of a notification, which would be effective only from the date it is notified in
the official gazette, and would thus come within realm of administrative order or at best,
subordinate legislation.
14. In such circumstances, this Court is unable to appreciate the submission of learned Government
Advocate that U.P. Act No. 4 of 2019 would come within definition of notification and would
therefore be saved.
15. The aforesaid aspect is more so in view of Section 3(19) of the General Clauses Act which defines
an enactment to include a regulation and is therefore quite distinct from a notification which has
clearly not been made a part of 'enactment'. The difference between a legislation and a notification
would be quite apparent from a perusal of Article 246 of Constitution of India whereunder powers
have been conferred for making laws in terms of 7th Schedule to the Constitution. By no stretch of
imagination can it be said that the laws promulgated in terms of Article 246 of the Constitution of
India would come within purview of a notification and not an enactment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 4
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
16. Distinction between an enactment and a notification can also be examined from the aspect that
all enactments may require to be notified but all notifications do not come within purview of an
enactment. The said concept can be readily explained in the manner that an enactment is referable
to constitutional power exercised under Article 246 of the Constitution of India with subordinate
legislation being any rule or regulation issued or notified in terms of power conferred by such
statute. The scope of such an enactment or subordinate legislation is directly referable either to the
Constitution of India or to the enactment under which such power is derived whereas a notification
by its very nature can be issued by any authority, not necessarily being a Parliament or Legislature,
to fill any void which is not covered either by an enactment or subordinate legislation. Such an order
which can be passed by administrative authorities in exercise of executive power do not require any
imprimatur of Parliament or Legislature.
17. The concept is also explained by Supreme Court in the case of State of Tamil Nadu versus P.
Krishnamurti and others (2006) 4 SCC 517 in the following manner:-
"23. In Union of India v. Cynamide India Ltd. [(1987) 2 SCC 720] this Court
differentiated between legislative acts and non-legislative acts thus: (SCC pp. 735-36,
para 7) "The distinction between the two has usually been expressed as 'one between
the general and the particular'. 'A legislative act is the creation and promulgation of a
general rule of conduct without reference to particular cases; an administrative act is
the making and issue of a specific direction or the application of a general rule to a
particular case in accordance with the requirements of policy'. 'Legislation is the
process of formulating a general rule of conduct without reference to particular cases
and usually operating in future; administration is the process of performing
particular acts, of issuing particular orders or of making decisions which apply
general rules to particular cases.' It has also been said: 'Rule-making is normally
directed toward the formulation of requirements having a general application to all
members of a broadly identifiable class' while, 'an adjudication, on the other hand,
applies to specific individuals or situations'. But, this is only a broad distinction, not
necessarily always true. Administration and administrative adjudication may also be
of general application and there may be legislation of particular application only.
That is not ruled out. Again, adjudication determines past and present facts and
declares rights and liabilities while legislation indicates the future course of action.
Adjudication is determinative of the past and the present while legislation is
indicative of the future. The object of the rule, the reach of its application, the rights
and obligations arising out of it, its intended effect on past, present and future events,
its form, the manner of its promulgation are some factors which may help in drawing
the line between legislative and non-legislative acts."
18. It is thus evident that notifications can be issued even by administrative authorities in exercise of
their executive power whereas enactments can be promulgated only in terms of powers conferred by
the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 5
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
19. In view thereof, in the considered opinion of this Court, since Section 531 BNSS not indicating
any terminology pertaining to legislative enactments, the provisions of Section 531(2)(b) BNSS can
not be termed to be a saving clause with regard to U.P. Act No.4 of 2019.
20. It is also a relevant fact that for the purposes of proper examination of provisions of Section 531
BNSS, the provision in its entirety is required to be examined and not a few sentences incorporated
therein. In terms of principles of interpretation of statute, the aspect of the principle 'ejusdem
generis' has particular application along with the principle of 'noscitur a sociis' which has been
explained by Supreme Court in the case of Maharashtra University of Health Sciences versus
Satchikitsa Prasarak Mandal (2010) 3 SCC 786 in the following terms:-
" 27. The Latin expression "ejusdem generis" which means "of the same kind or
nature" is a principle of construction, meaning thereby when general words in a
statutory text are flanked by restricted words, the meaning of the general words are
taken to be restricted by implication with the meaning of the restricted words. This is
a principle which arises "from the linguistic implication by which words having
literally a wide meaning (when taken in isolation) are treated as reduced in scope by
the verbal context". It may be regarded as an instance of ellipsis, or reliance on
implication. This principle is presumed to apply unless there is some contrary
indication [see Glanville Williams, The Origins and Logical Implications of the
Ejusdem Generis Rule, 7 Conv (NS) 119].
28. This ejusdem generis principle is a facet of the principle of noscitur a sociis. The
Latin maxim noscitur a sociis contemplates that a statutory term is recognised by its
associated words. The Latin word "sociis" means "society". Therefore, when general
words are juxtaposed with specific words, general words cannot be read in isolation.
Their colour and their contents are to be derived from their context. (See similar
observations of Viscount Simonds in Attorney General v. Prince Ernest Augustus of
Hanover [1957 AC 436 : (1957) 2 WLR 1 : (1957) 1 All ER 49 (HL)] , AC at p. 461.)"
21. Upon applicability of aforesaid judgment in the present facts and circumstances, it is a relevant
fact that general words in a section of enactment can not be read in isolation but their contents are
required to be defined from their context.
22. In the present case the provisions of Section 531(2)(b) BNSS clearly refers to notifications or
proclamations issued whereby powers were conferred, local jurisdictions were defined, sentences
were passed and orders of appointments were made under the Code. Evidently Section 531(2)(b)
pertains only to procedural aspect which were indicated under Cr.P.C. and were required to be
deemed to be made under corresponding provisions of the Sanhita. The said provision can not be
construed to be a saving clause for continuation of specific prohibition with regard to
maintainability of legal remedies available to an accused before the courts of law since the said
aspect would not come within any of the terms in the general context indicated under Section 531(2)
(b) BNSS.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 6
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
23. With regard to the aspect of notification viz-a-viz legislative eneactment, learned Government
advocate has placed reliance on the judgment in the case of State of Punjab versus Harnek Singh
(2002) 3 SCC 481.
24. However a bare perusal of the aforesaid judgment will make it evident that the same is
inapplicable in present facts and circumstances since in the said case, dispute pertained to
notification issued by the State Government in exercise of powers conferred upon it under section
5(A) of the Prevention of Corporation Act 1947. It is therefore evident that the aspect engaging
attention of Supreme Court actually pertained to power conferred upon the State Government under
legislative enactment and not to the enactment itself.
25. Similarly in the case of Vinay Kumar Pandey versus State of U.P. and others, decided by Division
Bench of this Court in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 13827 of 2024, the aspect again was power
exericsed by the State Government under Section 10 of the Criminal Law (Amendmnent) Act 1932.
Evidently the aforesaid case also does not lay down any proposition of law that a notification issued
under legislative enactment itself can be deemed to be a legislative enactment.
26. The case of Jitendra Pratap Singh versus State of U.P. a Division Bench of this Court in Criminal
Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application No. 144 of 2024 has merely enunciated the law that when a
words of statute are clear and unambiguous, courts must give effect to the legislative intent and
literal interpretation. Obviously the aforesaid proposition of law is required to be followed in the
circumstances indicated therein but again is not a law for the proposition that a notification issued
by the State exercising statutory powers itself can be considered to be at par with statute.
27. The aforesaid question therefore is answered negatively against the State.
Question No.2
28. With regard to aforesaid question, it would be necessary to advert to Section 438 Cr.P.C. as
included by U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 and 482 BNSS 2023 which are as follows:-
Section 438 Cr.P.C.
Section 482 BNSS, 2023 "438. Direction for grant bail to person apprehending
arrest.- [(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on
accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High
Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of
such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into
consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely-
(i)the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii)the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognisable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 7
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
offence;
(iii)the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv)where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the
applicant by having him so arrested, either reject the application forthwith or issue
an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail:
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has
not passed any interim order under this sub-Section or has rejected the application
for grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer incharge of a police station
to arrest, without warrant, the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended
in such application.
(2) Where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, considers it
expedient issue an interim order to grant anticipatory bail under sub-section (1), the
Court shall indicate herein the date, on which the application for grant of anticipatory
bail shall be finally heard for passing an order thereon, as the Court may deem fit,
arid if the Court passes any order granting anticipatory bail, such order shall include
inter alia the following conditions, namely-
(1) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer,
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
Court;and
(iv) such other conditions as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of Section 437, as
if the bail were granted under that section.
Explanation. The final order made on an application for direction under sub-section (1); shall not be
construed as an interlocutory order for the purpose of this Code.
(3) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1), it shall forthwith cause a notice
being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a reasonable
opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.
(4) On the date indicated in the interim order under sub-section (2), the Court shall hear Puplic
Prosecutor and the applicant and after due consideration of their contentions, it may confirm,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 8
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
modify or cancel the interim order.
(5) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall finally dispose of an application
for grant of anticipatory bail under sub-section (1), within thirty days of the date of application;
(6) Provisions of this section shall not be applicable,-
(a) to the offences arising out of,-
(i) the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967;
(ii) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985;
(iii) the Official Secret Act, 1923;
(iv) the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986.
(b) in the offences, in which death sentence can be awarded.
(7) If an application under this section has been made by any person to the High Court, no
application by the same person shall be entertained by the Court of Session." [Vide U.P. Act No.4 of
2019, S. 2 (Received the assent of the President on 1-6-2019 and published in the U.P. Gazette,
Extra., Part I, Section (Ka), dated 6.6.2019).] "482. Direction for grant of bail to person
apprehending arrest.-
(1)When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having
committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a
direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the event of such
arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2)When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under sub-section (1), it may
include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may
think fit, including-
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as
and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing
such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 9
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of section 480, as if the bail were
granted under that section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station on
such accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of
such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such
offence decides that a warrant should be issued in the first instance against that person, he shall
issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court under sub-section (1).
(4)Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of
having committed an offence under section 65 and sub-section (2) of section 70 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023."
29. It is a relevant fact that provision of anticipatory bail was omitted for the State of U.P. by Act
No.16 of 1976 and has thereafter been reincorporated by means of U.P. Act No. 4 of 2019.
30. The aforesaid State amendment came into effect once it received the assent of President of India
but subsequently, the entire Cr.P.C. was repealed with advent of BNSS 2023 with effect from Ist
July, 2024.
31. At the very outset, difference in provisions of Section 438 as applicable in the State of U.P. with
that of Section 482 BNSS will require consideration.
32. From a bare perusal thereof, it is evident that there is considerable difference in the provisions
of anticipatory bail as were applicable in State of U.P. prior to the advent of BNSS and subsequent
thereto. The primary difference in both the provisions apart from the prohibitions indicated in
Section 438(6) Cr.P.C. is that the factors indicated for grant of anticipatory bail under Section
438(1) Cr.P.C. are conspicuously absent under Section 482 BNSS. The proviso to Section 438(1)
Cr.P.C. is also missing while provisions of Section 438(3) and (4) also do not find any place under
newly incorporated Section 482 BNSS.
33. It is therefore evident that substantial change has been made under Section 482 BNSS
pertaining to grant of anticipatory bail after the advent of BNSS 2023.
34. With regard to aforesaid repeal of Cr.P.C. and incorporation of new provision for anticipatory
bail, learned Government Advocate has placed specific reliance upon Sections 6, 6A, 8 and 24 of the
General Clauses Act which are as follows:-
"6. Effect of repeal.-
Where this Act, or any 3[Central Act] or Regulation made after the commencement of
this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or hereafter to be made, then, unless a
different intention appears, the repeal shall not-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 10
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes
effect;or
(b)affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done
or suffered thereunder; or
(c)affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred
under any enactment so repealed; or
(d)affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence
committed against any enactment so repealed; or
(e)affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, mobligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation
had not been passed.
6A Repeal of Act making textual amendment in Act or Regulation.- Where any Central Act or
Regulation made after the commencement of this Act repeals any enactment by which the text of
any Central Act or Regulation was amended by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any
matter, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any
such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.
8. Construction of references to repealed enactments.-
2[(1)] Where this Act, or any 2[Central Act] or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act,
repeals and re-enacts, with or without modification, any provision of a former enactment, then
references in any other enactment or in any instrument to the provision so repealed shall, unless a
different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision so re-enacted.
3[(2)] 4[Where before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, any Act of Parliament of the United
Kingdom repealed and re-enacted], with or without modification, any provision of a former
enactment, then references in any [Central Act] or in any Regulation or instrument to the provision
so repealed shall, unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision so
re-enacted.]
24. Continuation of orders, etc., issued under enactments repealed and re-enacted.- Where any
3[Central Act] or Regulation, is, after the commencement of this Act, repealed and re-enacted with
or without modification, then, unless it is otherwise expressly provided any 4[appointment,
notification] order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law 4[made or] issued under the repealed Act or
Regulation, shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions re-enacted, continue in force,
and be deemed to have been 4[made or] issued under the provisions so re-enacted, unless and until
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 11
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
it is superseded by any 4[appointment notification,] order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law, 4[made
or] issued under the provisions so re-enacted 5[and when any 3[Central Act] or Regulation, which,
by a notification under section 5 or 5A of the 6 Scheduled Districts Act, 1874, (14 of 1874) or any like
law, has been extended to any local area, has, by a subsequent notification, been withdrawn from the
re-extended to such area or any part thereof, the provisions of such Act or Regulation shall be
deemed to have been repealed and re-enacted in such area or part within the meaning of this
section].
35. A perusal of the aforesaid sections makes it evident that apart from Section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, none of the other sections would be applicable in such circumstances as the present
one. Section 6-A of the Act would be applicable only in case where any Central Act or Regulation
repeals an enactment by which the text of any earlier Central Act or Regulation was amended. It is
therefore evident that Section 6-A would be applicable only in those cases where earlier Central Act
is kept intact and the subsequent Central Act or Regulation amends only the amendment made in
the earlier Central Act. The aforesaid section would have been applicable only in case the State
enactment was repealed while keeping provisions of Cr.P.C. as enacted by Parliament intact.
36. Similarly Section 8 of the General Clauses Act which appear to be pari materia with Section
531(2)(b) BNSS would be applicable only for the purposes of references to repealed enactments and
does not by any stretch of imagination be applicable for the purposes of saving the State enactment
as in the present case.
37. Section 24 of the General Clauses Act by its very nature also would not be applicable since it
pertains only to those aspects where any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye
law made or issued under repealed Act is not inconsistent with the provisions of enactment and
would continue in force. The aforesaid Section is therefore inapplicable in cases of re-enactment of
statute which may be inconsistent with the earlier enactment.
38. In the present case as has been observed herein above, there is considerable difference in
provisions of anticipatory bail as were amended by the U.P. Act No.4 of 2019 and the re-enacted
provisions of anticipatory bail under Section 482 BNSS.
39. In fact in such circumstances as the present one, it is Section 6 of the General Clauses Act which
would have applicability particularly in case different intention has been made apparent in the
re-enacted provisions after repeal of the earlier provision. The intention therefore to continue the
earlier provisions even after repeal have to be specifically indicated. Section 6(b) of the General
Clauses Act clearly pertains to repeal not affecting the previous operation of any enactment so
repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder.
40. The natural corollary of the said provision would be that for continued operation of any
enactment or any provision of such enactment so repealed would require specific intention in the
repealing enactment. Section 6(d) and (e) of General Clauses Act also indicates that for a legal
proceeding or remedy to continue even after repeal, a different intention in the subsequent
enactment is required. It is also relevant that under Section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act, only the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 12
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment is indicated. It naturally follows that any embargo upon any legal
proceeding or remedy imposed by the Amending Act would require specific intention indicated in
the subsequent enactment for its continuation. The said aspect has been dealt with by Supreme
Court in the case of State of U.P. versus Hirendra Pal Singh (2011) 5 SCC 305 in the following
manner:-
" 22. It is a settled legal proposition that whenever an Act is repealed, it must be
considered as if it had never existed. The object of repeal is to obliterate the Act from
the statutory books, except for certain purposes as provided under Section 6 of the
General Clauses Act, 1897. Repeal is not a matter of mere form but is of substance.
Therefore, on repeal, the earlier provisions stand obliterated/abrogated/wiped out
wholly i.e. pro tanto repeal (vide Dagi Ram Pindi Lall v. Trilok Chand Jain [(1992) 2
SCC 13 : AIR 1992 SC 990] ; Gajraj Singh v. STAT [(1997) 1 SCC 650 : AIR 1997 SC
412] ; Property Owners' Assn. v. State of Maharashtra [(2001) 4 SCC 455 : AIR 2001
SC 1668] and Mohan Raj v. Dimbeswari Saikia [(2007) 15 SCC 115 : (2010) 2 SCC
(Cri) 782 : AIR 2007 SC 232] )."
41. The aspect of a specific intention expressed in the subsequent enactment to keep alive provisions
of repealed enactment in terms of section 6 has been dealt with by Supreme Court in the case of
State of Punjab versus Mohar Singh (1954) 2 SCC 483 in following manner:-
"12. The High Court, in support of the view that it took, placed great reliance upon
certain observations of Sulaiman, C.J. in Danmal Parshotam Dass v. Babu Ram
Chhote Lal [Danmal Parshotam Dass v. Babu Ram Chhote Lal, 1935 SCC OnLine All
328 : AIR 1936 All 3] . The question raised in that case was whether a suit by an
unregistered firm against a third party, after coming into force of Section 69 of the
Partnership Act, would be barred by that section in spite of the saving clause
contained in Section 74(b) of the Act. The Chief Justice felt some doubts on the point
and was inclined to hold that Section 74(b) would operate to save the suit although
the right sought to be enforced by it had accrued prior to the commencement of the
Act; but eventually he agreed with his colleague and held that Section 69 would bar
the suit. While discussing the provision of Section 74(2) of the Partnership Act, in
course of his judgment, the learned Chief Justice referred by way of analogy to
Section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act and observed as follows (at p. 7):
"It seems that Section 6(e) would apply to those cases only where a previous law has
been simply repealed and there is no fresh legislation to take its place. Where an old
law has been merely repealed, then the repeal would not affect any previous right
acquired nor would it even affect a suit instituted subsequently in respect of a right,
previously so acquired. But where there is a new law which not only repeals the old
law, but is substituted in place of the old law, Section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act
is not applicable, and we would have to fall back on the provisions of the new Act
itself."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 13
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
These observations could not undoubtedly rank higher than mere "obiter dictum" for they were not
at all necessary for purposes of the case, though undoubtedly they are entitled to great respect. In
agreement with this dictum of Sulaiman, C.J., the High Court of Punjab, in its judgment in the
present case, has observed that where there is a simple repeal and the legislature has either not
given its thought to the matter of prosecuting old offenders, or a provision dealing with that
question has been inadvertently omitted, Section 6 of the General Clauses Act will undoubtedly be
attracted.
13. But no such inadvertence can be presumed where there has been a fresh legislation on the
subject and if the new Act does not deal with the matter, it may be presumed that the legislature did
not deem it fit to keep alive the liability incurred under the old Act. In our opinion the approach of
the High Court to the question is not quite correct. Whenever there is a repeal of an enactment, the
consequences laid down in Section 6 of the General Clauses Act will follow unless, as the section
itself says, a different intention appears. In the case of a simple repeal there is scarcely any room for
expression of a contrary opinion. But when the repeal is followed by fresh legislation on the same
subject we would undoubtedly have to look to the provisions of the new Act, but only for the purpose
of determining whether they indicate a different intention."
42. The aforesaid judgment would therefore be a proposition of law to the effect that in case of
repeal of an enactment, consequences laid down in Section 6 of the General Clauses Act will follow,
unless a different intention appears. In case the new legislation manifests an intention incompatible
with or contrary to the provisions of earlier section, such incompatibility would have to be
ascertained in order to indicate the saving clause. The said judgment has thereafter been followed
with approval in the case of Manphul Singh Sharma versus Ahmadi Begum, (1994) 5 SCC 456.
43. In the case of Gajraj Singh and others versus State Transport Appellate Tribunal and Others
(1997) 1 SCC 650, Hon'ble Supreme Court has also reiterated the said aspect with regard to Section
6 of General Clauses Act in the following manner:-
"24. When there is a repeal and simultaneous re-enactment, Section 6 of the GC Act
would apply to such a case unless contrary intention can be gathered from the
repealing Act. Section 6 would be applicable in such cases unless the new legislation
manifests intention inconsistent with or contrary to the application of the section.
Such incompatibility would have to be ascertained from all relevant provisions of the
new Act. Therefore, when the repeal is followed by a fresh legislation on the same
subject, the Court would undoubtedly have to look to the provisions of the new Act
only for the purpose of determining whether the new Act indicates different
intention. The object of repeal and re-enactment is to obliterate the Repealed Act and
to get rid of certain obsolete matters.
xxx xxxx xxxx
31. In Cardinal Rules of Legal Interpretation (3rd Edn.) by Randall, A.E., 1924, it is
stated at pp. 531-32 thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 14
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
"Their lordships ... conceive that, in dealing with a statute which professes merely to
repeal a former statute of limited operation, and to re-enact its provisions in an
amended form, they are not necessarily to presume an intention to extend the
operation of those provisions to classes of persons not previously subject to them,
unless the contrary is shown; but that they are to determine on a fair construction of
the whole statute, considered with reference to the surrounding circumstances,
whether such an intention existed. Brown v. McLachlan [(1872) LR 4 PC 543 : 42 LJ
PC 18] PC at p. 550 : LJPC at p. 23, Sir W. Colville, delivering the judgment of the
Judicial Committee.
'Where you have a repeal, and you have also a saving clause, you have to consider
whether the substituted enactment contains anything incompatible with the
previously existing enactment. The question is, Aye or No, is there incompatibility
between the two? And in those cases the Judges, in holding that there was a saving
clause large enough to annul the repeal, said that you must see whether the true
effect was to substitute something incompatible with the enactment in the Act
repealed; and that if you found something in the repealing Act incompatible with the
general enactments in the repealed Act, then you must treat the jurisdiction under
the repealed Act as pro tanto wiped out. That is settled by the cases of Busfield, In
re [(1886) 32 Ch D 123 : 55 LJ Ch 467] and Hume v. Somerton [(1890) 25 QBD 239 :
59 LJQB 420] .' R., In re [(1906) 1 Ch 730 : 75 LJ Ch 421] , Ch at p. 736 : LJ Ch at p.
423, Collins, M.R."
44. The aspect of applicability of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act is also required to be
examined with regard to applicability of proviso to Article 254(2) of the Constitution of India which
is as follows:-
"254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the
Legislatures of States-
(1) If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to
any provision of an existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by
Parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such
State, or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State [***] with respect to one of the
matters enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to the
provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing law with respect to
that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such State shall, if it has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, prevail in
that State:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 15
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from enacting at any
time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding to, amending,
varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of the State."
45. The said proviso to Article 254(2) is also indicative of the fact that even in case a State Act made
subsequent to the Central Act receives assent from the President and in terms thereof prevails in
that State, the Parliament would be within its legislative competence to enact a subsequent law
adding to, amending, verying or repealing the law so made by State Legislature. The aforesaid aspect
has been dealt by Supreme Court in the case of Zaver Bhai Amaidas versus State of Bombay (1954) 2
SCC 345 in the following manner:-
"15. Bavdekar, J., who came to the contrary conclusion observed, and quite correctly,
that to establish repugnancy under Section 107(2) of the Government of India Act, it
was not necessary that one legislation should say "do" what the other legislation says
"don't", and that repugnancy might result when both the legislations covered the
same field. But he took the view that the question of enhanced penalty under Act 36
of 1947 was a matter different from that of punishment under the Essential Supplies
(Temporary Powers) Act, and as there was legislation in respect of enhanced penalty
only when the offence was possession of foodstuffs, in excess of twice the prescribed
quantity, the subject-matter of Act 36 of 1947 remained untouched by Act 52 of 1950
in respect of other matters. In other words, he considered that the question of
enhanced punishment under Act 36 of 1947 was a matter different from that of mere
punishment under the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act and its
amendments; and in this, with respect, he fell into an error. The question of
punishment for contravention of orders under the Essential Supplies (Temporary
Powers) Act both under Act 36 of 1947 and under Act 52 of 1950 constitutes a single
subject-matter and cannot be split up in the manner suggested by the learned Judge.
On this principle rests the rule of construction relating to statutes that:
"when the punishment or penalty is altered in degree but not in kind, the later
provision would be considered as superseding the earlier one".
(Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 10th Edn., pp. 187 and 188). "It is a well-settled rule of
construction", observed Goddard, J. in Smith v. Benabo [Smith v. Benabo, (1937) 1 KB 518 (DC)] .
"that if a later statute again describes an offence created by a previous one, and
imposes a different punishment, or varies the procedure, the earlier statute is
repealed by the later statute : see Michell v. Brown [Michell v. Brown, (1858) 1 El & El
267 at p. 274 : 120 ER 909] , per Lord Campbell". (KB p. 525)
16. It is true, as already pointed out, that on a question under Article 254(1) whether
an Act of Parliament prevails against a law of the State, no question of repeal arises;
but the principle on which the rule of implied repeal rests, namely, that if the
subject-matter of the later legislation is identical with that of the earlier, so that they
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 16
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
cannot both stand together, then the earlier is repealed by the later enactment, will be
equally applicable to a question under Article 254(2) whether the further legislation
by Parliament is in respect of the same matter as that of the State law. We must
accordingly hold that Section 2 of Bombay Act 36 of 1947 cannot prevail as against
Section 7 of Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act 24 of 1946 as amended by
Act 52 of 1950."
46. The same aspect has recently again been considered in the case of Naeem Bano alias Gaindo
versus Mohd Rahees & another, special leave petition (c) No. 16460 of 2023 in the following
manner:-
" 9.1 Further, in Gauri Shankar Gaur vs. State of UP, [1993] Supp.1 SCR 667, this
Court held as follows:
"An exception has been engrafted to this rule by Cl.2 thereof, namely, if the state law
has been reserved for consideration and the President gives assent to a State Law, it
will prevail, notwithstanding it repugnance to a earlier law made by the Union,
though both laws are dealing with concurrent subject occupying the same field but
operate in a collision course. The assent obtained from the President of the State Act
which is inconsistent with the Union Law prevails in that State and overrides the
provisions of the Union Law in its application to that State only. However, if the
Parliament, in exercising its power under proviso to Art. 254(2) makes a law adding,
amending or repealing the union law, predominance secured by the State law by the
assent of the President is taken away and the repugnant State law though it became
valid by virtue of President's assent, would be void either directly of by its repugnance
with respect to the same matter." [emphasis supplied] 9.2 The judgment of this Court
in Innoventive Industries Ltd. vs. ICICI Bank, [2017] 8 SCR 33 examined the case law
on 9 Article 254 and summarised the position of law. As regards the case at hand, the
following points are relevant:
50. The case law referred to above, therefore, yields the following propositions:
XXX
vi) Repugnancy may be direct in the sense that there is inconsistency in the actual
terms of the competing statutes and there is, therefore, a direct conflict between two
or more provisions of the competing statutes. In this sense, the inconsistency must be
clear and direct and be of such a nature as to bring the two Acts or parts thereof into
direct collision with each other, reaching a situation where it is impossible to obey the
one without disobeying the other. This happens when two enactments produce
different legal results when applied to the same facts.
XXX
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 17
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
viii) A conflict may arise when Parliamentary law and State law seek to exercise their powers over
the same subject matter. This need not be in the form of a direct conflict, where one says "do" and
the other says "don't". Laws under this head are repugnant even if the rule of conduct prescribed by
both laws is identical. The test that has been applied in such cases is based on the principle on which
the rule of implied repeal rests, namely, that if the subject matter of the State legislation or part
thereof is identical with that of the Parliamentary legislation, so that they cannot both stand
together, then the State legislation will be said to be repugnant to the Parliamentary legislation.
However, if the State legislation or part thereof deals not with the matters which formed the subject
matter of Parliamentary legislation but with other and distinct matters though of a cognate and
allied nature, there is no repugnancy.
ix) Repugnant legislation by the State is void only to the extent of the repugnancy. In other words,
only that portion of the State's statute which is found to be repugnant is to be declared void.
x) The only exception to the above is when it is found that a State legislation is repugnant to
Parliamentary legislation or an existing law if the case falls within Article 254(2), and Presidential
assent is received for State legislation, in which case State legislation prevails over Parliamentary
legislation or an existing law within that State. Here again, the State law must give way to any
subsequent Parliamentary law which adds to, amends, varies or repeals the law made by the
legislature of the State, by virtue of the operation of Article 254(2) proviso." (underlining by us)"
47. Upon applicability of aforesaid judgments, it is evident that by virtue of Section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, a different intention to continue the repealed provisions is required to be specifically
stated in the subsequent enactment, failing which, the provisions of proviso to Article 254(2) would
be applicable whereby in case of any repugnance or difference with subsequent enactment, the law
made by Parliament would prevail.
48. Upon applicability of aforesaid judgments, it is thus evident as has been observed herein above
that there is no specific intention indicated in the subsequent enactment of BNSS 2023 to continue
with the State amendment made by means of Act No.4 of 2019 and even in terms of proviso to
Article 254(2) of the Constitution of Idia, there being a considerable difference in the provisions of
anticipatory bail between Act No.4 of 2019 and Section 482 BNSS 2023, in the considered opinion
of this court, it is the provisions of re-enacted Section 482 BNSS 2023, which shall prevail.
49. From perusal of differences in provisions of anticipatory bail incorporated vide Act No. 4 of 2019
and Section 482 BNSS 2023, it is evident that Parliament made a conscious decision to do away with
the prohibitions indicated in Section 438(6) Cr.P.C. particularly since it would be deemed that
Parliament was aware of provisions incorporated vide Act No.4 of 2019 by virtue of deeming fiction
and therefore the re-enacted provisions can be said to have been deliberately obliterated by
Parliament while enacting Section 482 BNSS 2023.
50. Another aspect pertaining to same is the concept that in case of any ambiguity in the
construction of penal statute, favourable interpretation towards protecting the right of accused are
required. The said aspect has been dealt with by Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M. Ravindran
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 18
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
versus Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (2021) 2 SCC 485 in the following manner:-
" 17.9. Additionally, it is well-settled that in case of any ambiguity in the construction
of a penal statute, the courts must favour the interpretation which leans towards
protecting the rights of the accused, given the ubiquitous power disparity between the
individual accused and the State machinery. This is applicable not only in the case of
substantive penal statutes but also in the case of procedures providing for the
curtailment of the liberty of the accused."
51. The aforesaid aspect has also been considered in the case of Tolaram Relumal and another
versus State of Bombay (1954) 1 SCC 961 in the following manner:-
" 8. The question that needs our determination in such a situation is whether Section
18(1) makes punishable receipt of money at a moment of time when the lease had not
come into existence, and when there was a possibility that the contemplated lease
might never come into existence. It may be here observed that the provisions of
Section 18(1) are penal in nature and it is a well-settled rule of construction of penal
statutes that if two possible and reasonable constructions can be put upon a penal
provision, the court must lean towards that construction which exempts the subject
from penalty rather than the one which imposes penalty. It is not competent for the
court to stretch the meaning of an expression used by the legislature in order to carry
out the intention of the legislature. As pointed out by Lord Macmillan in London &
North Eastern Railway Co. v. Berriman [London & North Eastern Railway
Co. v. Berriman, 1946 AC 278 at p. 295 (HL)] : (AC p. 295) "... Where penalties for
infringement are imposed it is not legitimate to stretch the language of a rule,
however, beneficent its intention, beyond the fair and ordinary meaning of its
language."
52. In view of discussion made herein above, it is quite evident that provisions of Section 482 BNSS
2023 would prevail over amendment made by Act No.4 of 2019.
53. The question No.2 accordingly is also answered negatively against the State.
54. In a recent judgment in the case of Raman Sahni versus State of U.P., Criminal Misc.
Anticipatory Bail Application U/s 438 Cr.P.C. No. 1710 of 2024 Coordinate Bench of this Court has
also held that in terms of Section 482 BNSS, anticipatory bail would be maintainable in cases where
NDPS Act is imputed.
55. In view thereof, it is held that an anticipatory bail application would be maintainable in cases
where sections of the NDPS Act have been made applicable in an F.I.R.
56. On merits of issue, it is evident that as per contents of F.I.R./recovery certificate, the incident is
said to have taken place on 8th May, 2024 when a police team acting on the basis of information
supplied apprehended a pickup van bearing registration No. U.P. 32 JN 9524 with the occupant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 19
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
namely Raj Kumar alias Sonu who is said to have disclosed the name of applicant as owner of the
vehicle. Recovery of cartons of mixed cough syrup with Codeine is said to have been made. It is also
stated that the applicant upon being contacted indicated that the aforesaid products belonged to one
Amandeep son of Gurmeet Singh and were being transported by applicant's vehicle.
57. It is submitted that applicant has been falsely implicated in allegations levelled against him
which would be evident from the fact that the applicant has neither been apprehended from the spot
nor is there any recovery from him. It is submitted that vehicle in fact belonged to his mother Smt.
Kamla Devi and was requisitioned by the applicant for purposes of transportation of bottles of cough
syrup which has been seized. It is submitted that aforesaid aspects are evident from the F.I.R. itself.
He has also adverted to Rule 52-A of the Rules framed under the Act of 1985 to submit that Methyl
Morphine commonly known as Codeine alongwith dilution and compounded with one or more
ingredients is required not to exceed 100 Mg. of the drug per unit. It is therefore submitted that
since as yet F.S.L. report is not made available, there can not be any assumption that the volume of
Codeine seized is more than the commercial or prescribed limit.
58. Learned A.G.A. has opposed bail application but admits that F.S.L. report has not yet been
obtained. It is also submitted that charge sheet as yet has not been filed.
59. Upon consideration of submissions advanced by learned counsel for parties and perusal of
material on record, prima facie subject to evidence led in trial, it appears that earlier charge sheet
had been filed against the applicant on sections excluding Section 22(c) of the NDPS Act 1985 which
has been imposed much subsequently. The aforesaid aspect would require to be considered by trial
court alongwith the aspect as to whether the volume of Codeine seized is more than the prescribed
limit in terms of rules framed under the Act of 1985, which at present may not be ascertainable due
to lack of F.S.L report.
60. Considering aforesaid circumstances, the aspects of Section 37 of NDPS Act are found in favour
of the applicant.
61. Thus in view of law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sushila Aggarwal Vs. State (NCT of
Delhi)-(2020) 5 SCC 1, it would be appropriate to grant anticipatory bail to applicant under Section
438 Cr.P.C./482 BNSS.
62. In view of the above, it is provided that in the event of arrest, the applicant- Sudhir @ Sudhir
Kumar Chaurasia shall be released on anticipatory bail in the aforesaid Case Crime number on his
furnishing a personal bond with two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
arresting officer/investigating officer/S.H.O. concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 20
Sudhir @ Sudhir Kumar Chaurasia vs State Of U.P. Thru. The Prin. Secy. ... on 30 May, 2025
from disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
court;
(iv) that in case charge-sheet is submitted the applicant shall not tamper with the
evidence during the trial;
(v) that the applicant shall not pressurize/ intimidate the prosecution witness;
(vi) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed unless
personal presence is exempted;
(vii) that in case of breach of any of the above conditions, benefit of this order would
not be available to applicant.
The application stands allowed.
Order Date :-30.5.2025 prabhat
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164166607/ 21
