Sugriv Bharti vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Sugriv Bharti vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14981
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 31447 of 2024
Applicant :- Sugriv Bharti
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Mohd. Shoeb Khan
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Mohd. Shoeb Khan, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Anit Kumar Shukla, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the material placed on record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.214 of 2024, under Sections 87/70(1) B.N.S., Police Station
Khadda, District Kushinagar, during the pendency of trial.
4. Earlier on, this Court was pleased to pass the following order vide order dated 07.01.2024:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88508710/ 1
Sugriv Bharti vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
"The matter relates to Case Crime No.214 of 2024 under Section 87/70(1) of B.N.S.
Police Station Khadda District Kushinagar.
In the present case, victim is major girl aged about 18 years. She in her statement has
made an allegation inter alia that on 04.07.2024 accused Akash along with his friend
Sugriv (applicant) took her to a hotel on bike and stayed together and thereafter they
have committed rape on her. Next day i.e. on 05.07.2024, when she woke up in the
morning and came outside, she saw that those people were talking with two men and
Akash was demanding Rs. 10,00,000/-, whereas they were inclined to give Rs.
7,00,000/-, and they were about to sell her in Jaipur. Then she ran towards the room
and called her father, and told everything. After that her father brought her to the
police station.
Main substratum of argument of learned counsel for the applicant is that applicant
has been falsely implicated in this case. During investigation victim refused for her
medical examination. The Investigating Officer, in C.D. No. 7 has also mentioned that
when the registers of nearby hotels were checked, no hotel was found where Akash
and Sugriv (applicant) had stayed along with victim on 05.07.2024. Even despite
making query from the victim and her father they have not disclosed about the name
of the hotel and the place of incident. It is also mentioned that no authentic evidence
was found regarding the victim talking about selling herself. Despite the said
observation in the case diary, the Investigating officer without conducting the fair
investigation submitted charge-sheet. It is next submitted that not only fair trial but
fair investigation is also the legal right of the accused.
Much emphasis has been given by contending that when amended law (B.N.S.) has
provided stringent punishment, then it is mandatory duty of the State to ensure fair
investigation.
Learned Government Advocate for the State prays for and is allowed two weeks? time
to seek instructions in the mater.
Put up this matter as fresh on 20th January, 2025.
Learned Government Advocate shall communicate this order to the Principal
Secretary (Home), U.P. Lucknow and the Director General of Police, U.P. Lucknow."
5. Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that the applicant is absolutely innocent and has
been falsely implicated in the present case. He is a youth aged about 24 years and the victim is
major. As per High School Certificate of the victim, her date of birth was 05.06.2006, as such, she
comes out to be 18 years and 29 days old on the date of occurrence. The victim was having love affair
with the co-accused person Akash and there is no evidence whatsoever collected by the Investigating
Officer during investigation regarding the stay of the applicant and the co-accused person at the said
hotel with the victim.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88508710/ 2
Sugriv Bharti vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
6. Learned counsel for the applicant has further stated that there is no proof of any money being
exchanged between the parties. The final report (charge-sheet) has already been filed. Several other
submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of the allegations
made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false implication of the
applicant have also been touched upon at length. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The
applicant is languishing in jail since 10.07.2024 and he is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the
applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
7. Learned A.G.A. has vehemently opposed the bail application on the ground that the conduct of the
Investigating Officer was not found up to the mark and a bad entry has been given to him, as such,
the applicant is not entitled for bail as the Investigating Officer had acted in collusion with the
applicant.
8. The Supreme Court in the case of Niranjan Singh and another vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
and Others, AIR 1980 SC 785 has avoided detailed examination of the evidence and elaborate
documentation of the merits of the case as no party should have the impression that his case has
been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive
exploration of the merits in the order itself.
9. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for the
parties, the evidence on record, and taking into consideration the settled law of the Supreme Court
passed in Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690 and
Manish Sisodia vs. Directorate of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595 and without expressing any opinion
on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The
bail application is allowed.
10. Let the applicant- Sugriv Bharti, who is involved in aforementioned case crime be released on
bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the
sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
11. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
12. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88508710/ 3
Sugriv Bharti vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 (Ravi Kant) (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88508710/ 4
