Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon on 6 October, 2023
Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A)
Gammon on 6 October, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 03.10.2023
Pronounced on 06.10.2023
MA No. 297/2013
Sukhbir Kour W/o. Late Khushwant .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Singh Koundal, Q. No. 340 DA
Block, Sheesh Mehal Apartments,
Near Hyderpur, New Delhi th. her
father and attorney Swinder Singh
Kalsi R/o. H. No. 844 Masters
Colony Gurdaspur Punjab
Q
Through: Mr. H. C. Jalmeria, Adv.
vs
1. Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon ..... Respondent(s)
India Ltd. Gammon House,
Virsavarkar Marg, Post Box 91229,
Prabhadevi-Mumbai, Maharashtra-
400025
2. General Manager/Project Manager,
Sewa H. E. Project, Gammon India
Ltd, Pathankot, Distt. Gurdaspur(Pb).
3. Assistant Labour Commissioner,
Kathua
Through: None.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The appellant has challenged award dated 29.04.2013 passed by the Commissioner, Employees
Compensation Act(Assistant Labour Commissioner), Kathua (hereinafter to be referred as the
Commissioner), whereby compensation in the amount of Rs. 4,11,900/- has been awarded in favour
of the appellant to be payable by respondent No. 2. In fact the appellant has filed the instant appeal
for enhancement of compensation awarded by the Commissioner and for payment of interest and
penalty.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113951603/ 1
Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon on 6 October, 2023
2. It has been contended that vide the impugned award, no interest has been allowed on the
awarded sum and even the penalty has not been awarded in favour of the appellant. It has been
further contended that the compensation has been awarded by taking the income of the appellant as
Rs. 4,000/- per month though as per the evidence on record, it was established that the monthly
income of the appellant was Rs. 8,000/- per month.
3. Notice of the appeal was issued to the respondents but despite service, none of the respondents
came forwarded to contest the appeal. Accordingly, they were set ex parte. In terms of order dated
20.04.2023, the following questions of law were framed:
(a) Whether the Assistant Labour Commissioner concerned has committed an error in not awarding
the interest to the appellant/claimant upon the compensation awarded to the appellant from the
date of accident?
(b) Whether the penalty at the rate of 50 per cent of the award amount was required to be imposed
upon the respondent Nos. 1 and 2?
4. I have heard learned counsel for the appellant and perused the record of the case.
5. The first question of law that has been framed is as regards the claim of the appellant to interest
on the amount of compensation awarded in her favour. In this regard, it is to be noted that the
Commissioner has not awarded any interest in favour of the appellant and only compensation in the
amount of Rs. 4,11,900/- has been awarded in her favour. Penalty in terms of Section 4A of the
Employee's Compensation Act has also not been awarded by the Commissioner.
6. If we have a look at the provisions contained in Section 4A of the Employee's Compensation Act,
1923, it deals with the payment of interest on amount of compensation to be paid when due and it
also deals with penalty for default. The said provision reads as under:
"[4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default.--(1) Compensation
under section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for compensation to the
extent claimed, he shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of
liability which he accepts, and, such payment shall be deposited with the
Commissioner or made to the employee as the case may be, without prejudice to the
right of the employee to make any further claim.
[(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation due under this Act within one
month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall--
(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest
thereon at the rate of twelve per cent per annum or at such higher, rate not exceeding the maximum
of the lending rates of any scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central Government by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113951603/ 2
Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon on 6 October, 2023
notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and
(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer shall, in addition
to the amount of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum not exceeding fifty per cent of
such amount by way of penalty:
Provided that an order for the payment of penalty shall not be passed under clause
(b) without giving a reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause why it
should not be passed.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section, "scheduled bank" means a bank
for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934. (3A) The interest and the penalty payable under sub-
section (3) shall be paid to the employee or his dependant, as the case may be."
7. From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that if an employer fails to pay compensation
due under the Act within one month from the date it falls due, the Commissioner has to direct the
employer to pay simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of compensation. The
rate of interest can go up to the rate not exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any
scheduled bank. So far as payment of penalty is concerned, the Commissioner has to direct the
employer to pay to the claimant in addition to the amount of arrears and interest, a further sum not
exceeding 50% by way of penalty in a case where there is no justification for delay.
8. The question that arises for consideration is as to when payment of compensation becomes due.
The answer to this question would determine as to whether respondent No. 2, the employer is
obliged to pay interest and the penalty on the awarded sum.
9. The Supreme Court in the case of Shobha and others v Chairman, Vithalrao Shinde Sahakari
Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. and others, 2022, LiveLaw (SC) 271 had an occasion to interpret the
provisions contained in Section 4A of the Employee's Compensation Act, 1923. While doing so, the
Supreme Court observed as under:
"4.1 Thus, from Section 4A of the Act, 1923 compensation under Section 4 shall be
paid as soon as it falls due. It can be seen that the liability to pay the interest on the
amount of compensation due and payable would be under Section 4A(3)(a) and the
penalty would be leviable under Section 4A(3)(b). As per Section 4A(3)(a), the
employer shall pay, in addition to the amount of the arrears, simple interest thereon
@ 12% p.a. or at such higher rate not exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of
any scheduled bank as may be specified on the amount due. As per Section 4A(1)
compensation under section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due. Therefore, on the
death of the employee/deceased immediately, the amount of compensation can be
said to be falling due. Therefore, the liability to pay the compensation would arise
immediately on the death of the deceased. Even as per Section 4A(2), in cases, where
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113951603/ 3
Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon on 6 October, 2023
the employer does not accept the liability for compensation to the extent claimed, he
shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of liability which he
accepts, and, such payment shall be deposited with the Commissioner or made to the
employee, as the case may be, without prejudice to the right of the employee to make
any further claim. Therefore, the liability to pay the compensation would arise from
the date on which the deceased died for which he is entitled to the compensation and
therefore, the liability to pay the interest on the amount of arrears/compensation
shall be from the date of accident and not from the date of the order passed by the
Commissioner. As per Section 4A(3)(b), if the Commissioner is satisfied that there is
no justification for the delay, it can direct the employer, in addition to the amount of
the arrears and interest thereon, to pay a further sum not exceeding 50% of such
amount by way of penalty. Thus, provision for interest and provision for penalty are
different. As observed hereinabove, the provision for levy of interest would be under
Section 4A(3)(a) and the provision for levy of penalty would be under Section
4A(3)(b). While directing the employer to pay the interest from the date of the order
passed by the Commissioner, the High Court has not at all considered Section
4A(3)(a) and has considered Section 4A(3)(b) only, which is the penalty provision. 5.
Under the circumstances, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court directing the employee to pay the interest on the amount of compensation as
leviable under Section 4A(3)(a) from the date of the order passed by the
Commissioner, i.e., 25.01.2017 is unsustainable. 6. In view of the above and for the
reasons stated above, the present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court insofar as awarding the interest @ 12% p.a. after the
period of expiry of one month from 25.01.2017, is hereby quashed and set aside and it
is observed and held that the appellants herein - original claimants shall be entitled
to the interest @ 12% p.a. on the amount of compensation as awarded by the
Commissioner from the date of the incident i.e., 29.11.2009."
10. From the analysis of the aforesaid ratio laid down by the Supreme Court, it is manifest that the
amount of compensation falls due on the death of the employee. Therefore, the liability to pay the
compensation would arise immediately on the death of the deceased. Even if the employer does not
accept the liability for compensation to the extent of the claim, still then he has to make provisional
payment of compensation and deposit the same with the Commissioner or pay the same to the
employee. It is also clear that if the Commissioner is satisfied that there is no justification for delay
in payment of compensation, the employer can be directed to pay a further sum not exceeding 50%
by way of penalty in addition to the amount of arrears and interest thereon. So the crucial date of
payment of compensation becoming due is the date of the incident.
11. In the instant case, the deceased-husband of the appellant had died on 06.07.2007. Therefore,
the amount of compensation became due to her on the said day. The record of the Commissioner
shows that the amount of compensation in the instant case has been deposited by the employer on
26.06.2013. However, the Commissioner has not awarded any interest in favour of the appellant
from the date of incident i.e. from 06.07.2007 to 26.06.2013. By omitting to do so, the
Commissioner has fallen into a grave error.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113951603/ 4
Sukhbir Kour W/O. Late Khushwant vs Sr. Vice President (P&A) Gammon on 6 October, 2023
12. Apart from the above, no reason much less a plausible reason has been assigned by the
respondents as to why they did not deposit the amount of compensation with the Commissioner
until 26.06.2013 even though the same had fallen due on the date of incident itself. The only plea
that was urged by the employer before the Commissioner was that the husband of the appellant had
died a natural death. However, the said plea has been found to be without any substance as the
deceased had died while on the work site and as per the post- mortem report, he has suffered
cardiac arrest. Thus, there was no justification for the employer to delay the payment of
compensation at least in making payment of provisional compensation to the appellant. The
appellant is, therefore, also entitled to amount on account of penalty besides the amount of interest
and the arrears of compensation.
13. Accordingly, the appellant is held entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date
of incident i.e. from 06.07.2007 to the deposition of the compensation with the Commissioner i.e.
up to 26.06.2013. Besides this, the appellant is also held entitled to payment of amount on account
of penalty which in the facts and circumstances of the case is assessed as 10% of the awarded sum
i.e. 10% of Rs. 4,11,900/-. The same shall be payable by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
14. The appeal is accordingly allowed and the impugned awarded is modified to the aforesaid extent.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 06.10.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether
the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113951603/ 5
