Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
Author: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
Bench: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No.532 of 2023
Arising Out of PS. Case No.-598 Year-2020 Thana- AMARPUR District- Banka
======================================================
Suman Devi, Wife of Balmukund Tanti, R/o Village- Solempur, P.S.-
Amarpur, Distt.- Banka, Bihar.
... ... Appellant/s
Versus
The State of Bihar
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Ankit Katriar, Advocate
For the Respondent/s : Mr. Bipin Kumar, APP
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJEEV RANJAN PRASAD
and
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SOURENDRA PANDEY
C.A.V. JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SOURENDRA PANDEY)
Date : 17-10-2025
We have heard Mr. Ankit Katriar, learned counsel for the
appellant and Mr. Bipin Kumar, learned Additional Public
Prosecutor.
2. The present appeal arises out of the judgment of
conviction dated 03.11.2022 and the order of sentence dated
10.11.2022
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023
dt.17-10-2025 Banka (Bihar) in connection with Sessions Trial No. 249 of 2021, arising out of
Amarpur P.S. Case No. 598 of 2020.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 1
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
3. By the impugned judgment, referred to above, the appellant has been convicted for the offences
under Sections 302, 323 and 341 of the Indian Penal Code (in short referred to as the 'IPC') and has
been sentenced to undergo life imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 500/- and in default of payment of
fine, to further suffer simple imprisonment of one week for the offence under Section 302 of the IPC
and has been sentenced to undergo imprisonment of one month each for the offences under
Sections 323 and 341 of the IPC.
Prosecution Case :
4. The prosecution case is based on the written application dated 02.10.2020 given
by the informant (P.W. 2). In his written report, the informant has stated that on
02.10.2020 at around 14:00 hours, when he was working at the poultry-farm of his
village, one Dhananjay Tanti informed him that his 7 years old son, namely, Sohit
Kumar is lying in an unconscious state and is unable to breathe. It is further alleged
that when he reached to his home, he found his son dead. Thereafter, the father and
the mother of the informant, namely, Bhudev Tanti and Sita Devi, Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 respectively, told the informant that his
wife, Suman Devi (appellant), has killed his son by suffocating him.
5. On the basis of the aforesaid written application, Amarpur P.S. Case No. 598 of
2020, dated 02.10.2020, was registered for the offences punishable under Section
302 of the IPC.
6. After completion of investigation, the Investigating Officer, namely, Ramashray
Prasad (P.W. 5) has submitted Charge-
Sheet, being Charge-Sheet No. 465 of 2020, dated 31.12.2020, under Sections 341, 323 and 302 of
the IPC.
7. Charges were read over and explained to the accused/appellant, namely, Suman Devi, in Hindi to
which, she pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
8. The cognizance of the offences under Sections 341, 323 and 302 of the IPC was taken on
28.01.2021.
9. The prosecution has examined altogether six witnesses and also exhibited some documentary
evidences in course of trial. The description of the prosecution witnesses and the exhibits are being
mentioned hereunder in tabular forms:-
List of Prosecution Witnesses :
P.W. 1 Shashi Yadav
P.W. 2 Balmukund Tanti
P.W. 3 Fulo Devi
P.W. 4 Dr. Ashish Ranjan Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 2
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 P.W. 5 Ramashray
Prasad P.W. 6 Sita Devi List of Exhibits on behalf of the Prosecution :
Ext. P1/P.W. 2 Signature of the informant on written information Ext. P2/P.W. 4
Signature of the doctor on the post-
mortem report Ext. P3/P.W. 5 Endorsement of the then SHO on the FIR Ext.
P4/P.W. 5 Signature on the formal FIR
10. Thereafter, the statement of the accused/appellant was recorded under Section 313 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. The accused/appellant denied all the allegations leveled against her and took
a plea that she is innocent.
Findings of the Learned Trial Court :
11. The learned Trial Court, after examining all the evidences available on the record, found that the
allegation as alleged by the prosecution is beyond all reasonable doubts. Before the death of the
deceased, only the accused/appellant (Suman Devi) was present in the house and on the body of the
deceased (Sohit Kumar), four nail bites were found in front of neck with bruises and abrasions. The
cause of death was "asphyxia due to strangulation". The accused/appellant has failed to prove that
the deceased died naturally.
Submissions on behalf of the appellant :
12. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has submitted that the evidences produced
by the prosecution are Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 marred by
contradictions and, hence, cannot be relied upon in order to convict the appellant. It has been
submitted that the Medical Officer (P.W. 4), who had conducted the post-mortem examination of
the deceased, has stated that the cause of death was "asphyxia due to strangulation", but during his
cross-examination, he has mentioned the cause of death as "asphyxia by nail and there was no sign
of strangulation". In such a condition, it has been submitted that very cause of death becomes
doubtful and it could not be relied upon.
13. It has further been pointed out that P.W. 2, Balmukund Tanti, who is the father of the deceased,
in his deposition has stated that there was injury on the back of the head of the deceased and blood
was oozing out. However, such statement of P.W. 2 has not been corroborated by the Medical
Officer (P.W. 4).
14. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the Police Officer (P.W. 5), who had
recorded the fardbeyan of the informant (P.W. 2) at Amarpur Police Station on 02.10.2020, has not
been examined and as such, the fardbeyan has not been proved. It has further been submitted that
there is no eye-witness to the incident and the grandmother of the deceased (P.W. 6) has falsely
framed her daughter-in-law (appellant). From her contradictory statement, it would be evident that
even she had not seen the incident. It has been submitted that from the perusal of the deposition of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 3
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
the father of the deceased (P.W. 2), it would manifest that he has reiterated what his Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 mother (P.W. 6) had told him and has framed
his wife (appellant) for the murder of his own child, although there was no eye-witness.
15. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that there is absolutely no proved motive on the
part of the appellant in the present case as from the perusal of the various depositions, it would be
evident that there has not been a single incident of ill-treatment of the deceased at the hands of the
appellant (Suman Devi). It has further been submitted that P.W. 6, the mother of the informant
(P.W.
2), though has stated to be an eye-witness to the said incident and the entire case has been
established on her statement, but there is substantial difference in the statements given by her in the
deposition and the cross-examination and these contradictions cut at the root of the entire
prosecution case and make the same doubtful.
16. It has next been submitted that the Trial Court has passed the judgment and order of conviction
and sentence, referred to above, merely on the basis of conjectures and surmises and has ignored
the contradictions inherent in the deposition of the prosecution witnesses. The prosecution, it has
been argued, has failed to prove its case beyond all reasonable doubts. It has also been submitted
that in absence of mens-rea, the prosecution has miserably failed in its effort to suggest that it was
the appellant who had inflicted injuries, causing death of her stepson. Patna High Court CR. APP
(DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
17. It has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant that conspicuously the two
signatories of the fardbeyan, viz., Umesh Tanti and Ravindra Tanti, were also not examined by the
prosecution, raising serious doubt over the veracity of the content of the fardbeyan. It has lastly
been submitted that the appellant is a lady and has a young child with her, who is also residing
within the jail premises with her mother, the appellant.
Submissions on behalf of the State :
18. Mr. Bipin Kumar, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State, has submitted that the
appellant being the stepmother and also found alone with the child in the house, which was seen by
the grandmother of the deceased (P.W. 6), there is no iota of doubt with regard to her culpability in
the present case. It has been submitted that the post-mortem report confirms the homicidal death of
the stepson of the appellant as the cause of death was found to be "asphyxia due to strangulation". It
has further been submitted that the factum of the appellant being present at the house alone at the
time of the incident has been proved by the consistent evidence of the prosecution witnesses and
such ocular evidence has gone on to prove the fact that the appellant was alone with the child and as
stated by the grandmother (P.W. 6), who has categorically stated that the appellant had dragged the
child (deceased) from the by lanes in order to make him eat and had bolted the doors from inside
and, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 subsequently, she had seen the
appellant sitting on the child and pressing his neck. P.W. 6 has further stated that soon thereafter,
the appellant brought the child outside the room and made him lie down on the cot. In view of such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 4
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
specific ocular evidence, there is no requirement of any other evidence to prove the fact that it was
the appellant who had committed the murder of her stepson by strangulation.
19. Thus, it has been submitted on behalf of the State that there is no illegality in the findings arrived
at by the learned Trial Court and, hence, the appeal is fit to be dismissed and the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence, referred to above, be affirmed.
Consideration :
20. We have considered the rival submissions canvassed by the learned counsel for the parties and
have also gone through the evidence produced by the parties before the learned Trial Court.
21. From perusal of the records, it would appear that the present case was initiated on the basis of
the fardbeyan of the informant (P.W. 2), namely, Balmukund Tanti, who had alleged that on
02.10.2020 at around 02:00 P.M., while he was working at the poultry-farm, he heard the news that
his son was lying in an unconscious state and is unable to breathe. On hearing such news, he came
back to his house and found that his son, namely, Sohit Kumar was lying dead and his father
(Bhudev Tanti) and mother (Sita Devi) Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023
dt.17-10-2025 informed him that his wife, namely, Suman Devi (appellant), had killed his son by
suffocating him. An information to this effect was, thereafter, given to the Amarpur Police Station,
upon which, a formal FIR was drawn.
22. Before proceeding ahead, it would be apt to first refer to the evidences led by the prosecution.
23. P.W. 1, Shashi Yadav, is a villager and he has merely stated that he learnt about the death of the
child who was around five to six years old and was lying dead in the lap of his grandmother and
apart from this, he does not know anything.
24. P.W. 2, Balmukund Tanti, happens to be the informant and the father of the deceased. He, in his
examination-in-chief, has stated that he received the news of the death of his son while he was
working at the poultry-farm and when he came back, he saw his son lying dead in the lap of his
mother. P.W. 2 has stated that there was red sign on both the cheeks of his son and he was killed by
suffocating. He has also stated that there was a cut sign on his forehead. He further states that his
mother had told him that his wife had killed his son and when he inquired about the same from his
wife, she told him that she killed the deceased due to mistake and she had not thought that he would
die. P.W. 2, during his cross-examination, has stated that the appellant is his second wife and he had
two sons, namely, Sohit (deceased) and Sumit from his first wife, namely, Geeta Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 Devi. He has stated that the name of his third wife is
Pinki Devi, while his second wife (appellant) is in custody. He has accepted that the occurrence had
not taken place before his eyes and he had given this statement to the police, who had recorded his
statement at his house. P.W. 2 has also admitted the fact that there was no quarrel or dispute in the
family since before. He has stated that one Dhananjay of the village had informed him about the
incident. He has further stated that said Dhananjay informed him that the entire village knows
about the incident and the fact that his son has been done to death by my wife (appellant). He has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 5
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
also stated that there was an injury behind the head of the deceased and blood was coming out and
there were signs on the face and neck of the deceased.
25. P.W. 3, Fulo Devi, is a neighbour, who has stated that while she was working at her home, the
deceased, Sohit Kumar, aged about 7 years, had come to play at her house and thereafter, his
stepmother (appellant) came and took him for food. She has further stated that, thereafter, she had
gone to the fields and later on, at around 4 - 5 O'clock in the evening, she heard that Sohit is dead.
She has also stated that there were signs of injury on the cheeks and neck as also on the forehead of
the deceased. During her cross- examination, she has stated that she does not know as to how Sohit
Kumar (deceased) had died. P.W. 3 has also stated that prior to the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 incident, there was no fight and quarrel or dispute between Suman
(appellant) and her in-laws.
26. P.W. 4, Dr. Ashish Ranjan Kumar, is the Doctor, who had conducted the post-mortem, on the
body of the deceased (Sohit Kumar), had found the following injuries:
"External - 4 nail bite in front of neck; Bruise 3" x 1/2" on Rt. Cheek; Abrasion 1" x 1"
on Lt. Cheek and Abrasion 1 ½" x 1" on upper Cheeks.
Internal - Lungs-Congested; Stomach-Empty; Rt. Heart-fill blood and Lt.
Heart-Empty.
On section neck blood clot present in derms of mussels of the layers.
Cause of death - Asphyxia death due to strangulation. Time of death - 18 to 21 hrs."
P.W. 4, during his cross-examination, has stated that this is ligature strangulation. However, he did
not mention it on the post- mortem report. He has further stated that he found "asphyxia by nail
and there was no any sign of strangulation".
27. P.W. 5, Ramashray Prasad, happens to be the Investigating Officer of the case, who has stated
that the informant (P.W. 2) had supported the prosecution case in his reinstatement and thereafter,
the statements of the witnesses, namely, Shashi Yadav and Fulo Devi, were recorded and they had
all supported the prosecution case. He has also stated that the fardbeyan is in the handwriting of the
then SHO, namely, Arvind Kumar Rai, which he recognizes and the same was exhibited. P.W. 5,
during his cross-examination, has Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
admitted that he had not recorded the statement of the two witnesses of the fardbeyan, namely,
Umesh Tanti and Ravindra Tanti. He has also stated that the informant got to know about the
incident by one Dhananjay Tanti. However, he had not recorded the statement of said Dhananjay
Tanti. He has also admitted that he had not recorded the statement of the boundary witnesses,
namely, Shyam Tanti and Arjun Tanti. P.W. 5 has also admitted that the Chowkidar had taken the
deceased for the post-mortem and he has also not recorded his statement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 6
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
28. P.W. 6, Sita Devi, who is the mother-in-law of the appellant and the grandmother of the
deceased, has claimed herself to be an eye-witness to the occurrence. She, in her examination-in-
chief, has stated that Suman Devi (appellant) brought Sohit (deceased) by dragging him by the lanes
and on her asking about as to where she was taking him, the appellant is said to have responded that
she is taking him for feeding and thereafter, she bolted the doors from inside. This witness has
subsequently stated that the appellant, after taking the child inside the room, slammed him on the
floor and sat on his penis and strangulated him. She further states that when the child shouted, then
she inquired as to what had happened, upon which, the appellant is said to have stated that he is
crying for taking the food. She has further stated that then she opened the door and found that the
child was breathing lightly and thereafter, he died in the house. She Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 has also stated that then the Police was called, who arrested the
appellant and took her away and thereafter, she informed her son (P.W. 2) about the incident. P.W.
6 has stated that the appellant is the stepmother of Sohit (deceased). During her cross-examination,
this witness has categorically stated that Suman Devi (appellant) had been staying for the last six
months in the house and during the said period, no quarrel or altercation had ever taken place
between them. She, however, states that she did not give food to the children. In paragraph 7 of her
cross-examination, she has stated that the appellant took the child inside the room and bolted the
doors. She has gone on to state that she had heard the sound of shouting of the child and had seen
him sitting and was lashed to the cot by means of a towel. She further states that the child was
dragged out of the room by the appellant itself and was made to lie down on the cot. P.W. 6 has
added that she had gone inside the house and saw her (appellant) beating the child.
29. Upon careful examination of evidences of the prosecution, it is apparent that the child had died
an unnatural death and as per the post-mortem report, the cause of death was stated to be "asphyxia
death due to strangulation".
30. We have already noted hereinabove the ante-mortem injuries found on the body of the deceased.
On perusal of the same, it appears that the deceased had died due to pressure on his neck, which
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 could have been caused by pressing
of the fingers, causing marks of nail on the neck of the deceased. We have also taken note of the
reference of the injuries in the inquest report, wherein, the Police Officer has stated in Column - 5
about the injuries on the left part of the forehead, injury on the left cheek and abrasions on the neck.
On comparison of the two important documents/exhibits, it would appear that there is no exact
reference to the injuries. We have also observed that there is no apparent injury which would
suggest that the child had been strangulated by an object.
31. This lead us to co-relate the same with the ocular evidence of the sole eye-witness, the
grandmother of the deceased (P.W. 6), who has stated that the appellant had been pressing the neck
of the child. P.W. 6 has stated that she had opened the door and entered the house and saw that the
child was breathing lightly and thereafter, he died. During the cross-examination, she has also
stated that she had seen the child sitting lashed to the cot with the help of a towel and thereafter, she
had stated that the child was dragged out from the room by the appellant itself, who kept the body of
the child on the cot. This statement of P.W. 6 does not inspire confidence as she at once said that the
appellant had closed the door, but on the other hand, she has stated that she entered the room and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 7
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
saw the child breathing lightly.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
32. The statement of P.W. 2, Balmukund Tanti, during his examination-in-chief, is of utmost
importance, wherein, he has stated that ".........iRuh ls iqNs rks iRuh us dgk fd xyrh ls ekj fn;k lksps
ugha Fks fd ej tk;sxk ijUrq ej x;kA vc ds"k oXkSjg er djks ;gh dg jgh FkhA ......." [when he asked his
wife, she said that she had accidentally killed him (child); she had not thought he would die, but he
did. She was also requesting him for not lodging the case].
33. Considering the aforesaid testimony of P.W. 2, the husband of the appellant and the father of the
deceased, and comparing the same with the post-mortem report and the ante-mortem injuries,
referred therein, we examined the matter as to whether it is a case of culpable homicide amounting
to murder or that it may be a case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Sections 299,
300, 302 and 304 of the IPC are extracted hereinbelow for ready reference:
299. Culpable homicide.-Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of
causing death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause
death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the
offence of culpable homicide.
300. Murder.-Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder,
if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or-
2ndly.-If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely
to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or-
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 3rdly.-If it is done with the intention
of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in
the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or-
4thly.-If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all
probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act
without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
302. Punishment for murder.-Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or
[imprisonment for life], and shall also be liable to fine.
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.-Whoever commits culpable
homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with [imprisonment for life], or imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the
act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 8
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
likely to cause death, but without any intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death."
34. From the perusal of the provisions contained in Section 304 of the IPC, one fundamental
difference between murder, as defined under Section 300 IPC, and culpable homicide not
amounting to murder, as defined under Section 304 of the IPC, is "intention" of the offender.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
35. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Chunni Bai Vs. State of Chhattisgarh : 2025 SCC Online
SC 955, has held in paragraphs 18 & 19 as follows:
18. The difference between "murder" and "culpable homicide not amounting to
murder" has been succinctly explained by this Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu
Punnayya, (1976) 4 SCC 382 in the following words:
"12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, "culpable homicide" is genus and "murder" its
specie. All "murder" is "culpable homicide" but not vice-versa. Speaking generally,
"culpable homicide" sans "special characteristics of murder", is "culpable homicide
not amounting to murder". For the purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to
the gravity of this generic offence, the Code practically recognises three degrees of
culpable homicide. The first is, what may be called, "culpable homicide of the first
degree". This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which is defined in Section
300 as "murder". The second may be termed as "culpable homicide of the second
degree". This is punishable under the first part of Section 304. Then, there is
"culpable homicide of the third degree". This is the lowest type of culpable homicide
and the punishment provided for it is, also, the lowest among the punishments
provided for the three grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under
the second part of Section 304."
19. The difference was further elucidated in Rampal Singh v. State of U.P., (2012) 8 SCC 289 in the
following words:
"18. This Court in Vineet Kumar Chauhan v. State of U.P. [(2007) 14 SCC 660 :
(2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 915] noticed that academic distinction between "murder" and
"culpable homicide not amounting to murder" had vividly been brought out by this
Court in State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya [(1976) 4 SCC 382 :
1976 SCC (Cri) 659] where it was observed as under: (Vineet Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 Kumar case [(2007) 14 SCC 660 : (2009) 1
SCC (Cri) 915], SCC pp. 665-66, para 16) "16. ..... that the safest way of approach to
the interpretation and application of Sections 299 and 300 IPC is to keep in focus the
key words used in various clauses of the said sections. Minutely comparing each of
the clauses of Sections 299 and 300 IPC and drawing support from the decisions of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 9
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
this Court in Virsa Singh v.
State of Punjab [AIR 1958 SC 465 : 1958 Cri LJ 818] and Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala [AIR 1966
SC 1874 : 1966 Cri LJ 1509] , speaking for the Court, R.S. Sarkaria, J. neatly brought out the points
of distinction between the two offences, which have been time and again reiterated. Having done so,
the Court said that wherever the court is confronted with the question whether the offence is
'murder' or 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', on the facts of a case, it [would] be
convenient for it to approach the problem in three stages. The question to be considered at the first
stage would be, whether the accused has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of
another. Proof of such causal connection between the act of the accused and the death, leads to the
second stage for considering whether that act of the accused amounts to 'culpable homicide' as
defined in Section 299. ... If the answer to this question is in the negative the offence would be
'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', punishable under the First or the Second Part of
Section 304, depending, respectively, on whether the second or the third clause of Section 299 is
applicable. If this question is found in the positive, but the case comes within any of the Exceptions
enumerated in Section 300, the offence would still be 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder',
punishable under the First Part of Section 304 IPC. It was, however, clarified that these were only
broad guidelines to facilitate the task of the court and not cast-iron imperative."
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
36. As we have seen, the factum of the prosecution case was that the appellant had taken the child
inside the room for giving him food and during such process, the child died. If the ocular testimony
of P.W. 6, the grandmother of the deceased, is to be believed and taken into account, it could easily
be gathered that the appellant was trying to feed the child after he was brought from the house of
the neighbour, Fulo Devi (P.W. 3), and in such course, she might have used some kind of force to
make him eat without realizing that such force could not be sustained by the child, who died due to
suffocation. As per the definition of Section 300 of the IPC, it was a death which the appellant
neither intended nor knew herself to be likely to cause death of the child.
37. It is relevant to state here that the prosecution witnesses have categorically stated that there was
no difference or dispute between them and as such, there was no motive for the appellant to commit
such a crime which had no direct bearing to her benefit.
38. On the contrary, we have also observed the conduct of the appellant that her intentions were
rather pious as she was trying to make the child eat some food, who was, admittedly, playing at the
neighbour's house from where the appellant had brought him back to the house and closed the
doors in order to make him eat. Such conduct of the appellant shows the soft-side of a mother, who
was trying to feed the child/son, who was playing without taking any food. Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 This fact can also be gathered from the post-mortem report
of the deceased, wherein, from the internal examinations, the stomach of the child was found to be
empty. While saying so, this Court has also taken into account the conduct of the appellant in not
fleeing from the place of occurrence after the incident had taken place.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 10
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
39. From the evidence on record, we have seen that the Doctor (P.W. 4) has opined the cause of
death as "asphyxia due to strangulation". However, from the external injuries, he found 4 nail bites
on the body of the deceased in front of the neck, bruise on right cheek, abrasion on left cheek and
abrasion on upper cheeks. Referring to these injuries, the Doctor (P.W. 4) opined that none of the
injuries would go to suggest that they are of such nature, which could have caused the death of the
child. The Doctor (P.W. 4), in paragraph 2 of his cross-examination, has stated that this was ligature
strangulation, which he had not mentioned on the post-mortem report. He has further stated that
he had found asphyxia by nail and there was no sign of strangulation. Thus, from such injuries, it
does not reflect that the deceased had been strangulated. However, he died of asphyxia.
40. As already observed, the intention to kill is one of the major ingredients for an offence to be
counted as murder and in order to perceive "intention" in the present case, the entire circumstances
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025 needs to be taken into consideration
for establishing the specific intention for causing death of the deceased.
41. We have already given our reasons doubting the mens- rea of the appellant and, in fact, we have
seen that she had, as per P.W. 6, the grandmother of the deceased, taken the child inside the room
during the day time in order to feed him, though in some harsh manner.
42. In view of the aforesaid discussions, we find that the conviction of the appellant under Section
302 IPC is not being made out, considering the circumstances under which the child was found to be
dead. As discussed above, we have seen that there was no immediate circumstance or motive in
which the appellant could have committed the murder of her stepson. However, if we accept the
ocular evidence of the sole-eyewitness, P.W. 6, even then, the intention of committing murder could
not be found. However, we are of the opinion that it is a case of culpable homicide not amounting to
murder and it will come under Section 304 Part-II of the IPC.
43. In the case of Gurmukh Singh Vs. State of Haryana :
(2009) 15 SCC 635, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in paragraph 23 as follows:
"23. These are some factors which are required to be taken into consideration before
awarding appropriate sentence to the accused. These factors are only illustrative in
character and not exhaustive. Each case has to be seen from its special perspective.
The relevant factors are as under: Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023
dt.17-10-2025
(a) Motive or previous enmity;
(b) Whether the incident had taken place on the spur of the moment;
(c) The intention/knowledge of the accused while inflicting the blow or injury;
(d) Whether the death ensued instantaneously or the victim died after several days;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 11
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
(e) The gravity, dimension and nature of injury;
(f) The age and general health condition of the accused;
(g) Whether the injury was caused without premeditation in a sudden fight;
(h) The nature and size of weapon used for inflicting the injury and the force with
which the blow was inflicted;
(i) The criminal background and adverse history of the accused;
(j) Whether the injury inflicted was not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death but the death was because of shock;
(k) Number of other criminal cases pending against the accused;
(l) Incident occurred within the family members or close relations;
(m) The conduct and behaviour of the accused after the incident.
Whether the accused had taken the injured/the deceased to the hospital immediately to ensure that
he/she gets proper medical treatment?
These are some of the factors which can be taken into consideration while granting an appropriate
sentence to the accused."
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
44. From the above, it would be evident that from the evidence which has been led by the
prosecution, we do not find that the death was caused with pre-motivation. We have seen that there
was no weapon used by the accused/appellant in committing the crime and even the injuries
received by the deceased do not go on to show/prove that they would have ordinarily cause death of
a person. The intention/knowledge of the accused while inflicting the injuries, which were found on
the body of the deceased, are also not being proved rather the deposition of P.W. 2, the father of the
deceased and the husband of the accused/appellant, ratifies the same, wherein, he has stated that
his wife on being asked as to why she did it, she stated that it was done accidentally and she had not
thought he would die. We have also seen that there was no motive as also any kind of quarrel or
dispute between the accused/appellant and her in-laws. This Court has observed that the occurrence
had taken place in broad day light in presence of P.W. 6, the mother of the deceased, and the
conduct and behaviour of the accused/appellant after the incident, wherein, she had brought the
body of the deceased out of the room, laid it on the cot and stayed there and did not make any
attempt to flee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 12
Suman Devi vs The State Of Bihar on 17 October, 2025
45. The conviction of the appellant under Section 302 IPC is, thus, altered to one under Section 304
Part-II of the IPC. Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
46. It appears from the case records that the appellant is in custody since 03.10.2020 and has, thus,
spent about five years in jail by now. Mr. Katriar, learned counsel for the appellant, has stated that
the appellant has a young child, who too is with her in jail.
47. We have also given our anxious consideration on the fact that the appellant never intended to
cause death; or that she only wanted to secure the well being and happiness of her stepson and as
such, the appellant needs to be dealt with leniently.
48. For the reasons afore-noted, this Court deem it appropriate and believe that the interest of
justice would be met if the sentence of the appellant is reduced to the period of custody which she
has already undergone.
49. We order accordingly.
50. The appellant, namely, Suman Devi, is directed to be released from jail forthwith, if not required
or detained in any other case.
51. The appeal stands disposed off accordingly.
52. Let a copy of this judgment be dispatched to the Superintendent of the concerned Jail forthwith
for compliance and record.
53. The records of this case be immediately returned to the learned Trial Court.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.532 of 2023 dt.17-10-2025
54. Interlocutory application(s), if any, also stand disposed off accordingly.
(Sourendra Pandey, J) Rajeev Ranjan Prasad, J :
(Rajeev Ranjan Prasad, J) Praveen-II/-
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 08.10.2025
Uploading Date 17.10.2025
Transmission Date 17.10.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/66251535/ 13
