Sumit Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Civil Secrtt. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
Sumit Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Civil Secrtt. Home ... on 1
April, 2025
Author: Alok Mathur
Bench: Alok Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:18058
Court No. - 12
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 2745 of 2025
Applicant :- Sumit Kumar
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Civil Secrtt. Home Deptt. Lko. U.P. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Pradeep Kumar Srivastava,Prem Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Alok Mathur,J.
1. Heard Sri Pradeep Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as AGA on behalf
of the State-respondents.
2. In light of the proposed order, notice to private respondent no.2 is dispensed with.
3. By means of the present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. (Now 528 BNSS), the petitioner has
challenged the revisional order dated 04.02.2025 passed by learned Sessions Judge, Raebareli,
where rejecting the revision preferred by the petitioner against the summoning order dated
06.11.2023 passed by the Civil Judge (Junior Division)/ FTC-II, Raebareli.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163518940/ 1
Sumit Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Civil Secrtt. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
4. The brief facts of the case as stated in the petition are that the complaint was lodged by the
opposite party no.2 in the court of 10 Civil Judge (Junior Division), Raebareli alleging that the
complainant had said that 7 years prior he had given an amount of Rs.2,50,000/- for the purposes
of the wedding of his sister in cash and he has assured the complainant that he would repay the
entire amount within a period of one year. When the amount was not paid, the complainant pursued
the matter and the petitioner repeatedly assured him that he would repay the entire amount and and
despite the aforesaid repaid Rs.30,000/- and for the remaining amount, despite the repeated
pressure build up by the complainant, the petitioner did not repay. On 02.06.2023, the complainant
had again contacted the petitioner and threatened him a legal action and it is on the said date, the
petitioner had given a cheque of Rs.2,20,000/- to the complainant bearing Cheque No.864712 from
the account of 32551752922 drawn on State Bank of India. The complainant presented the said
cheque for encashment on 05.06.2023. On deposit the said amount on 05.06.2023, the said cheque
was returned and dishonored on the ground that no such account exists. A notice was sent by the
complaint to the petitioner on 19.06.2023 and after waiting for the statutory period had filed a
complaint. On which the trial court had issued summons to the petitioner for appearance. It is only
when non-bailable warrants were issued against the petitioner, he appeared before the trial court.
On which their warrants were recalled and he had assailed the summoning order before the Sessions
Court in Raebareli. Before the Sessions Court, it was stated that in 2017, two cheques were lost and
he had duly intimated the police. He had further admitted the fact that the signatures appearing on
the cheque were made by him but the remaining amount of details in the cheque are not in his hand
writing and also stated that bank account maintained by the petitioner had already been closed on
21.02.2017 and therefore, there was no existing bank account at the date when the cheque was
drawn and consequently, the ingredients of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act were not
fulfilled and consequently, prayed for setting aside the summons as well as entire proceedings
against the petitioner.
5. The revisional court duly considered the arguments of the petitioner and noticed that in his
complaint made to the police station, only vague intimation was given regarding loss of cheques but
neither was a detailed of the cheque number or detailed of bank given in the said complaint. The
revisional court duly considered the judgement cited by the petitioner and did not find any merit in
the same and consequently, rejected the same. Before this Court, the petitioner has reiterated his
arguments raised before the revisional court. It has been stated that once the cheques have been lost
and this fact was duly intimated to the police and therefore, on the basis of said stolen cheques,
proceedings under Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act could not be maintained at the behest
of the complainant. Apart from the above, it was stated that the account had already stood closed
prior to issuing of a cheque and hence, the revisional court has misdirected itself and accordingly
prayed for quashing of the order of the trial court issuing summons to the petitioner as well as the
order passed by the revisional court rejecting the revision.
6. Learned AGA, on the other hand, has submitted that there is no infirmity in either the order
issuing summons to the petitioner or the revisional order inasmuch as the petitioner has not given
any specific cheque number which has been lost and intimation given was general in nature and
could not acted upon. Apart from the above, the petitioner himself is signatory to the cheques and in
all likelihood had himself fraudulently given the cheques after closing of the said account which in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163518940/ 2
Sumit Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Civil Secrtt. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
fact makes out a serious offence then merely under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
and consequently, prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
7. I have heard the rival parties and perused the record.
8. The challenge is being made by the petitioner to the proceedings initiated against him under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. The first ground raised by the petitioner is that he
had duly intimated the police with regard to the cheques having been lost. A perusal of his
application to the police on 21.02.2017 indicates that on mere blank piece of paper, it was intimated
to the police on which the stamp of the concerned Thana is available. In the complaint, it is stated
that on 16.02.2017 when the petitioner was on the way, his Aadhar Card, Pan Card, Passbook and
cheque book in which there are two signed cheques have been lost. Neither any details of the
cheques are indicated nor the Bank is indicated from which it can be ascertained that the cheques
belong to a particular bank. Apart from the above, we don't find that the said fact was intimated to
the bank or any stop order was issued to the Bank with regard to the two cheques.
9. Judgement relied upon by the petitioner in the case ofJugesh Sehgal versus Shamsher Singh Gogi
reported in 2009(14) SCC 683,the Supreme Court had interfered in the matter where it found that
the cheques have been issued on an account which do not belong to the accused. The Supreme Court
was of the view that the ingredients under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act require
that the cheques should be drawn by a person on an account maintained by him and considering
that the cheques were issued which belong to another person, the ingredients of 138 of NI Act are
non-fulfilled. The facts in the present case are totally different than which were before the Supreme
Court in the case ofJuger Shahgal (supra),the petitioner does not dispute that the cheque was drawn
on account no. 32551752922, which was maintained by the petitioner, still it was closed. In the
aforesaid, circumstances, the judgement relied upon by the petitioner is clearly distinguishable.
Apart from the above, we find that the petitioner has himself admitted that the cheques were, in
fact, signed by him and merely because a written complaint was given to the police station that
certain cheques were lost without giving any further particular and details would not be sufficient
itself at this stage to returned a finding in faviour of the petitioner. The petitioner would have to
adduce sufficient evidence during trial with regard to the fact that alleged cheque which was issued
in favour of the complainant was the same cheque for which the complaint had been made by him to
the police station. No conclusive evidence is forthcoming apart from the letter adduced by him
which in the concern opinion of this Court is not sufficient in itself at this stage to interfere in the
matter and record a finding in favour of the petitioner. Apart from the above, we find that the trial
court as well as revisional court has duly considered the facts of the case and material on record
existing at that stage for issuing summons to the petitioner.
10. Accordingly, I do not find any ground for interference. Accordingly, the petition being bereft of
merit and is dismissed. However, it shall be open for the petitioner to adduce evidence in his favour
before the trial court with regard to the grounds raised by him.
[Alok Mathur,J.] Order Date :- 1.4.2025 KR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163518940/ 3
