Sumit Chauhan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Sumit Chauhan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44586
Court No. - 68
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 8122 of 2025
Applicant :- Sumit Chauhan
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Nanhe Lal Tripathi,Satish Kumar Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.
Counter affidavit filed in the Court today is taken on record.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, Sri S.K. Ojha, learned AGA-I for the State-respondents and
perused the record.
This bail application under Section 483 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 has been
moved on behalf of accused-applicant,Sumit Chauhan, seeking enlargement on bail in Case Crime
No. 637 of 2024, under Sections 318(4), 336(3), 338, 317(2), 317(5) of theBharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 and Section 3/25 Arms Act, Police Station- Pilkhuwa, District- Hapur.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157883913/ 1
Sumit Chauhan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the accused-applicant is innocent. He has been falsely
implicated in this very case crime number and is languishing in jail since 02.12.2024. Learned
counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant is whole sole guardian of his family member.
The articles mentioned in the recovery memo are totally false and planted as there is no
independent witness of the alleged recovery. He has criminal antecedent of forty nine cases
including the present case and the same are reflected in Annexure C.A.-2 of the counter affidavit.
The applicant has explained his criminal history. There is no likelihood of his fleeing from course of
justice or tampering with evidence in case of release on bail. Hence, bail has been prayed for.
Learned AGA has vehemently opposed the prayer for bail keeping in view the criminal antecedents
of the applicant.
Considering all above facts and circumstances, the nature of accusations, severity of the punishment
in the case of conviction and nature of supporting evidence, reasonable apprehension of tampering
with the witness and prima facie case, but without commenting on merit of case, a case for bail is
made out.
Accordingly, the bail application is allowed.
Let the accused-applicant,Sumit Chauhan, involved in above mentioned case crime number be
released on bail, on his executing a personal bond and two heavy sureties each, in the like amount to
the satisfaction of the court concerned, subject to the following conditions. Further, before issuing
the release order, the sureties be verified.
1. The applicant will not tamper with the evidence.
2. The applicant will not indulge in any criminal activity.
3. The applicant will not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses and co-operate in the trial.
4. The applicant will appear regularly on each and every date fixed by the trial court, unless his
personal appearance is exempted through counsel by the court concerned.
5. The applicant will record his presence in the concerned Police Station fortnightly (every 15 days
from the date of release) till conclusion of trial.
In the event of breach of any of the aforesaid conditions, the court below will be at liberty to proceed
to cancel his bail.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Anjali
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157883913/ 2
