Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec.
Home ... on 1 April, 2025
Author: Manish Kumar
Bench: Manish Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:17996
Court No. - 14
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 2579 of 2025
Applicant :- Suneel Kumar And Another
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Sajjad Husain,Mohd. Saud Khan
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Manish Kumar,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicants and Shri Piyush Kumar Singh, learned A.G.A. for the
State. Shri Harsh Prakash, learned counsel has put in appearance on behalf of respondent/ opposite
party no.4 alongwith the vakalatnama of the complainant but the same is to be filed through e-mode
as this matter is an e-file so he is permitted to file the same today itself through e-mode.
2. The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C./528 B.N.S.S. has been preferred with the
following relief:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 1
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
"For the facts, reasons and circumstances stated in the accompanying affidavit, it is
most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to quash
the the order dt. 24.02.2025 passed in ST No. 124 of 2023 Computer No. 405 of 2023
State vs. Shyam Ji & Ors in Case Crime No. 114 of 2022 Police Station Jahangirganj,
District Ambedkar Nagar, passed by Additional District & Session Judge, 1st,
Ambedkar Nagar, in the interest of justice. Copy of order dt. 24.02.2025 is annexed
herewith as Annexure No. 1 to the application.
The Hon'ble Court may further be pleased to stay the operation and implementation
of order 24.02.2025 passed in ST No. 124 of 2023 Computer No. 405 of 2023 State
vs. Shyam Ji & Ors in Case Crime No. 114 of 2022 Police Station Jahangirganj,
District Ambedkar Nagar passed by Additional District & Session Judge, 1st,
Ambedkar Nagar, in the interest of justice. Copy of order dt. 24.02.2025 is annexed
herewith as Annexure/No. 1 to the application.
The Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to stay the arrest of the applicants in
furtherance of order dt. 24.02.2025 passed in ST No. 124 of 2023 Computer No. 405
of 2023 State vs. Shyam Ji & Ors in Case Crime No. 114 of 2022 Police Station
Jahangirganj. District Ambedkar Nagar passed by Additional District & Session
Judge, 1st, Ambedkar Nagar, in the interest of justice. Copy of order dt. 24.02.2025 is
annexed herewith as Annexure No. 1 to the application."
3. Learned counsel for the applicants has submitted that the court concerned has passed an
impugned order dated 24.02.2025 under Section 319 Cr.P.C. issuing summons against the
applicants without application of mind or sufficient material/ evidence available before the court
concerned. He has further submitted that the Full Bench decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Hardeep Singh & Others versus State of Punjab & Others reported in (2014) 3 SCC 92
which has been followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Shankar versus State of U.P. &
Others reported in (2024) 6 SCR 10 and by this Court in Application U/S 482 No.418 of 2008 (Smt.
Rekha and 3 Others versus State of U.P. and 2 Others), wherein it has been held, that the degree of
satisfaction that will be required for summoning a person under Section 319 Cr.P.C. would be
different than satisfaction for summoning the original accused. It is further submitted that the
learned trial court while passing the order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. had merely on the statements
of the prosecution witnesses passed the impugned order, whereas during the investigation by the
police, there were three eye witnesses, who had deposed under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that the
applicants were not present at the time of incident. Hence, the order is bad in the eyes of laws and is
liable to the quashed.
4. On the other hand, learned A.G.A. has submitted that the judgments which has been relied by the
learned counsel for the applicants are not applicable on the facts of the present case and there is no
illegality in the orders passed by the trial court under Section 319 Cr.P.C. summoning the applicants
in Case Crime No.114 of 2022 as their names were there since the very inception.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 2
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
5. Learned counsel for the respondent no.4 has submitted that all the injured witnesses had taken
the name of the applicants in their statements recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and at the time of
examination-in-chief under Section 142 of the Indian Evidence Act during the trial so the police
without considering the same had purposely merely on the statements of alleged eye witnesses had
dropped the names of the applicants.
6. After hearing learned counsel for the parties, going through the record of the case and the
judgments relied by the learned counsel for the applicants, the position which emerges out in the
present case is that the FIR was lodged by the complainant against the named accused persons
including the present applicants. During the investigation the five injured witnesses had taken the
names of the applicants. The Investigating Officer of the case had also recorded the statements of
alleged three eye witnesses, who had deposed that the applicants were not present and not involved
in the offence as alleged in the FIR and on that basis had dropped the name of the applicants while
filing the charge-sheet.
7. The court concerned has not taken cognizance and issued summons against the applicants
immediately after the filing of the charge-sheet, the same was issued under Section 319 Cr.P.C. after
the examination-in-chief during the trial of the injured witnesses, who have again taken the names
of the applicants. The name of the applicants were there since the very inception of the lodging of an
FIR, the statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. during investigation by the police and in the
examination-in-chief before the trial court. The judgment in the case of Hardeep Singh (supra) the
relevant para relied by the learned counsel for the applicants is quoted here-in-below:-
"Question No. IV Q.IV What is the nature of the satisfaction required to invoke the
power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. to arraign an accused? Whether the power under
Section 319 (1) Cr.P.C. can be exercised only if the court is satisfied that the accused
summoned will in all likelihood be convicted?
A. Though under Section 319(4)(b) Cr.P.C. the accused subsequently impleaded is to
be treated as if he had been an accused when the Court initially took cognizance of
the offence, the degree of satisfaction that will be required for summoning a person
under Section 319 Cr.P.C. would be the same as for ?framing a charge. The difference
in the degree of satisfaction for summoning the original accused and a subsequent
accused is on account of the fact that the trial may have already commenced against
the original accused and it is in the course of such trial that materials are disclosed
against the newly summoned accused. Fresh summoning of an accused will result in
delay of the trial - therefore the degree of satisfaction for summoning the accused
(original and subsequent) has to be different."
8. Another judgment in the case of Shankar (supra) the relevant para relied by the learned counsel
for the applicants in quoted here-in-below:-
"16. The degree of satisfaction required to exercise power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. is
well settled after the above-referred decision. The evidence before the trial court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 3
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
should be such that if it goes unrebutted, then it should result in the conviction of the
person who is sought to be summoned. As is evident from the above-referred
decision, the degree of satisfaction that is required to exercise power under Section
319 Cr.P.C. is much stricter, considering that it is a discretionary and an
extra-ordinary power. Only when the evidence is strong and reliable, can the power
be exercised. It requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his
complicity.
24. There are no other witnesses who have deposed against the appellants. There is
no documentary evidence that the prosecution had collected against the appellants.
There is absolutely no role that is attributed to the appellants. We are of the opinion
that the deposition of PW-1 is also in line and consistent with her statement under
Section 161. When these factors are looked in a holistic manner, it would be clear that
the higher degree of satisfaction that is required for exercising power under Section
319 Cr.P.C. is not met in the present case."
9. The last judgment dated 07.01.2025 in the case of Smt. Rekha (supra) the relevant para relied by
the learned counsel for the applicants is quoted here-in-below:-
"13. Though, according to the learned State Counsel, the deposition of
complainant-PW-1 recorded during the trial proceedings is enough for summoning
the applicants as an additional accused. But, this Court does not find any force in the
arguments advanced by the learned State Counsel as the deposition of
complainant-PW-1 before the court cannot be construed as a new piece of evidence,
which emerged for the first time and was not previously available when either the
first information report was registered or the investigation was carried out. The
expression "Evidence" as contained in Section 319 Cr.P.C. would not include a vague
statement, and essentially the deposition of prosecution witness has to be tested in its
substance.
14. The decision in Hardeep Singh's case (supra) was again followed by Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Labhuji Amratji Thakor and others Vs. State of Gujraat and
another reported in (2019) 12 SCC 644, wherein it was held that the process under
Section 319 Cr.P.C. cannot be issued by the trial court in a casual manner, as in view
of the decision in Hardeep Singh's case (supra), the trial court is required to analyze
the substance of the evidence recorded during trial. The relevant observations are
reproduced below:
"13. The High Court does not even record any satisfaction that the evidence on record
as revealed by the statement of victim and her mother even makes out a prima facie
case of offence against the appellants. The mere fact that the Court has power under
Section 319 Cr.P.C. to proceed against any person who is not named in the F.I.R. or in
the Charge Sheet does not mean that whenever in a statement recorded before the
Court, name of any person is taken, the Court has to mechanically issue process
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 4
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
under Section 319 Cr.P.C.The Court has to consider substance of the evidence, which
has come before it and as laid down by the Constitution Bench in Hardeep Singh's
(supra) has to apply the test, i.e. "more than prima facie case as exercised at the time
of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes
unrebutted, would lead to conviction." "
10. The judgments relied by the learned counsel for the applicants, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that the difference in the degree of satisfaction for summoning the original accused
and a subsequent accused is on account of the fact that the trial may have already commenced
against the original accused. Fresh summoning of the accused will result in delay of the trial,
therefore, the degree of satisfaction for summoning the accused (original and subsequent) has to be
different.
11. The word 'evidence' has also been discussed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Hardeep Singh (supra), the relevant extract is quoted here-in-below:-
"....Which includes the proof by testimony of witnesses, on oath; or by writing or
records...."
12. It is the case where the testimony of witnesses not only witnesses but the injured witnesses were
in writing as well as during the examination-in-chief which constitutes the sufficient material for
passing the order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. The judgment relied in the case of Shankar (supra) is
not applicable on the facts of the present case. In that case, the FIR was lodged against the named
accused persons. In the FIR, the complainant had said that "I am quite sure that my son Vijay Singh
has been jointly murdered by Bachha Singh s/o Mohan Singh, Shankar s/o Bacha Singh, Vishal s/o
Bacha Singh- residents of Raha and Sanjay s/o Munna Singh, Kallu Singh s/o Munna
Singh-residents of Jalala, Police Station Ghatampur. We have an old existing enmity with these
people." while at the time of recording of the statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C., she had stated
that the appellants were not involved and that she named them without collecting full information
and Shankar & Vishal were not involved in my son's murder. In her deposition as PW-1 before the
trial court, she had once again named the appellants, however, she had said that she had named
them only on the basis of suspicion and due to 11 years old enmity, I had written the names of the
Shankar & Vishal in the FIR so in that circumstances or in these facts some more satisfaction was
required, while passing the order under Section 319 Cr.P.C. Whereas in the present case, the
applicants were named in the FIR, the five injured witnesses had taken the name of the applicants,
the injury reports are on the record, all these injured witnesses at the time examination-in-chief
during the trial had deposed the same statement as they had given at the time of recording of their
statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and there was no suspicion in the minds of the injured
witnesses that these applicants were not involved.
13. As far as the judgment in the case of Smt. Rekha (supra) relied by the learned counsel for the
applicants is concerned i.e. also not applicable on the facts of the present case as para 13, which is
also relied by the learned counsel for the applicants on perusal of the same it has come out that for
the first time in the deposition of complainant PW-1, the name of the accused persons came in light
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 5
Suneel Kumar And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Principal Sec. Home ... on 1 April, 2025
but not earlier either at the time the FIR was lodged or during investigation.
14. It is to be noted that alleged eye witnesses, who had not named the applicants in the statement
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are not injured witnesses, whereas, other five eye witnesses who
consistently named the applicants are all injured witnesses. No error can be said to be committed by
the trial court in summoning the applicants on the statements of injured eye witnesses.
15. In view of the facts, circumstances and discussion made here-in-above, undoubtedly, as per the
law settled by the Full Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Hardeep Singh (supra)
that there must be difference of degree of satisfaction while framing of charge against the named
accused person and the subsequent accused and the said satisfaction depends upon the facts of each
case and as per the facts of the present case as discussed above, there is no illegality in the impugned
order dated 24.02.2025 passed by the learned trial court. Hence, no interference is called for and
the present application is hereby dismissed.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Mohd. Sharif
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21446584/ 6
