Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 24.02.2023
Pronounced on: 16.03.2023
LPA No.13/2020
Sunil Kumar ...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. Muzaffar Ali Shah, Advocate
V/s
Union of India and others ...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. Sandeep Gupta, CGSC
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. This intra Court appeal is directed against the judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court
["Writ Court"] dated 02.11.2019 passed in SWP No.2715/2002 titled Sunil Kumar v. Union of India
and others, whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant herein ["writ petitioner"] seeking
quashment of the order passed by respondent No.3, dismissing the writ petitioner from service
w.e.f. 05.05.2001, has been dismissed.
2. Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant, we find it necessary to give brief resume of the factual antecedents leading to the filing of
this appeal.
3. The writ petitioner was appointed as Constable in 71 Bn Border Security Force on 28.05.1990. He
proceeded on leave w.e.f. 06.06.2000 to 04.08.2000 to attend his ailing wife. On request, the leave
was extended upto 03.10.2000. The writ petitioner claims that he applied for extension of leave, as
his wife was not fully recovered, however, the same was not granted by the respondents and
consequently, the writ petition was recorded absent w.e.f. 04.10.2000 to 04.02.2001. The writ
petitioner, as is claimed by him, reported for duty accompanied by his wife on 05.02.2001. He was
permitted to resume his duties. On 09.02.2001, the writ petitioner again abandoned his duties and
left for home along with his wife. This, the writ petitioner submits, was necessitated because of a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 1
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
serious medical condition of his wife. The writ petitioner claims that he took his wife first to Civil
Hospital on 10.02.2001 from where she was referred to Gandhi Dham Hospital in Gujrat for
specialized treatment and later shifted to Government Medial College, Jammu. The writ petitioner
reported back for duty at Gandhi Dham in Gujrat on 15.04.2001. He was arrested and a Summary
Security Force Court was ordered by respondent No.3. The writ petitioner was tried by the Summary
Security Force Court ["SSFC"], which pronounced sentence of dismissing the petitioner from
service.
4. Feeling aggrieved, the writ petitioner filed an appeal before the Director General, Border Security
Force but the same also came to be dismissed on 12.08.2002. It is in these circumstances, the writ
petitioner filed the writ petition before the Writ Court claiming inter alia quashment of order of his
dismissal from service and a direction to the respondents to reinstate him in service w.e.f.
05.05.201. The decision of the SSFC was challenged before the Writ Court inter alia on the ground
that trial of the writ petitioner was conducted in breach of Rule 63, 134, 157 and 166 of the Border
Security Force Rules, 1969 ["the Rules"]. It was the grouse of the writ petitioner that never during
trial or thereafter he was given a fair opportunity to defend and that the „plea of guilty(cid:129) was
erroneously recorded, though, no such plea had been made by the writ petitioner at any point of
time.
5. On being put on notice, the respondents filed their objections. In the objections, it was averred
that on first occasion the writ petitioner overstayed leave for 61 days and thereafter he remained
absent without leave for 43 days and 189 days respectively on two occasions. The period of absence
of 43 days w.e.f. 18.01.1992 to 29.02.1992 was regularized by granting him 36 days earned leave and
07 days HPL. Even absence without leave for 189 days was regularized by treating the said period as
„dies non(cid:129). The aforesaid leave for 61 days w.e.f. 08.02.1999 to 09.04.1999 was also regularized by
granting 61 days earned leave to the writ petitioner. It is, thus, submitted that the writ petitioner was
habitual of absenting from service without leave. In the year 2000 also when the writ petitioner
proceeded on 60 days earned leave w.e.f. 06.06.2000 to 04.08.2000, on humanitarian ground his
earned leave was extended twice by 30 days each. He was, thus, required to resume his duty on
04.10.2000 forenoon but the writ petitioner chose not to join his duty even after expiry of the
extended period of leave.
6. Having regard to the conduct of the writ petitioner, a Court of Inquiry was instituted under
Section 62 of the Security Force Act, 1968 ["the Act"] to inquire about the unauthorized absence of
the writ petitioner and to find out deficiency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to
the care of the writ petitioner. The Inquiry was completed and Apprehension Roll was issued to the
writ petitioner on 25.12.2000. He, however, voluntarily reported at Battalion Headquarter on
05.02.2001 forenoon after overstaying leave by 124 days. Within five days, when the unit was busy
in massive civic relief work for earthquake victims in addition to operational duties, the writ
petitioner again, on 10.02.2001, deserted the unit lines without leave/permission. An FIR to his
effect was lodged with Officer Commanding on 12.02.2001 and also addressed to Superintendent of
Police, Jammu with copy endorsed to S.H.O. of the Police Station concerned. Three registered
letters were sent to the home address of the writ petitioner by the respondents directing him to
report Battalion Headquarters forthwith. The writ petitioner did not respond to the directions of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 2
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
respondent No.3 and remained absent without any leave.
7. It is averred by the respondents that the writ petitioner instead of responding to the letters of
respondent No.3 made a complaint directly to the Director General, BSF alleging that respondent
No.3 was causing harassment to him. The matter was inquired into by the Frontier Headquarter and
the allegations leveled by the writ petitioner against respondent No.3 and the administration were
found baseless. When the absence period of the writ petitioner crossed 30 days, a Court of Inquiry
was instituted under Section 62 of the Act to inquire into the absence of the writ petitioner. In the
meanwhile, the writ petitioner voluntarily reported at Battalion Headquarter on 15.04.2001 after
AWL of 65 days. The Court of Inquiry was completed on 23.04.2001, which recommended „strict
disciplinary action(cid:129) against the writ petitioner under the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
Upon joining of the writ petitioner for duty at Battalion Headquarters, the writ petitioner was
brought before the Commandant for hearing on offence report under Rule 45 of the Rules for
committing offence under Section 19(a) and 19(b) of the Act. The Commandant after providing
hearing to the writ petitioner ordered for „Record of Evidence(cid:129). On completion of „Record of
Evidence(cid:129) and after going through the same, the Commandant decided to try the accused by
Summary Security Force Court. Trial of the writ petitioner by the SSFC was conducted on
05.05.2001 and the writ petitioner was sentenced "to be dismissed from service". The writ petitioner
filed an appeal before the Director General, Border Security Force against the order of his dismissal
but the same, too, was dismissed by the Director General, BSF.
8. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, it is evident that
the writ petitioner, having been tried by the SSFC on the charges framed against him under Section
19(a) and 19(b) of the Act, has been found guilty of both the charges and has been sentenced to
"dismissal from service".
9. It is true and as is vehemently contended by the learned counsel for the writ petitioner that a
person subject to the Act, who commits any of the offences enumerated in Section 19 including that
he absents himself without leave; or overstays leave granted to him without sufficient cause shall, on
conviction by the Summary Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or such less punishment as in the Act mentioned. Relevant extract of
Section 19, which is relevant for our purpose is reproduced hereunder:-
"19. Absence without leave.--- Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, that is to say,---
(a) Absents himself without leave; or
(b) Without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or
(c) .....................
(d) .......................
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 3
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
(e) ..........................
(f) ..........................
(g) ...........................
Shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
This Section, however, cannot be read in isolation, more so when it clearly provides that the
Summary Security Force Court shall, on conviction of the accused, sentence him to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in the Act
mentioned. This will take us to Section 48 of the Act, which prescribes the punishments that can be
awarded by the Summary Security Force Courts. Before we proceed, we would like to clarify that
Security Force Court, as is defined in Section 2(1)(u) of the Act means a Court referred to in Section
64 of the Act. Section 64 of the Act enumerates three kinds of Security Force Courts i.e. (i) General
Security Force Court; (ii) Petty Security Force Court; and (iii) Summary Security Force Court. Before
we proceed, we find it relevant to set out Section 48 and 49 of the Act herein below:-
"48. Punishments awardable by Security Force Courts.--
(1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons subject
to this Act and convicted by Security Force Courts according to the scale following,
that is to say,--
(a) death;
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but
excluding imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(c) dismissal from the service;
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody;
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank
in the case of an under-officer;
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the
purpose of promotion
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other
prescribed purpose;
(h) fine, in respect of civil offences;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 4
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an
under-officer
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an
offence committed on active duty;
(k) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such
dismissal;
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the
offence for which he is convicted is made good.
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be
inferior in degree to every punishment preceding it in the above scale.
49. Alternative punishments awardable by Security Force Courts.--Subject to the provisions of this
Act, a Security Force Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences
specified in sections 14 to 45 (both inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments
lower in the scale set out in section 48 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence."
10. From a reading of Sections 48 and 49 of the Act, it is clear that Security Force Courts are
empowered to inflict various punishments mentioned in Section 48 of the Act, which include the
sentence of "dismissal from service". As is evident from a reading of Section 48 of the Act,
punishments awardable for offence under Section 19 of the Act is higher in degree to the
punishment of "dismissal from service", in that, imprisonment which may extend to three years is
comprehended by Clause (b) whereas punishment of "dismissal from service" is indicated at Clause
(c). In view of the provision of Sub Section 2 of Section 48 of the Act, the punishment of "dismissal
from service" is inferior in degree to the punishments preceding it i.e. punishments mentioned in
Clause (a) and (b) of Section
48. Section 49 makes it further evident that a Security Force Court may, on convicting a person
subject to the Act for any of the offences specified in Section 14 to 45 (both inclusive), which would
definitely include Section 19, award either the particular punishment provided for the offence in the
said Section or in lieu thereof any of the punishments lower in the scale set out in Section 48. The
Security Force Court is, thus, within its power and jurisdiction to award punishment, which is lesser
or inferior in degree to the punishment that could be awarded under the Section to which the
offence committed by the person subject to the Act is relatable.
11. In the instant case, indisputably, the punishment provided for commission of offence under
Section 19 is imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years but nothing prevents the
Security Force Court to inflict a punishment which is inferior in degree to the aforesaid punishment.
In the instant case, the respondent i.e. Summary Security Force Court has awarded alternative
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 5
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
punishment lower in the scale set out in Section 48 and instead of sentencing the writ petitioner to
suffer imprisonment under Section 19 of the Act has awarded the punishment of "dismissal from
service", which, as explained above, is inferior to the punishment prescribed under Section 19 of the
Act.
12. The aforesaid position becomes abundantly clear from a systematic reading of Section 19 with
Sections 48 and 49 of the Act. We, therefore, reject the contention of the learned counsel for the writ
petitioner that the Summary Security Force Court, which tried the writ petitioner could, on
conviction by it, have only inflicted the sentence of imprisonment as prescribed under Section 19 of
the Act and, therefore, the sentence of "dismissal from service" is bad in the eye of law.
13. Equally untenable is the argument of learned counsel for the writ petitioner that in terms of
Section 11 of the Act read with Rule 22 of the Rules, the services of the writ petitioner could not have
been terminated without the competent authority recording reasons in writing that the trial of the
writ petitioner was inexpedient and impracticable as also without arriving at the opinion that his
further retention in the service was undesirable. The complaint of the writ petitioner is that Section
11 and Rule 22 were not complied with before imposing penalty of "dismissal from service" upon the
writ petitioner. Having gone through the record and also clear stand taken by the respondents,
Section 19 of the Act read with Rule 22 of the Rules were not attracted in the instant case.
14. Indisputably, after the offence report was lodged before the competent authority that the writ
petitioner has committed offence punishable under the Act, the competent authority i.e.
Commandant of the writ petitioner after having dealt with the matter under Rules 44 and 45
remanded the writ petitioner for preparing „Record of Evidence(cid:129). The officer, namely, Bhanwar
Singh, Dy. Commandant was detailed to prepare „Record of Evidence(cid:129) in terms of Rule 48 of the
Rules and it is only after going through the „Record of Evidence(cid:129), which was indisputably recorded
in the presence of the writ petitioner and after associating him in the proceedings, a decision was
taken to put the writ petitioner on trial by Summary Security Force Court. Summary Security Force
Court convened by the Commandant and presided over by him, served upon the writ petitioner two
charges referable to Section 19(a) and 19(b) of the Act. As per the respondents, the writ petitioner
pleaded guilty to both the charges and prayed for taking a lenient view in the matter of punishment.
The Summary Security Force Court without conducting any further proceedings and relying on the
„plea of guilty(cid:129) to both the charges made by the writ petitioner pronounced the sentence i.e.
sentence of "dismissal from service". As already indicated, "dismissal from service" is one of the
punishments that can be awarded by the Security Force Courts for commission of various offences
including the offences under Section 19 of the Act.
15. In the instant case, services of the writ petitioner have been terminated by way of sentence
awarded by the Summary Security Force Court under Section 19 read with Section 45 of the Act and,
therefore, the procedure provided under Rule 22 of the Rules, which is referable to Section 11 was
not required to be followed. Section 11 read with Rule 22 would come into play when a person
subject to the Act is to be dismissed or removed consequent upon a disciplinary inquiry into his
misconduct and not by way of punishment awarded for commission of an offence under the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 6
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
16. Viewed, thus, the only question that begs determination in the given facts and circumstances of
the case is whether the writ petitioner has been tried by the Summary Security Force Court fairly
and in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Rules. As is indicated above and is reiterated
that in the instant case, the findings of Summary Security Force Court recorded against the writ
petitioner are not based on any evidence recorded during trial by the Summary Security Force
Court. The writ petitioner has been held guilty of charges solely on the „plea of guilty(cid:129) made by the
writ petitioner and recorded by the SSFC. This brings us to scrutinize the manner in which the „plea
of guilty(cid:129) of the writ petitioner has been recorded by the SSFC.
17. We are aware that the High Court exercising power of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution does not sit over the judgment or order of the domestic tribunals or Security Force
Courts as an appellate authority. The jurisdiction of this Court is circumscribed and confined only to
the correction of procedural errors or errors of law, which may have resulted in manifest
miscarriage of justice. This Court may also interfere where the order of sentence passed by the
Security Force Court is in violation of the principles of natural justice. The Supreme Court in the
case of S.R.Tewari v. Union of India and another, (2013) 6 SCC 602, has reiterated the law in the
following terms:-
"The role of the court in the matter of departmental proceedings is very limited and
the court cannot substitute its own views or findings by replacing the findings arrived
at by the authority on detailed appreciation of the evidence on record. In the matter
of imposition of sentence, the scope for interference by the court is very limited and
restricted to exceptional cases. The punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority
or the appellate authority unless shocking to the conscience of the court, cannot be
subjected to judicial review........."
18. Shorn of other untenable arguments made by the learned counsel for the writ petitioner, we, in
the instant case, are inclined to examine the manner in which the alleged „plea of guilty(cid:129) has been
recorded by the Summary Security Force Court for awarding punishment of „dismissal from
service(cid:129) upon the writ petitioner.
19. The scrutiny is limited only to find out as to whether because of non-compliance of the
mandatory provisions of the Rule 142 of the Rules, right of fair trial guaranteed to the writ petitioner
not only under the Act and the Rules framed thereunder but also under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India has been violated. Rule 142 of the Rules lays down elaborate procedure for recording the
„plea of guilty(cid:129) or „not guilty(cid:129) and, therefore, it is necessary to set out Rule 142 of the Rules herein
below:-
"142. General plea of "Guilty "or "Not Guilty" .-(1) The accused person 's plea of
"Guilty "or "Not Guilty "(or if he refuses to plead or does not plead intelligibly either
one or the other), a plea of "Not Guilty "shall be recorded on each charge.
(2) If an accused person pleads "Guilty ", that plea shall be recorded as the finding of
the Court but before it is recorded, the Court shall ascertain that the accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 7
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
understands the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty and shall inform
him of the general effect of that plea, and in particular of the meaning of the charge to
which he has pleaded guilty, and of the difference in procedure which will be made by
the plea of guilty and shall advise him to withdraw that plea if it appears from the
record or abstract of evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought to plead
not guilty.
Provided that after recording plea of guilty, signature of the accused and friend of the accused shall
be obtained. (3) Where an accused person pleads guilty to the first two or more charges laid in the
alternative, the Court may after sub-rule (2) has been complied with and before the accused is
arraigned on the alternative charge or charges, withdraw such alternative charge or charges as
follow the charge to which the accused has pleaded guilty without requiring the accused to plea
thereto, and a record to that effect shall be made in the proceedings of the Court."
20. From a reading of Rule 142 of the Rules, it is abundantly clear that the procedure that is
required to be followed and the manner in which the "plea of guilty" or "not guilty" is to be recorded
is mandatory in nature lest in the event of breach the trial would be vitiated on account of violation
of principles of natural justice. The Rule lays down following steps to be followed:-
i) Plea of "guilty" or "not guilty" shall be recorded on each charge. If the accused
refuses to plead or does not plead intelligibly "guilty" or "not guilty", a plea of "not
guilty" shall be recorded on each charge.
ii) If an accused person pleads "Guilty" the plea shall be recorded by the Court as the
finding of the Court.
iii) Before recording such plea of "guilty" the Court shall ascertain that the accused
understands the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded guilty.
iv) The accused shall also be informed by the Court of the general effects of making
plea of "guilty". He should be made aware of the meaning of the charge to which he
has pleaded "guilty" and of the difference in procedure which will be followed
consequent upon such plea.
v) The Court shall also advise the accused making plea of "guilty" to withdraw such
plea where the Court is of the opinion based upon the record or abstract of evidence,
if any, or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty.
vi) That after recording plea of "guilty", signatures of the accused and the friend of
the accused shall be obtained. (This was, however, added by way of an amendment
made in Rule 142 of the Rules by S.O.2628(E) dated 25.11.2011.)
21. In light of the procedure provided in Rule 142 of the Rules, when we examine the original record
produced by Mr. Vishal Sharma, learned DSGI, we find that the „plea of guilty(cid:129) recorded by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 8
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
SSFC is not in consonance with law and has occasioned serious miscarriage of justice. The writ
petitioner has been inflicted a major penalty of "dismissal from service" without holding proper
trial. The writ petitioner, as is evident from the original record, appears to have appeared before the
Court along with his friend appointed by the respondents, namely, Sh. D.S.Samyal, Deputy
Commandant. The charge-sheet was read over and explained to the writ petitioner and he was put
four questions. Question No.1 was in respect of charge No.1 to which the writ petitioner answered
"guilty". Similarly, to the question No.2, which was in respect of charge No.2, the writ petitioner
answered "guilty". It seems that without first explaining the writ petitioner the meaning of the
charges to which he allegedly pleaded guilty and without making him aware of the general effects of
that plea and difference in the procedure that will be followed consequent upon such plea, the Court
recorded in proceedings the "plea of guilty" allegedly made by the writ petitioner. Neither the writ
petitioner nor his friend appointed by the respondents has acknowledged the plea and put their
signatures in lieu thereof.
22. It is true that as per Rule 142 of the Rules, as it stood on 01.05.2001, signatures of the accused
were not required on the "plea of guilty" but having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case, more particularly, when the writ petitioner has all along maintained that he was not guilty of
the charges and remained absent from duty due to the reasons beyond his control, the Court should
have been more careful while recording the "plea of guilty" and should have done well to obtain
signatures of the writ petitioner as also friend of the writ petitioner appointed by the respondents to
defend him. In the offence report the writ petitioner has clearly denied the charges, which ultimately
became subject matter of trial before the SSFC. In his statutory appeal made to the Director General
of Police, Border Security Force the writ petitioner has clearly stated that he had not made any „plea
of guilty(cid:129) before the SSFC. We also cannot lose sight of the fact that the writ petitioner had made
serious allegations of harassment against his Commandant, who ultimately convened and presided
over the SSFC. It is the said Commandant, who ultimately sentenced the writ petitioner by inflicting
the punishment of "dismissal from service". Otherwise also, in view of the clear stand of the writ
petitioner taken while recording his statement during preparation of "Record of Evidence" by Sh.
Bhanwar Singh appointed by the Commandant, it was incumbent upon the Court to advise the writ
petitioner to withdraw his plea and try him as per the procedure laid down in the Rules. This part of
the provisions contained in Sub Rule 2 of Rule 142 of the Rules also does not appear to have been
complied with by the SSFC.
23. Moreover plea of "guilty" has been recorded on a cyclostyle/type sheet with blanks which have
been filled up later during recording of the plea. The questions asked to the writ petitioner-
Constable are in English language without making it clear whether the questions were also
translated in the manner the charge sheet is said to have been translated and read over to the writ
petitioner. After recording the plea of guilty, the Commandant presiding over the Court has made a
note by borrowing the language contained in Rule 142 of the Rules, as is evident from Sheet-B of the
proceedings of the Court, which for facility of reference is reproduced herein below:-
"............The accused having pleaded guilty to both the charges the Court explains to
the accused the meaning of charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertains
that the accused understands the nature of the charge(s) to .............which he has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 9
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
pleaded guilty. The Court also inform the accused the general effect of that plea and
the difference in procedure which will be followed consequent to the said plea. The
Court having satisfied itself that the accused understands the charge(s) and the effect
of his plea of guilty, accepts and records the same. The provisions of Rule 142(2) are
complied with.
Sd/-
(P.C.Sharma, Commandant)"
24. From a reading of the extracted portion of the proceedings, it is crystal clear that is a pre-typed
page where the particulars of the writ petitioner have been filled in with questions as to whether you
plead "guilty" or "not guilty" to the charges. Below the questions, there are answer using singular
word "guilty" and in the last paragraph, compliance to Rule 142 of the Rules is indicated by
borrowing the language used in Rule 142 itself. As already noted, the plea of "guilty" is neither
signed by the writ petitioner nor by Dy. Commandant- D.S.Samyal, who acted as friend of the writ
petitioner in the trial.
25. The manner in which the plea is recorded and the other attending circumstances bring the „plea
of guilty(cid:129) recorded by the SSFC in the realm of reasonable suspicion that the writ petitioner ever
pleaded "guilty" before the SSFC. Merely saying or noting in the proceedings that the Rule 142 has
been complied with is not the compliance. Before the plea of guilty is recorded, it is incumbent upon
the Court to explain to the accused the nature and manner of the charge and forewarn him about the
consequences and effect of the plea of guilty. The accused must be made aware that different
procedure will be followed, if he pleads "guilty" and that one or more of the punishments laid down
under the Act could be inflicted. It is only, if after understanding the charge and effects of recording
plea of "guilty" as also being aware that a different procedure shall follow consequent upon
recording of such plea, the accused voluntarily pleads "guilty" to the charges, such plea should be
recorded. Warning to the accused of the general effects of the plea and the difference in procedure
which will be followed consequent upon recording of such plea is sine qua non for recording „plea of
guilty(cid:129).
26. In the instant case, the respondents have put the cart before the horse. The plea of "guilty" is
recorded first and then the writ petitioner has been stated to have been informed about what is laid
down in Rule 142 of the Rules. Even in the absence of their being specific provision in Rule 142 in
the year 2001, it was prudent for the SSFC to obtain signatures of the writ petitioners or his friend
appointed to defend him in acknowledgement of such plea of "guilty" made by the writ petitioner to
the charges for which he was put on trial by the SSFC.
27. Having regard to the facts and circumstances attending the instant case and the manner in
which the alleged "plea of guilty" of the writ petitioner has been recorded, leaves us with no option
but to come to a conclusion that the writ petitioner has either not pleaded "guilty" to any of the
charge as is recorded by the Court or same was not voluntarily in nature. We are, therefore, of
considered view that the right of the writ petitioner to have a fair trial before the SSFC has been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 10
Sunil Kumar vs Union Of India And Others on 16 March, 2023
violated and the writ petitioner has been condemned unheard.
28. For the foregoing reasons, we find that the Summary Security Force Court proceedings including
the award of sentence of "dismissal from service" are entirely vitiated. The Writ Court has not
adverted to this aspect in right perspective and has without indicating much reasons concluded that
the dismissal of the writ petitioner from service was in consonance with Rule 22 and, therefore, does
not call for any interference. Whether or not the "plea of guilty" attributed to the writ petitioner was
rightly recorded or not has not been dealt with by the Writ Court at all.
29. For the foregoing reasons, we allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of the Writ Court
impugned in this appeal. Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and by writ of certiorari Order
No.ESTT/71 BN/SSFC/2001/4543-64 dated 05.05.2001 is quashed. The writ petitioner shall be
deemed to have been reinstated in service with effect from the date he was dismissed from service
with all consequential benefits. It shall, however, remain open to the respondents to proceed with
and conclude the trial by Summary Security Force Court de novo within two months. The
disbursement of consequential benefits shall be dependent upon the outcome of de novo trial by
SSFC.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU
16.03.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183542604/ 11
