Sunil Sonkar vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Sunil Sonkar vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Author: Sanjay Kumar Pachori
Bench: Sanjay Kumar Pachori
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15535
Court No. - 75
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3088 of 2025
Applicant :- Sunil Sonkar
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Umesh Chandra Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Sanjay Kumar Pachori,J.
Heard Sri Umesh Chandra Tiwari, learned counsel for the applicant and Ms. Ladly Pandey, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the material on record.
The present bail application has been filed on behalf of applicant-Sunil Sonkar under Section 439 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, with a prayer to enlarge him on bail in Case Crime No.21 of 2024
for offence punishable under Sections 3(1) of U.P. Gangsters and Anti Social Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1986, registered at Police Station- Navgadh, District- Chandauli, during pendency of the trial,
after rejecting the bail application of the applicant by Special Sessions Judge (Gangster
Act)/Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.-I), Chandauli vide order dated 30.11.2024.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8412063/ 1
Sunil Sonkar vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. It is further submitted that the applicant has
been slapped in the present case on the basis of two criminal cases, which have been explained in
paragraph no. 8 of the affidavit.
It is further submitted that there is no pre- summoning evidence with regard to the fact that the
applicant effected the evidence in a murder case in any manner. It is further submitted that there is
no pre-summoning evidence with regard to the fact that the applicant has run any gang or a gang
leader as defined in the Act. It is next contended that applicant is neither a member of any gang nor
a gang leader and he is not indulged in any anti-social activities as alleged by the prosecution in the
first information report. It is further submitted that there is no other evidence with regard to
tampering the evidence in the pending cases.
It is further submitted that the provisions of the Act have been ill-used by the Police in order to
perpetuate the detention of the applicant in jail anyhow even though the offence under the aforesaid
Act is not made out. It is also submitted that the applicant is not a gangster and has never acted or
conducted himself as such. Learned counsel for the applicant has also tried to demonstrate that the
alleged previous offences which are said to have been committed by the applicant can at the most be
said to be stray incident of breach of law having no nexus with the definition of a gangster as has
been provided in the Act. It is further submitted that co-accused Vikash Kumar Kesarwani @ Rahul
Gupta has been granted bail by this Court in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 23531 of 2024, vide
order dated 27.6.2024.
He has next argued that except the present case and the two others cases, applicant has no other
criminal history and the applicant is languishing in jail since 06.12.2023.
Learned counsel for the applicant has relied upon the judgments of Apex Court in Ash Mohammad
Vs. Shiv Raj Singh @ Lalla Babu and another, (2012) 9 SCC 446 and Prabhakar Tiwari Vs. State of
U.P. and another, (2020) 11 SCC 648 wherein the Apex Court has observed that pendency of other
criminal cases against the accused may itself cannot be a basis for refusal of bail.
Per contra, learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail of the applicant by contending that the
innocence of the applicant cannot be adjudged at pre trial stage, therefore, he does not deserve any
indulgence. In case the applicant is released on bail, he will again indulge in similar activities and
will misuse the liberty of bail.
It is well settled position of law that bail is the rule and committal to jail is an exception and refusal
of bail is a restriction on the personal liberty of the individual guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution [Vide State of Rajasthan Vs. Balchand @ Baliay (1977) 4 SCC 308 Gudikanti
Narasimhulu And Ors Vs. Public Prosecutor, High Court Of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1978 SC 429 and
Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation & Another, (2021) 10 SCC 773.] No
material or circumstances has been brought to the notice of this Court with regard to tampering of
evidence or intimidating of witnesses in previous criminal history.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8412063/ 2
Sunil Sonkar vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Keeping in mind, larger mandate of Article 21 of the constitution of India, the nature of accusations,
the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of punishment which conviction will entail,
the character of the accused-applicant, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused, reasonable
possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the
witnesses being tampered with, the larger interest of the public/ State and other circumstances and
after considering the provision of Section 19(4) of the U.P. Gangsters Act, but without expressing
any opinion on the merits, I am of the view that it is a fit case for grant of bail. Hence, present bail
application is allowed.
Let applicant, Sunil Sonkar be released on bail in the aforesaid case crime number on his furnishing
a personal bond and two reliable sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to the following conditions:
(i) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat, or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates
fixed for (a) opening of the case, (b) framing of charge and (c) recording of statement
under Section 313 of Cr.P.C.
(iv) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in the
trial court.
(v) The applicant shall remain present before the trial court on each date fixed, either
personally or through his counsel.
(vi) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity or commission of any
crime after being released on bail.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail. If in the
opinion of the trial court that absence of the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then
it shall be open for the trial court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed in
accordance with law.
The trial court may make all possible efforts/endeavor and try to conclude the trial expeditiously in
accordance with law after the release of the applicant, if there is no other legal impediment.
It is made clear that the observations made in this order are limited to the purpose of determination
of this bail application and will in no way be construed as an expression on the merits of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8412063/ 3
Sunil Sonkar vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
The trial court shall be absolutely free to arrive at its independent conclusions on the basis of
evidence led unaffected by anything said in this order.
The party shall file computer generated copy of such order downloaded from the official website of
High Court Allahabad, self attested by the applicant along-with a self attested identity proof of the
said person (preferably Aadhar Card) mentioning the mobile number to which the said Aadhar Card
is linked.
The concerned Court/Authority/Official shall verify the authenticity of such computerized copy of
the order from the official website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a declaration of such
verification in writing.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Akram
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8412063/ 4
