Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April,
2019
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH: BENCH AT INDORE
Division Bench: Hon'ble Shri Justice S.C Sharma and Hon'ble
Shri Justice Virender Singh
Criminal Appeal No.867/2019
Sunil
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh
Smt. Rekha Shrivastava, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri L.S Chandiramani, learned counsel for the
respondent/State.
JUDGMENT
(Delivered on 09/04/2019 ) Per : Virender Singh, J. :
The appellant has challenged his conviction and sentence of life imprisonment under
section 302/34 of the IPC recorded by Special Judge, SC/ST Act, Rajgarh Biaora vide
judgment dated 26.04.2017 delivered in Special Sessions Trial No.75/2015.
2. The appellant is convicted alongwith three other accused persons namely Ashok, Rajesh and
Pawan, who have preferred appeal bearing criminal appeal nos.961/2017, 1177/2017 and 1340/2017
and their appeals have been allowed by this Court vide judgment dated 02.01.2019 and they are
acquitted from the charges.
3. Learned counsel for the appellant argued the matter on the same line on which the co-accused
persons have been acquitted by this Court.
4. Learned public prosecutor has fairly admitted that the case of the present appellant is identical to
the case of co-accused persons who have been acquitted by this Court vide judgment dated
02.01.2019 passed in Criminal Appeal Nos.961/2017, 1177/2017 and 1340/2017.
5. The judgment passed in the aforesaid appeals reads thus:-
" With the consent of the parties, heard finally.
1. All these three appeals have arisen out of the same judgment; therefore, they are
heard analogously and are being decided by this common order.
2. All the appellants have challenged their conviction and sentence of life
imprisonment under section 302/34 of the IPC recorded by Special Judge, SC/ST
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 1
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
Act, Rajgarh Biaora vide judgment dated 26.04.2017 delivered in Special Sessions
Trial No.75/2015.
3. The prosecution had come before the Trial Court with a case that the deceased
Rajkumar was having affair with the sister of the appellant Sunil. Annoyed by this he
hatched a conspiracy with his cousins Pawan and Ashok and friend Rajesh to kill
him. On 19th August, 2015 at about 07:00 in the evening they called him through
Ashok on the pretext that they will deputize him with his lover. Ashok went to his
house and took him with him towards Kurawar. Other appellants also joined them.
On the way to Kurawar, they offered him drinks and had the same with him. When he
was intoxicated, they strangulated him with a handkerchief and threw his body in the
bushes to disappear the evidence of commission of the offence with intent to screen
themselves from legal punishment and they have committed the offence knowingly
that the deceased belongs to Scheduled Caste.
4. According to the prosecution case, on 19.08.2015, the deceased was at home
alongwith his mother Inderbai (PW-5) and brother Vinod (PW-8) at village
Mohmmadpur, Police Station Kalapipal, district Shajapur. His father had gone at his
job with Gopal Seth at Kurawar. In the evening, at about 07:00 his friend Ashok
(appellant) came and asked him to come with him to Kurawar. They both left the
house on the motorcycle of Ashok. After about an hour when mother Inderbai asked
his son Vinod to ask the deceased Raj Kumar as to where he is and when will he come
back, the deceased replied that he is in Kurawar with Ashok and Pawan (appellants).
After sometime, when Vinod again called him on mobile, he said that he is coming
back shortly, but he did not come back. At about 09:00 in the night, Vinod again tried
to contact him on mobile but this time could not get connection. The deceased did
not come back home for the whole night. On next morning, Vinod called his father
Kunwarji (PW-1) on mobile and informed about the incident. He came back home at
about 10:00 o'clock and went to the house of Ashok with his wife Inderbai and asked
his father Baijnath and brother Jitendra about Rajkumar but they scolded and asked
them to leave their house. Kunvarji tried to search his son but in vain. Ultimately, he
approached the police and lodged a missing person report No. 23/2015 on
23.08.2015 (Ex.P/2) at Police Station Kalapipal.
5. On 21.08.2015, the police of Narsingarh recovered deadbody of an unknown
person, registered merg No.30/2015 and got the post mortem done. It was revealed
that the death of the deceased was due to throttling and was in homicidal in nature;
therefore, FIR No.410/2016 (Ex.P/16) against the unknown persons was registered
and the Police buried the deadbody.
6. After 6-7 days, Kunwarji received information from the Police Station Narsingarh
about recovery of dead body of an unknown person. Next day he went there. The
police showed him photograph clothes and shoes of the dead body, which they had
found at the Ganesh Mandir Hills. Kunwarji identified them as photographs and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 2
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
articles of his son Rajkumar.
7. During investigation, father Kunwarji and brother Vinod of the deceased informed
the police that 5-6 months prior to the incident sister of the appellant Sunil, Manju
had written two love letters to the deceased, but he brought them home as he was
illiterate and asked his brother Vinod to read them. Father (of the deceased) took
these letters to Bhagirath (PW-3) and they both approached Tejsingh (PW-4), who
assured them that he will talk to the family of Manju. Father of the deceased kept the
photocopy of the letters with him and handed over both the letters to the father of
Manju, who got them burned through his son Sunil. But due to this episode Sunil got
annoyed.
8. On receiving this information, the Police nabbed the appellants and interrogated
them. They revealed that due to affair of the deceased with sister of Sunil, he along
with his cousins Ashok and Pawan and friend Rajesh hatched a conspiracy to kill the
deceased, called him through Ashok and on the way to Kurawara, killed him at hills
of Ganesh Mandir and threw his body in the bushes.
9. The police recovered a black handkerchief allegedly used in throttling (Ex.P/33)
and a black platinum motorcycle (Ex.P/34) from Sunil, a black purse containing a
colour photograph of the deceased and a receipt of his Aadhar Card from Rajesh
(Ex.P/35), a green Bajaj motorcycle from Ashok (Ex.P/36) on the basis of their
disclosure statements (Ex.P/28-31). Sunil also revealed that he had thrown the
mobile of the deceased in a pond. The police tried to recover it with the help of divers
but in vain (Ex.P/24-25). The police arrested the appellants vide memo Ex.P/37-40,
got the purse recovered from Rajesh identified from father of the deceased through
councilor Mohan Verma, seized photocopy of letters written by Manju to the
deceased (Ex.P/43) and one mobile each from Sunil (Ex.P/44) and Ashok (Ex.P/45)
and sent the black handkerchief to the doctor for his opinion as to whether the
ligature marks found on the dead body can be caused by this handkerchief (query
Ex.P/48 reply Ex.P/49). Manju refused to give sample of her handwriting; therefore,
hand writing of photocopy of letters allegedly written by her could not be compared.
The police sent a letter Ex.P/14 to the Tehsildar to get the spot map prepared from
Patwari, who later prepared the same (Ex.P/13). All the articles seized were sent to
the FSL vide Ex.P/51 and who submitted reports Ex.P52 and 53. CDR of mobile
phones used by the accused persons were also seized from service provider Idea and
Vodaphone (Ex.P/54-55).
10. Panchnama (Ex.P/22) of verification of the spot where, according to the
appellants, they had liquor with the deceased and panchnama of the place where they
got their tube of motorcycle changed were also prepared. The police got the tube
identified from the shopkeeper Kailash and prepared Panchana Ex.P/14. After
investigation, the police filed charge sheet.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 3
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
11. Charges under section 302 read with Section 120- B IPC, in alternate Section 302
read with Section 34 of the IPC, Section 201 of the IPC and Section 3 (2)(v) of The
Scheduled Castes And The Scheduled Tribes (Prevention Of Atrocities) Act, 1989
were framed against the appellants. They denied the charges and claimed for trial.
After the trial, they are convicted under section 302/34 of the IPC and acquitted from
all other charges.
12. The appellants have preferred this appeal on the grounds that the judgment of the
learned trial Court is contrary to the law and facts available on record. The learned
trial Court has committed error in appreciating the evidence of the prosecution and
in relying upon the statements of interested witnesses and in discarding the defense
version. Learned trial Court failed to consider material contradictions and omissions
appeared in the statements of the prosecution witnesses and have wrongly placed
reliance on their statements, therefore, the appellants are entitled for the acquittal.
13. Learned public prosecutor has supported the judgment and prayed for dismissal
of the appeal.
14. Before the trial Court, Dr. Shahbar PW/17 has stated that he along with his
companion Dr.K.K Uniya and Dr. Gaurav had performed the post mortem on the
body of 26-27 years old unknown persons on 21.08.2015 and after observation they
were of the opinion that the cause of death of the deceased was asphyxia due to
throttling. Though the appellants have contested the finding of the Doctors before the
trial Court but before us they have not controverted this fact, therefore, we uphold
the findings of the trial Court that the death of the deceased was homicidal.
15. The trial Court has summed up the circumstances placed before it by the
prosecution in para no.17 of the impugned judgment which reads thus:-
17- vfHkys[k ij vfHk;kstu dh vksj ls izkjaHk ls var rd vfHk;qDrx.k ds fo:) ,slh dksbZ
izR;{k lk{; is'k ugha dh xbZ gS] ftlds vk/kkj ij izekf.kr gksrk gks] fd vfHk;qDrx.k }kjk
e`rd jktdqekj dh gR;k mldk xyk ?kkSaVdj dh xbZ FkhA vfHk;kstu dh vksj ls e`rd
jktdqekj dh gR;k esa vfHk;qDrx.k dh lafyIrrk LFkkfir djus ds fy, ifjfLFkfrtU; lk{; dk
voyacu fy;k x;k gSA vfHkys[k ij miyC/k lk{; dk fo'ys"k.k djds ;g ns[kuk gksxk fd D;k
vfHk;kstu }kjk is'k lk{; ds vk/kkj ij ;qfDr;qDr lansg ,oa 'kadk ls ijs e`rd jktdqekj dh
gR;k esa vfHk;qDrx.k dh lafyIrrk izekf.kr gS\ vfHk;kstu }kjk ;g izdj.k fuEufyf[kr
ifjfLFkfr;ksa ds vk/kkj ij is'k fd;k x;k gSA ifjfLFkfr dz- 1 %& e`rd jktdqekj dks vafre
ckj vfHk;qDr v'kksd ds lkFk lk{kh banjckbZ v-lk-5 ,oa fouksn v-lk-8 }kjk ns[kk x;k
FkkA ifjfLFkfr dz- 2 %& vfHk;qDr lquhy mQZ lksuw dh cgu eatwckbZ dk iszeizlax
e`rd jktdqekj ds lkFk gksuk ,oa ?kVuk ds dq N fnu iwoZ eatwckbZ }kjk e`rd jktdqekj
dks izsei= fy[kdj fn;k tkukA ifjfLFkfr dz- 3 %& vfHk;qDr jkts'k ds eseksjsaMe iz-ih- 31
ds vk/kkj ij vfHk;qDr jkts'k dh fu'kknsgh ij e`rd jktdqekj dk ilZ tIrh iapukek iz-ih- 35
ds }kjk tIr fd;k tkukA ifjfLFkfr dz- 4 %& vfHk;qDr lquhy mQZ lksuw ds eseksjsaMe
iz-ih- 29 ds vk/kkj ij vfHk;qDr lquhy mQZ lksuw dh fu'kknsgh ij iz-ih- 33 ds
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 4
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
tIrhiapukes ds }kjk e`rd jktdqekj dh gR;k esa iz;qDr dkyk jax dk :eky tIr fd;k tkukA
ifjfLFkfr dz- 5 %& vfHk;qDr jkts'k] lquhy] iou ,oa v'kksd ds eseksjsaMe iz-ih-15 ds
vk/kkj ij vfHk;qDrx.k dh fu'kknsgh ij ?kVukLFky dk rLnhd iapukek iz-ih-21 cuk;k
tkukA"
16. First and the most important circumstance relied on by the prosecution is that the deceased was
last seen with the appellant Ashok and when contacted on mobile he revealed that he is with Pawan
and Ashok. To establish this circumstance, the prosecution has examined mother Inderbai PW/5
and brother Vinod PW/8 of the deceased and they have deposed on oath that when they all together
were at home, Ashok came and asked the deceased to accompany him to Kurawar and the deceased
went with him on his motorcycle. When they contact him twice on mobile, he revealed that he is
with Ashok and Pawan but thereafter, neither he could be contacted on phone nor he returned
home. Both these witnesses have stated that they have revealed this fact before husband/father
Kunwarji. Kunwarji PW/1 has also admitted this fact that his wife Inderbai and son Vinod had
informed him that the deceased had gone with Ashok and when he contacted him on mobile he
revealed that he is with Ashok and Pawan. Kunwarji has stated that after knowing this, he went to
the house of Ashok to inquire about the whereabouts of his son Rajkumar, but they started
quarreling, scolded him and asked him to leave their house but surprisingly all these facts are not
informed to the police at the first instance and these facts are not mentioned in the missing person
report Ex.P/2 lodged by Kunwarji at Police Station Kalapipal. The information given by Kuwarji at
police station Kalapipal reads thus:-
'' xqelqnk ?kj ls fn- 19@8@15 dks 'kke 7%00 cts fcuk crk;s dgh pyk x;k gS tks vkt rd
okil ugh vk;k gSA ;g igys Hkh ,d ckj pyk x;k Fkk tks okil vk;kA "
17. It would be pertinent to mention that at the time of lodging this missing persons report, wife of
Kuwarji and mother of the deceased Inderbai was with him (Kuwarji) at the police station itself. In
para no. 13 of his deposition, she has admitted that her husband lodged this missing persons report
in her presence and they have informed the police regarding the fact that the appellant Ashok had
taken their son with him and when contacted on mobile, he informed her that he is with Pawan and
Ashok. No explanation, whatsoever, is given by the prosecution as to why this fact is not mentioned
in the missing person report.
18. Missing person report is lodged after four days of missing of the deceased on 23.08.2015 and the
delay is unexplained and is fatal to the prosecution case particularly when the prosecution itself has
come with the story that since the time the deceased left home, his mother and brother were aware
of the fact that he had gone with Ashok. Non mentioning of this fact in the missing person report
specially when the scriber Kunwarji was knowing this fact at the time of lodging the report, adds on
the doubt already existing in the mind. Record shows that first time this fact has come to the
knowledge of the police on 05/06-09-2015 when statements of father Kuwarji PW/1, mother
Inderbai PW/5 and brother Vinod PW/5 were recorded by the police under section 161 of the Cr.P.C
but it is to keep in mind that prior to recording of these statements, all the accused persons were
already in custody since 02.09.2015 (Ex.P/37-40). The police interrogated them on the same day,
recorded their memo statements also (Ex.P30-33) and recovered two motorcycles, purse,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 5
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
handkerchief (Ex.P/33-36) from their possession. This fact also strengthens the doubt.
19. It is claimed by Inderbai and Vinod that they called the deceased twice mobile but most
important link is missing in this case as to from and on which mobile numbers Vinod made calls.
Neither the information regarding the mobile number used by Vinod or the deceased to make or
receive the calls nor their call details are seized or produced by the prosecution before the Trial
Court and this missing link breaks the chain of circumstance particularly in the background of the
fact that at the first instance no such information was given to the police that the deceased had gone
with the accused Ashok.
20. In his cross examination, Vinod PW/8 had admitted that he did not revealed this fact before
anyone for next 15 days and he has not given any explanation for the same. This makes his
statement and also the prosecution case based on this evidence doubtful.
21. In any case, if we consider the statements of the witnesses true, even then they only stated that
the deceased had gone with Ashok. There is no evidence that the other accused Sunil and Rajesh
were with the deceased. This evidence also cannot be used against the accused Pawan as there is no
evidence to connect him with the crime except the statement of Vinod that deceased told him that he
was with Pawan and Ashok. In absence of any corroborative evidence like call details, only on the
basis of such evidence, we cannot hold that the other appellants were also last seen together with the
deceased. Thus, we have no hesitation to hold that first circumstance put-forth by the prosecution
could not be established beyond a reasonable doubt.
22. The evidence against the appellant Sunil is that a black handkerchief, which was allegedly used
to strangulate the deceased was seized from his possession and Dr.K.K. Uniya PW/20 has opined
that the ligature marks found on the dead body may be caused by this handkerchief. But Dr. Uniya
had admitted in his cross examination that generally handkerchief is soft material and ligature mark
cannot be caused by such soft material. The trial Court has dismissed this explanation on the basis
that it was a reply to a general question and no specific question is asked regarding the handkerchief
seized from the appellant Sunil but this is not a case of the prosecution that some typical or specific
type of handkerchief was seized from Sunil. The evidence produced by the prosecution itself shows
that this was a common type of handkerchief, therefore, admission of Dr.Uniya cannot be discarded
on this ground alone. Otherwise also, this is a fact of common knowledge that ligature marks cannot
be caused by handkerchief. Thus, guilt of appellant Sunil also does not establish in this case.
23. The prosecution has come forward with a story that the deceased was having affair with sister of
Sunil, Manjubai. She wrote two love letters to the deceased, which proved the root cause of the death
of the deceased or which led the controversy upto the death of the deceased but admittedly original
love letters were not available to the police, these letters were written 5-6 months prior to the
incident and handwriting of these letters could not be compared due to non co-operation of Manju.
Besides, the prosecution evidence shows that after getting those letters, Kuwarji took them to
Tejsingh, who assured him to look into the matter, then he photocopied those letters and returned
the originals to the father of Manju, who got them burned, but there are discrepancies on the
material points in the statements of the witness. Mother Inderbai has stated nothing regarding the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 6
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
story of love letters. Tejsingh PW-4 has stated nothing regarding the story of handing over of
original letters to the father of Manju or the fact that Sunil had burned them. Kuwarji PW-1 has
stated that he had shown those letters to Tejsingh who read the same and asked him to go back
home, while Tejsingh has stated that he had never read those letters, but asked Kuwarji to come in
the Panchayat in the next morning, but he never turned up. It appears unbelievable that even after
returning original letters; a rustic villager does take out photocopies of those letters and will keep
them with him for no reason.
24. Seizure of purse of the deceased containing his photograph and receipt of Aadhar Card is
another circumstance placed by the prosecution to prove guilt of the appellants, but first of all, this
purse was seized from Rajesh. Nothing is there to connect other appellant with this recovery. There
has nothing come in the evidence that at the time of leaving the house the deceased was having any
purse with him. According to the prosecution case, after killing the deceased, Rajesh took out the
purse and mobile from the dead body, kept the purse with him and threw the mobile in the pond.
Later, mobile could not be recovered while purse was recovered kept in his suitcase kept in the
almirah in the house. This story is inherently improbable. This is unbelievable that after killing some
person for the reason that the deceased was having affairs with his cousin sister will search the dead
body and after taking out the purse and mobile would throw the mobile, which at least has some
value and keep the purse alongwith the photograph and receipt of Aadhar card of the deceased,
which was totally useless for him. It is further unbelievable that after stealing the purse from the
dead body, without using it someone will keep it only for the sake of keeping the same. In absence of
any corroborating evidence and in absence of any explanation, the entire story of the prosecution
does not inspire confidence.
25. There is no evidence to connect the motorcycles seized from the appellants or the spot map or
the memo of verification of the place of incident, therefore, these circumstances are also not
sufficient to prove the charge framed against the appellants. It has come in the prosecution case
itself that no sign of struggle or no injury was found on the dead body. The prosecution has come
before this court that first the appellants had liquor with the deceased, thereafter, they killed him,
but brother of the deceased Vinod P/W-8 has clearly admitted that the deceased had no habit of
having liquor. Presence of liquor in the viscera also could not be confirmed in the FSL Report. This
makes the prosecution story doubtful.
26. Thus, the prosecution failed to produce any cogent and convincing evidence to establish that it
was the appellant; who took the deceased with them and killed him. The learned trial Court has
committed error in appreciating the evidence and also in holding the appellants guilty for the
alleged crime.
27. Consequently, all the appeals are allowed. The appellants are acquitted from the charge under
section 302/34 of the IPC. Fine amount, if deposited, be refunded to them. They be set at liberty
forthwith, if not required in any other case.
28. Order of the trial Court regarding disposal of property stands confirmed."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 7
Sunil @ Sonu Pal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 April, 2019
6. As the case of the appellant is identical to the other co-accused persons, this appeal also stands
allowed.
7. The appellant is acquitted from the charge under section 302/34 of the IPC. Fine amount, if
deposited, be refunded to him. He be set at liberty forthwith, if not required in any other case.
8. Order of the trial Court regarding disposal of the case property stands confirmed.
(S.C.Sharma) (Virender Singh)
Judge Judge
sourabh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15690385/ 8
