Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of
J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
1
S No. 01
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 23/2022
Reserved on :22.12.2022
Pronounced on :23.02.2023
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul age 22 years S/O Tarseem ....Petitioner(s)
Lal (caste Bhagat) R/O Chak Aslam Tehsil R.S.
Pura District Jammu.
Through :- Sh.D.S. Saini, Sr. Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of J&K through Secretary Home ..Respondent(s)
Department Civil Secretariat, Jammu;
2. District Magistrate Jammu;
3. Senior Superintendent of Police Jammu;
4. Superintendent Central Jail Kot Bhalwal Jammu.
Through :- Sh.Pawan Dev Singh, Dy AG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court in terms of Article-226 of the Constitution of
India, has sought the indulgence of this court for issuance of writ of Habeas Corpus, writ of
Certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order or direction with the prayer for quashment of the
impugned detention order No. 05 of 2022 dated 13.05.2022 issued by respondent No. 2 for
detaining the petitioner u/s 8 (i) (a) of J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and further commanding the
respondent No. 4 to release the petitioner from Central Jail KotBhalwal Jammu on the following
grounds:-
(i) that the petitioner is aggrieved of the impugned detention order No. 05 of 2022
dated 13.05.2022 passed by respondent No.2whereby the petitioner has been
detained under Section 8(i)(a) of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and direction was
issued to the respondent No.3 to execute the aforesaid impugned detention order and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 1
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
detain the petitioner in the Central Jail KotBhalwal, Jammu, that only the photostat
copy of the dossier herein list of the old criminal cases by adding a fresh FIR No.
75/2022 registered with Police Station R.S. Pura was communicated/supplied to the
petitioner on 25.05.2022 by respondent No. 04 in Central Jail KotBhalwal Jammu,
but the petitioner was not supplied with the impugned detention order alongwith
dossier and also was not supplied the grounds of detention, FIR, statement of the
witnesses or seizure memo or challan or any other material regarding the registration
of criminal cases mentioned in the dossier against the petitioner; that on 27.05.2022
the relation of the petitioner namely Rahul Kumar filed the application before the
District Magistrate, Jammu on behalf of the petitioner for issuing of the attested copy
of the detention order in respect to petitioner/detenue Sunil Kumar alias Gokal S/o
Tarsem Lal Caste Bhagat R/o Chak Aslam Tehsil R.S.Pura District Jammu as the
aforesaid petitioner Sunil Kumar is already detained under the PSA and is kept at
Central Jail KotBhalwal Jammu, but the copy of the impugned detention order is not
supplied to the petitioner, the said application was received by the office of the
respondent No.2 on 27.05.2022, but despite receipt of the application for issuance of
the attested copy of the detention order, intentionally and deliberately did not supply
the same;
(ii) that the impugned detention order and the list of the cases attached with detention order are in
the English language, whereas, petitioner can only sign but cannot read or understand the detention
order as well as the list of the cases annexed with the impugned order which are in English, neither
the alleged detention order was ever read over and explained to him in the Hindi or Dogri language
which the petitioner understand, as such, the petitioner is totally ignorant about the alleged
impugned detention order which has prevented him from making effective representation in terms
of Section 22 (5) read with Section 13 of Public Safety Act.
2. Respondent No. 02(District Magistrate Jammu) the detaining authority has filed a counter
affidavit, wherein, it has been specifically contended, that none of the fundamental, constitutional,
statutory or any legal right of petitioner stands violated/infringed by respondents, as such, no cause
of action has accrued to the petitioner to maintain the present writ petition; the petitioner has not
approached the court with clean hands, instead has tried to mislead the court, keeping in view the
prejudicial activities of the petitioner/detenue his preventive detention has been ordered, whereby
the writ petition is liable to be dismissed. It is contended, that the petitioner has been detained
under the provisions of J&K Public Safety Act 1978 as per the dossier supplied by SSP Jammu
(respondent No.03) vide his endorsement No. CRB/dossier/2022/03/DPOJ dated 02.05.2022 in
order to prevent him from indulging in criminal activities which are prejudicial and detrimental to
the maintenance of public order, the detention order alongwith grounds of detention and other
material has been read over and explained to the detenue in the language which he fully understood
and the entire material was furnished to him against proper receipt. It is moreso contended, that the
detenue is a hardcore criminal, desperate character, history sheeter and habitual of indulging in acts
of violence such as attempt to murder, stabbing, arms act and other criminal cases, and thereby has
spread the reign of terror among the peace loving people of the area, the anti-social activities of the
petitioner are highly prejudicial to the maintenance of public order which warrants immediate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 2
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
preventive measures, as number of criminal cases have been registered against him in Police Station
R. S. Pura Jammu viz; (i) FIR No. 213/2014 u/s 341/323 RPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura, (ii) FIR No.
83/2015 u/s 307/341/323/147 RPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura, (iii) FIR No. 80/2016 u/s
341/323/34 RPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura, (iv) FIR No. 223/2017 u/s 3/25, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S
Pura, (v) FIR No. 59/2018 u/s 323/458/34 RPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura, (vi) FIR No. 67/2018 u/s
307/341/323/147/149 RPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura, (vii) FIR No. 06/2020 u/s 452/323/201/34
IPC, 4/25 A. Act P/S R.S Pura &(viii) FIR No. 75/2022 u/s 3/25, Arms Act, petitioner/detenue is a
habitual criminal and if he remains free in the society, he would definitely indulge in criminal
activities which would be danger to the public peace and tranquility, therefore, the presence of
subject in society is certainly prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, peace and tranquility
and safety of citizens of the area.
3. Sh. D.S. Saini Ld. Sr. Advocate appearing on behalf of petitioner, has reiterated the grounds urged
in the petition and has vehemently sought the setting aside/quashment of the impugned detention
order on the following counts:-
(i) It is argued, that petitioner/detenue has not been supplied the copies of dossier,
copies of all the FIRs registered against him, copies of recovery & seizure memos,
copies of statements of prosecution witnesses recorded u/s 161/164-A Cr.pc and has
therefore been deprived from his legal right to make effective representation before
the State Govt. which constitute infraction of his valuable right guaranteed under
Article 22(5) of Constitution of India r/w Sec. 13(1) of J&K Public Safety Act which
makes the detention order invalid.To buttress his arguments, learned counsel has
relied upon the decisions reported in, (i) AIR 2000 SC 2504 (State of Maharashtra
&Ors.
v. Santosh Shankar Acharya), and (ii) LPA No. 137/2020 (Saboor-ul-HaqMalla v. Union Territory of
JK &Anr.) decided by the Division Bench of Hon'ble High Court of J&K on 18.12.2020;
(ii) It is argued, that the impugned detention order and the list of cases attached with it are in the
English language whereas the petitioner/detenue only understands Hindi/Punjabi,neither the
detention order was read over and explained to the petitioner in Hindi or Dogri language which is a
pre-requisite for maintainability of the detention order, the non-supply of detention order and all
other documents in Hindi or Punjabi language violates the provisions of law as such the detention
order deserves its quashment. To support his arguments, learned counsel has relied upon a decision
reported in 1992 Legal Eagle (J&K) 28 (Manzoor Ahmad Malik v. State &Ors.);
4. Sh. Pawan Dev Singh, learned Dy AGappearing on behalf of respondents, has reiterated the
grounds urged in the detention order, and has vehemently argued, that the detenue/petitioner is a
habitual criminal who has created fear amongst the general public and since he was likely to commit
similar offences in future, it was important to prevently detain him, as the ordinary law had no
deterrent effect on him. It is argued, that the petitioner has no respect for law and has indulged in so
many cases viz; attempt to murder, burglary, wrongful restraint and assault, abduction cases, use of
sharp edged weapons, extortion, assault on public servants, theft cases, illegal possession of fire
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 3
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
arms, rioting, arson, and all the offences against the petitioner are heinous in nature as he has
indulged in organized crime and has disrupted the peace of the area, therefore, the detention order
against the petitioner needs its confirmation and dismissal of the petition.
5. I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Dy. AG for respondents. I have also
perused the contents of the petition, counter affidavit filed by the respondentNo. 02 and the record
made available by the respondents.
6. The first argument urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is, "that the detenue/petitioner has
not been supplied the copies of dossier, copies of FIRs registered against the petitioner, recovery
memos, statements of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C to enable the petitioner to make
effective representation against the impugned detention order, thereby, for non-supplying of such
material, petitioner's right to representation against his detention has been violated in terms of
Article 22 (5) of Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act
1978."
In AIR 2000 SC 2504, (State of Maharashtra and Ors. -
Appellants v. Santosh Shankar Acharya - Respondent) relied upon by learned counsel for the
petitioner, Hon'ble Supreme Court quashed the detention order on the ground that the detenue was
not supplied the copies of the material from which the detention order was made, there was non-
communication of the fact to the detenue that he could make representation to the detaining
authority which amounted to denial of representation to the detenue and infraction of a valuable
constitutional right guaranteed to the detenue under Article 22 (5) of Constitution of India. In LPA
No 137/2020 (Saboor-ul-Haq Malla v. Union Territory of JK & Anr.) also relied upon by learned
counsel for the petitioner, Division Bench of High Court of J&K on 18.12.2020 quashed the
detention order on the ground that the detenue was not communicated the grounds of detention.
Ratios of the judgments(supra) relied by the learned counsel for the petitioner are distinguishable
and inapplicable to the facts of the case in hand. It is apt to reiterate here, that the detention record
depicts that the order of detention dated 13.05.2022 issued by respondent No. 02 (District
Magistrate Jammu) vide order No. 05 of 2022 has been served/executed upon the
petitioner/detenue by PSI Amit Singh PID No. EXJ 196422 of P/S R. S. Pura on 18.05.2022 within a
period of five days alongwith all the detention record/material including FIR, statement of
witnesses, detention order, notice of detention, grounds of detention and other relevant
material/documents totaling 143 leaves. Therefore, it does not lie in the mouth of petitioner to urge
that the essential documents/material has not been supplied to him. From the detention record, it is
clearly demonstrated, that all the relevant material in regard to the detention of the petitioner has
been supplied to him who has been informed to make representation to the Government as well as
to the detaining authority against his detention. That being so, there has been no
violation/infraction/infringement of petitioner's right to make representation in terms of Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India read with Section 13 of J&K Public Safety Act. The arguments
canvassed by learned counsel for petitioner, therefore, being far from reality, misconceived under
law are repelled, discarded and rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 4
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
7. The 2nd argument urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is, "that the detenue only
understands Hindi/Punjabi language, the detention order was not read over to him in Hindi or
Punjabi or Dogri language which is a pre- requisite for maintainability of detention order and
non-supply of the detention order in the language which the detenue understands makes the
detention order liable to be quashed."
In 1992 Legal Eagle (J&K) 28 (Manzoor Ahmad Malik v. State and Others) relied upon by learned
counsel for the petitioner, detention order was quashed by Hon'ble High Court of J&K on the
ground that it was mandatory on part of the detaining authority to supply the grounds of detention
to the detenue in the language which the detenue knows and infraction thereof is infringement of his
legal and constitutional right to make effective representation. The case law (supra) relied by
learned counsel for petitioner is also distinguishable and inapplicable to the facts of the case in
hand. Detention record demonstrates that 143 leaves of whole of the detention record/material
including copy of detention order, notice of detention, grounds of detention, dossier of detention,
copies of FIR, statement of witnesses and other relevant documents have been supplied/provided to
petitioner/detenue by Executing Officer PSI Amit Singh PID No. EXJ196422 P/S R. S. Pura which
has been read over in English language and explained to petitioner/detenue in Hindi/Dogri
language which he fully understood and in receipt thereof petitioner/detenue has appended his
signature in English on the receipt order. The arguments of learned counsel for petitioner that the
detention record and all the documents were not read over to the petitioner in Hindi/Dogri
language, is far from reality, untrue, legally unsustainable, repelled, discarded and rejected.
8. Although right of personal liberty is most precious right, guaranteed under the Constitution,
which has been held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a person independent of the
Constitution, yet the personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal charge or is
convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. A person is not to be deprived of his
personal liberty except in accordance with procedure established under law and the procedure as
laid down in ManekaGandhi vs. Union of India, (1978 AIR SC 597), is to be just and fair. Where a
person is facing trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his personal liberty owing
to criminal charge framed against him, he has an opportunity to defend himself and to be acquitted
of the charge in case prosecution fails to bring home his guilt. Where such person is convicted of
offence, he still has satisfaction of having been given adequate opportunity to contest the charge and
also adduce evidence in his defence. However, the framers of the Constitution have, by
incorporating Article 22(5) in the Constitution, left room for detention of a person without a formal
charge and trial and without such person held guilty of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment
by a competent court. Its aim and object is to save the society from activities that are likely to
deprive a large number of people of their right to life and personal liberty. In such a case it would be
dangerous for the people at large to wait and watch as by the time ordinary law is set into motion,
the person having dangerous designs, would execute his plans, exposing general public to risk and
causing colossal damage to life and property. It is for that reason, necessary to take preventive
measures and prevent the person bent upon to perpetrate mischief from translating his ideas into
action. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India, therefore, leaves scope for enactment of preventive
detention law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 5
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
9. The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is not to punish
him for something he has done, but to prevent him from doing it. The basis of detention is the
satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of likelihood of detenue acting in a manner
similar to his past acts and preventing him by detention from doing the same. The Supreme Court in
HaradhanSaha vs. State of W.B. (1975) 3 SCC 198, points out that a criminal conviction, on the other
hand, is for an act already done, which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There is no
parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the Act. One is a punitive
action and the other is a preventive act. In one case, a person is punished to prove his guilt and the
standard is proof, beyond reasonable doubt, whereas, in preventive detention a man is prevented
from doing something, which is necessary for reasons mentioned in the Act, to prevent.
10. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978,
guarantee safeguard to detenue to be informed, as soon as may be, of grounds on which order of
detention is made, which led to the subjective satisfaction of detaining authority and also to be
afforded earliest opportunity of making representation against order of detention. Detenue is to be
furnished with sufficient particulars to enable him to make a representation, which on being
considered, may obtain relief to him. Detention record, made available by learned counsel for
respondents, reveals that detention order was made on proper application of mind to the facts of the
case and detenue was detained at the time of execution of detention order, the material and grounds
of detention and also informed that he had a right to represent against his preventive detention.
Perusal of detention order depicts its execution. It further reveals that the copy of detention
warrant, grounds of detention, notice of detention, copy of dossier etc. were received by the
petitioner-detenue which were read over and explained to detenue in Urdu/Kashmiri languages,
which detenue understood fully in token of which the signatures of detenue had been obtained. It
also divulges that detenue was informed that he can make representation to the government and
detaining authority. The grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity.
The detenue has been informed with sufficient clarity what actually weighed with Detaining
Authority while passing detention order. Detaining Authority has narrated facts and figures that
made the authority to exercise its powers under Section 8 J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and record
subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be placed under preventive detention in order to
prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
11. Further, by indepth perusal of the grounds of detention, one cannot lose sight of the fact that
petitioner/detenue actively and covertly takes part in many criminal activities, has no respect for
law of land and always believes in breaking the law repeatedly, thus, scaring and terrorizing the
people of the area as he habitually deals in cases viz; attempt to murder, arms act etc and being a
habitual criminal if he remains free in the society it would be danger to public peace and tranquility
which is certainly prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and safety of citizens of the area.
Earlier, petitioner/detenue had indulged in as many as 7 FIRs and his earlier detention order No. 09
of 2021 dated 08.07.2021 was quashed by this Court vide Order dated 20.04.2022.
Petitioner/detenue again has indulged in criminal activities under Arms Act and FIR No. 75/2022
u/s 3/25 Arms Act has been registered against him in P/S R. S. Purawhereby he has been again
detained by respondent No. 02 vide detention order No. 05 of 2022 dated 13.05.2022, so as to
prevent him from acting in a manner similar to his past acts or engaging in activities prejudicial to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 6
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
security of the State or maintenance of public order. Further, the sponsoring authority has not only
supplied the material, viz; dossier, containing gist of the activities of the detenue, but has also
supplied the grounds of detention. All this material was before the detaining authority when it
arrived at subjective satisfaction that activities of the detenue were prejudicial to maintenance of
public order and requires preventive detention of detenue. Moreso, if in any given case a single act is
found to be not sufficient to sustain the order of detention that may well be quashed, but it cannot
be stated as a principle that one single act cannot constitute the basis for detention. On the contrary,
it does. In other words, it is not necessary that there should be multiplicity of grounds for making or
sustaining an order of detention. The same views and principles were reiterated by the Apex Court
in Goutam Jain vs. Union of India, AIR 2017 SC 230. Since the actions taken against the
petitioner/detenue under the ordinary law from time to time have not been proved to be deterrent,
as such, the respondents had no other option but to keep him in preventive detention.
12. Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the Founding Fathers
enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the State to detain
a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanizing the harsh
authority over individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic power to
detain a person without trial for security of the State or maintenance of public order must be strictly
construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of the security of
the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger interest of the
nation. These observations have been made by the Supreme Court in The Secretary to Government,
Public (Law and Order-F) and another vs. Nabila and another (2015) 12 SCC 127.
13. In the present case, the petitioner has been involved in FIR No. 75/2022 registered with Police
Station R. S. Pura for commission of offence u/ss 3/25 Arms Act.From the bare perusal of the FIR
and the allegations therein against the petitioner, it is discernable, that the petitioner is a hardcore
criminal, has become a habitual offender among the people of the area, the actions taken against
him under ordinary law from time to time have not been proved to be deterrent. It seems that
petitioner/detenue instead of mending his ways has continuously been indulging in criminal
activities and has not shown any respect for the law of the land, as such, the petitioner/detenue has
created a sense of alarm, scare and a feeling of insecurity in the minds of the public of the area, has
become a chronic fear amongst the people of the area. Thus, the activities of the petitioner are of
hardcore criminal and habitual nature of indulging in acts of attempt to murder, Arms Act and other
criminal nature, hence, petitioner has been rightly detained by Respondent No. 2, therefore, the
detention order issued vide order No. 05 of 2022 dated 13.05.2022, does not suffer from any
illegality, propriety and perversity, the same is affirmed/upheld.
14. For the foregoing discussion, the petition sans any merit, is accordingly, dismissed along with
connected application(s), if any.
15. Registry to return the detention record against proper receipt.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 7
Sunil Kumar @ Gokul Age 22 Years S/O ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 23 February, 2023
(MOHAN LAL) JUDGE Jammu 23.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No Whether
the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55553314/ 8
