Sunil Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Sunil Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:46038
Court No. - 68
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 7912 of 2025
Applicant :- Sunil Maurya
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Anjali,Pramod Kumar Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, Sri S. K. Rai, learned AGA for the State-Respondent and
perused the record.
This bail application under Section 483 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 has been
moved on behalf of accused-applicant seeking enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 237 of 2024,
under Sections 3/7/25 of Arms Act, Police Station Doharighat, District Mau.
Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the accused-applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in this case crime number. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the recovery
has been made from the house of Girja Shankar but due to ulterior motive the Police has implicated
the applicant with a concocted story. He further submits that nothing incriminating material has
been recovered from the possession of the applicant. The alleged recovery has been made from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91860893/ 1
Sunil Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
house of one Ashutosh Maurya and the applicant has no concern with the aforesaid crime. There is
no independent witness of the aforesaid alleged crime. The applicant is languishing in jail since
01.12.2024. The applicant has no criminal antecedent and there is no likelihood of his fleeing from
course of justice or tampering with evidence in case of release on bail. Hence, the bail has been
prayed for.
Learned AGA has vehemently opposed, but could not dispute the fact that applicant has no criminal
antecedents.
Considering all those facts and circumstances, the nature of accusations, severity of the punishment
in the case of conviction and nature of supporting evidence, reasonable apprehension of tampering
with the witness and prima-facie case, but without commenting on merit of case, a case for bail is
made out.
Accordingly, the bail application is allowed.
Let the accused-applicant, Sunil Maurya, involved in above mentioned case crime number be
released on bail, on his executing a personal bond and two reliable sureties each, in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned, subject to the following conditions:
1. The applicant will not tamper with the evidence.
2. The applicant will not indulge in any criminal activity.
3. The applicant will not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses and
co-operate in the trial.
4. The applicant will appear regularly on each and every date fixed by the trial court,
unless his personal appearance is exempted through counsel by the court concerned.
In the event of breach of any of the aforesaid conditions, the court below will be at liberty to proceed
to cancel his bail.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 pks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91860893/ 2
