Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on
10 October, 2025
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (SJ) No.724 of 2004
======================================================
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi wife of Shambhu Shah @
Garbhu Sah, resident of village-Sadhwara, P.S. Simri, District-Darbhanga.
... ... Appellant/s
Versus
State of Bihar
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
with
CRIMINAL APPEAL (SJ) No. 764 of 2004
======================================================
Shambhu Sah @ Garbhu Sah son of late Nathuni Sah, resident of village-
Sadhwara, P.S. Simri, District-Darbhanga.
... ... Appellant/s
Versus
State of Bihar
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
(In Cr. App. (SJ) No. 724 of 2004 and Cr. App. (SJ) No. 764 of 2004)
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Ajay Kumar Thakur, Adv.
Ms. Vaishnavi Singh, Adv.
Mr. Ritwik Thakur, Adv.
Ms. Kiran Kumari, Adv.
Mr. Priyanshu, Adv.
For the State : Mrs. Anita Kumari Singh, APP
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE JUSTICE SMT. SONI SHRIVASTAVA
ORAL JUDGMENT
Date : 10-10-2025
Heard Ms. Vaishanavi Singh, learned counsel for the
appellants and learned Mrs. Anita Kumari Singh, APP for the
State.
2. The aforesaid two appeals are being taken up for
hearing together since they arise out of the same judgment and
order of conviction and sentence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 1
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
3. The aforesaid appeals under Section 374 (2) of the
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025
2/32
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter referred as
'Cr.P.C.') have been preferred against the common judgment of
conviction and order of sentence dated 12.10.2004 passed in
Sessions Trial No. 40 of 2002 (arising out of Simri P.S. Case
No. 36 of 2001) by the Court of the learned 1st Additional
Sessions Judge, Darbhanga (hereinafter referred to as the
learned 'Trial Judge'). By the said judgment the learned Trial
Judge has convicted the appellants of both the aforesaid appeals
for commission of offence under Sections 304B/34 and 201/34
of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as the 'IPC')
and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven
years for the offence under Section 304B/34 of the IPC and
rigorous imprisonment for two years for the offence under
Section 201/34 of the IPC. Both the sentences have however,
been directed to run concurrently.
4. The short facts of the case as disclosed in the first
information report based on the written report of the informant
Jaimangal Sah is that his daughter Chandra Kala Devi was
married with one Shambhu Sah (appellant) on 18.04.1995
according to Hindu rites and rituals, whereafter, she was
subjected to physical and mental torture by the accused persons
including the present appellants and a demand of Rs. 50,000/-
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025
3/32
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 2
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
was made for the purposes of running a shop properly. It is
alleged that the informant paid some amount of money and tried
to pacify the matter, however, they remained adamant on their
dowry demand. Two children were born out of the wedlock of
the appellant Shambhu Sah and the deceased, who were aged
about 4 years and 2 years at the time of occurrence. The
informant has also alleged that his son-in-law i.e. appellant
Shambhu Sah was running a sweet shop at Patna where he
developed illicit relations with Sumitra Devi (appellant) who is
a resident of Patna and they began to inflict both physical and
mental cruelty upon the daughter of the informant on account of
demand of Rs. 50,000/-. On getting an information on
11.06.2001
with regard to the fact that his daughter has been killed and the dead body has been made to
disappear, the informant reached the house of his son-in-law and he was informed by the local
people that his daughter was taken to Muzaffarpur whereupon he had a very strong suspicion that
his daughter has been killed for want of demand of dowry and the children have either been hidden
somewhere or killed. On the basis of the said written report, a formal FIR bearing Simri P.S. Case
No. 36 of 2001 was registered under Sections 304B, 201 read with 34 of the IPC on 14.06.2001 at
around 2:15PM, Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 against five accused
persons including the present appellants.
5. After investigation, the police submitted charge- sheet on 14.11.2001 against the present two
appellants, for offences under Sections 304B, 201 and 34 of the IPC while keeping the investigation
pending against the other accused persons. On the basis of the said charge-sheet, cognizance has
also been taken and the case was committed to the Court of Sessions and the case was numbered as
Sessions Trial No. 40 of 2002, whereafter the trial judge framed charges on 07.03.2002 under
Sections 304B/34 and 201/34 of the IPC against the appellants to which they pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried.
6. During the course of trial, the prosecution has examined seven witnesses to substantiate its case,
out of whom, P.W. 1 Raj Kumar Sahni, P.W. 2 Yogi Sahni (both hostile), P.W. 3 Mahendra
Choudhary and P.W. 4 Shatrughan Choudhary are the co-villagers of the informant, examined on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 3
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
the point of occurrence. P.W.5 Jaimangal Sah is the informant himself, as also the father of the
deceased, P.W. 6 Radhe Shyam Sah is the cousin brother of the informant who has also been
declared hostile and P.W. 7 Md. Kaisar Alam is the Investigating officer of the case.
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025
7. I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants and the learned APP for the
State.
8. Ms. Vaishnavi Singh, learned counsel for the appellants has contended, at the outset, that there is
a delay in lodging of the first information report inasmuch as while the occurrence is alleged to have
been taken place on 11.06.2001 and the informant also got knowledge about death of the deceased
on the same date, yet the written report was filed before the police only after a lapse of 3 days on
14.03.2001 whereupon the formal FIR was drawn. It has also been stated that the said FIR was only
received in court on the next date i.e. on 15.06.2001 and the prosecution has not been able to tender
any explanation for the delay caused, much less a plausible one. Such an unexplained and inordinate
delay has been contended to be fatal to the case of the prosecution. In support of her contention,
learned counsel has relied upon the case of Nand Lal & Ors. Vs. State of Chhattisgarh reported in
(2023) 10 SCC 470 by referring to paragraphs 23 and 24 thereof. She has further submitted that out
of the six private witnesses examined on behalf of the prosecution, P.Ws. 1, 2 and 6, who are the co-
villagers of the informant, have not supported the case of the prosecution, hence have been declared
hostile. It has, however, Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 been pointed
out that these witnesses have been cross-examined at length and they have maintained their stand
that the deceased was the second wife of the appellant Shambhu Sah and she died on account of
illness. Besides pointing out that the age of the eldest child is nine years, the attention of this court
has also been invited to the evidence of P.W. 2 who despite being a hostile witness has stated in his
cross examination that there were cordial relations between the deceased and the appellant Sumitra
Devi and that the deceased was the second wife of the appellant while maintaining that the appellant
Sumitra Devi was originally the wife of the appellant Shambhu Sah. Besides PW1 and PW2, the two
hostile witnesses, P.W. 3 (Mahendra Chaudhary) and P.W.4 (Shatrughan Chaudhary) are the other
two witnesses who have also been examined on the point of occurrence and who also happen to be
co-villagers of the informant but have not supported the case of the prosecution and have yet not
been declared hostile. P.W. 3 in his examination-in-chief has stated that the deceased died due to
illness and also that there was a love marriage between the deceased and the appellant. In para-2 of
his evidence, this witness has also stated as a matter of fact, the children of the deceased have been
residing with appellant Sumitra Devi in Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004
dt.10-10-2025 Patna. P.W. 4 has also supported the factum of the deceased dying on account of
illness in his examination-in-chief and in paragraph-2 of his deposition, he has also admitted that
the appellant Shambhu was earlier married to appellant Sumitra and subsequently had entered into
a love marriage with the deceased. He has also stated that the eldest son of the appellant and the
deceased was aged 10 years and considering that his statement was made in the year 2002, the
learned counsel has raised serious objection to the fact that the death of the deceased has taken
place within 7 years of marriage.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 4
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
9. Upon taking this Court through the evidence of P.W. 3 and 4, learned counsel for the appellants
has contended that both the aforesaid witnesses are full-fledged prosecution witnesses and yet, they
have neither supported the prosecution case nor have been declared hostile. As such, the evidence of
these witnesses becomes binding on the prosecution and to buttress this submission, the learned
counsel has placed reliance on the case of Raja Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan reported in (2005) 5 SCC
272 and paragraph-9 thereof is being quoted hereunder:
"9. But the testimony of PW 8 Dr. Sukhdev Singh, who is another neighbour, cannot
easily be surmounted by the prosecution. He has testified in very clear terms that he
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 saw PW 5 making the
deceased believe that unless she puts the blame on the appellant and his parents she
would have to face the consequences like prosecution proceedings. It did not occur to
the Public Prosecutor in the trial court to seek permission of the court to heard (sic
declare) PW 8 as a hostile witness for reasons only known to him. Now, as it is, the
evidence of PW 8 is binding on the prosecution. Absolutely no reason, much less any
good reason, has been stated by the Division Bench of the High Court as to how PW
8's testimony can be sidelined."
10. The above-mentioned case of Raja Ram (supra) finds a mention in subsequent judgments of
Mukhtiar Ahmed Ansari Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), reported in (2005) 5 SCC 258 and the learned
counsel has relied on paragraph-30 and 31 of the said judgment and has also made a reference to a
case reported in AIR 2022 SC 3373, Virendra Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, relying on paragraph-7
of the said judgment.
11. Learned counsel has further submitted that there are several infirmities and inconsistencies in
the evidence of the prosecution witnesses including that of the informant who has been examined as
P.W. 5, hence it has been argued that the testimony of all the prosecution witnesses are bereft of
credibility. It has next been submitted that there have been some Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 major lapses in the investigation as the Investigating Officer P.W. 7
has failed even to record the statements of the children whose evidence would have had important
bearing on the present case. The defence had also tried to adduce the evidence of the son of the
deceased by examining him as D.W.-1, but as a matter of fact the trial court did not permit his
examination considering him a child witness and finding him incompetent to depose in the court
12. The primary contention raised on behalf of the appellants is that the prosecution has miserably
failed to prove its case of demand of dowry and that of torture being meted out to the deceased soon
before her death. Learned counsel thus submits that in absence of essential ingredients of Section
304B of the IPC, the said offence is not at all made out against the appellants, hence the conviction
of the appellants under the aforesaid section cannot be sustained. It has also been pointed that there
is no sufficient evidence on record even to prove the fact that the death of the deceased has taken
place within a period of seven years of marriage and that the same was an unnatural death,
inasmuch as the prosecution witnesses themselves including P.W. 3 and 4 have clearly stated that
the deceased had died on account of illness and Investigating Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 Officer (P.W. 7) has also stated in his evidence that the witnesses
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 5
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
have stated before him that the deceased died on account of an attack of diarrhoea. The counsel for
the appellants has relied upon a few case laws on the point that in absence of the essential
ingredients of demand of dowry and cruelty meted out soon before death, no offence under Section
304B IPC would be made out and no conviction in absence of these ingredients which are sine qua
non of Section 304B could be legally maintained.
13. The case of Charan Singh Vs. The State of Uttrakhand reported in AIR 2023 SC 2095 has been
relied upon by the learned Counsel for the appellants and paragraphs 11, 21 and 23 of the said
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Apex Court have been pointed out to contend that when the
evidence led by the prosecution does not fulfill the prerequisites to invoke presumption u/s 304B
IPC or section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, the conviction of the appellants cannot be justified.
The said judgment was followed in the case of Karan Singh Vs. State of Haryana, reported in 2025
SCC Online SC 214 wherein the essential ingredients of Section 304B IPC have been enumerated
and it has been laid down that the presumption u/s 113B of the Indian Evidence Act will apply only
when it is Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 established that soon
before her death, the woman has been subjected by the accused to cruelty in connection with
demand for dowry. Paragraph-8 of the said judgment is being quoted hereunder: -
"8. ...............
The presumption under Section 113 -B will apply when it is established that soon
before her death, the woman has been subjected by the accused to cruelty or
harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry. Therefore, even for
attracting Section 113-B, the prosecution mush establish that the deceased was
subjected by the appellant to cruelty or harassment for or in connection with any
demand of dowry soon before her death. Unless these facts are proved, the
presumption under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act cannot be invoked."
14. Further in this regard, the learned counsel has also relied upon paragraphs 6 & 7 of the case of
Chabi Karmakar and Ors v/s The State of West Bengal reported in (2025) 1 SCC 398 and paragraphs
12, 18 and 23 of the case of Shoor Singh and Ors v/s State of Uttarakhand reported in (2025) 2 SCC
815 to emphatically submit that even the informant P.W. 5 has not given any specific instances of
dowry demand or torture, much less being soon before death, hence the essential ingredients in
order to constitute an offence u/s Section 304B Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004
dt.10-10-2025 IPC is lacking.
15. Per Contra, the learned APP for the State Ms. Anita Kumari Singh has submitted in response,
that the death of the deceased has taken place in unnatural circumstances within 7 years of marriage
and the appellants in conspiracy with each other have caused the said death, which fact has been
supported by the prosecution witnesses, in as much as the informant PW 5 has supported the
version of the First Information Report that the deceased was subjected to torture on account of
demand of Rs 50,000/- for running the shop of the husband Shambhu Sah and subsequently caused
her death on account of non-fulfillment of the said demand and even caused disappearance of
evidence by surreptitiously cremating the dead body of the deceased.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 6
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
16. I have minutely perused both the oral and the documentary evidence besides hearing the learned
Counsel for the parties. It would be necessary to cursorily discuss the evidence before proceeding
further.
17. The prosecution in order to substantiate its case, has examined seven witnesses out of whom PW
1 Raj Kishore Sahni, P.W.2 Yogi Sahni and P.W. 6 Radhey Shyam Sah are the witnesses who are
residents of the village of the informant, have not supported the prosecution case and have been
declared Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 hostile, hence their evidence
do not warrant any discussion.
18. The evidence of P.W. 3 Mahendra Chaudhary and P.W-4 Shatrughan Chaudhary who also
happen to be the co- villagers of the informant have been examined on the point of occurrence.
P.W.3, Mahendra Chaudhary has stated in his examination-in-chief that the wife of appellant
Shambhu Sah, the deceased herein, was unwell and she was taken for treatment to Muzaffarpur. He
had further stated that he later got to know that the deceased Chandrakala Devi had died and that
the appellant Shambhu Sah had another wife namely Sumitra Devi who used to reside in Patna. In
his cross-examination he has stated that the children of the deceased were staying with appellant
Sumitra Devi at Patna where the later is looking after their education.
19. P.W. 4 Shatrughan Chaudhary has also stated in his examination-in-chief that the death of the
wife of the appellant Shambhu Sah took place on account of illness and the appellant Shambhu Sah
had taken her for treatment to Muzaffarpur, however the deceased died and her cremation was done
at Muzaffarpur. In the cross-examination this witness has deposed that the marriage of the
appellant Shambhu Shah with his deceased wife Chandrakala was a love marriage and there were
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 two children out of the wedlock, the
elder son being about 10 years of age while the daughter being 5 years old. He has also made a
mention of his another wife Sumitra Devi (appellant) to be the first wife of the appellant Shambhu
Sah.
20. The informant, Jaimangal Sah who is the father of the deceased, has been examined as P.W. 5.
This witness has stated in his examination-in-chief that the marriage of his daughter Chandrakala
was performed on 18.04.1995 with the appellant Shambhu Sah and after her marriage the appellant
Shambhu Sah and all other accused persons, the other members of the family used to assault her
and also used to coerce her for bringing Rs. 50,000/- from her parents in order to enable her
husband to run a shop at Patna and such demand could not be fulfilled. Despite the efforts taken by
this witness to pacify the matter, they remained adamant on their demand, even after the birth of
two children out of the wedlock, and Shambhu Sah and his brother Shankar Sah had even
threatened to kill his daughter in case of non-fulfillment of the aforesaid demand. The informant
further states that he got information from his elder son-in-law about his daughter being killed and
thrown away on 11.06.2001, whereupon he along with some other persons went to the matrimonial
household of the deceased but not having found Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004
dt.10-10-2025 anyone present, enquired from the villagers who informed him that the accused
persons had taken his daughter to Muzaffarpur. He thus filed a written report (Exhibit-1) and
supported the facts mentioned therein in his examination before the police. In his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 7
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
cross-examination this witness while expressing his ignorance about the whereabouts of the
children of his deceased daughter, has stated specifically in paragraph 12 of his evidence that he
neither remembers the date, month or year of the birth of the children of his daughter nor does he
remember the date, month and year of the marriage of his other three daughters. He has further
stated that he had not made any complaint, oral or written before any police station or court in
Muzaffarpur or Patna with regard to the demand of dowry, torture and threatening to kill his
daughter. The informant has expressed his ignorance to the defence suggestion that while the son of
the deceased was born on 28th June, 1992, the daughter was born on 25th May 1997. The attention
of this witness has been drawn to the contents of the written report and his statement before police
wherein he has denied that he ever stated about threatening to kill given by the appellant Shambhu
Sah and his brother and also some other vital facts. He has also denied the defence suggestion that
his daughter had died on account of illness. Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004
dt.10-10-2025
21. The Investigating Officer, examined as P.W. 7, has stated that he received the typed written
report of the informant Jaimangal Sah on 14.06.2001 whereupon he had drawn the FIR (Ext. 2) and
took up investigation. He inspected the place of occurrence and recorded statements of witnesses
and the villagers had disclosed that the deceased had been taken to Muzaffarpur for treatment as
she was suffering with diahorrhea. The witnesses of the parental household of the deceased however
stated that the accused persons, including the appellants used to torture her on account of
non-fulfillment of demand of Rs.50,000/- and later killed her and did not inform them about her
death. In his cross-examination, this witness stated in paras 14,15 and 16 of his deposition, that the
informant Jaimangal Sah did not state before him that his daughter had asked for money from him
nor had stated that Shambhu Sah and his brother Shankar Sah had threatened to kill his daughter or
oust her from house. The informant had even not disclosed about him learning facts relating to
murder of deceased from his elder son-in-law Shankar Sah.
22. After closing the prosecution evidence, the Trial Court recorded the statements of appellants
under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. on 06.07.2004, enabling them to personally explain the Patna High
Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 circumstances appearing in the evidence against
them, however, they denied the said charges and circumstances.
23. The son of the deceased Chandan Kumar, aged about 11 years, was examined as DW-1, but since
he could not answer to the questions posed to him, he was held to be an incompetent witness.
24. The learned Trial Judge, upon appreciation, analysis and scrutiny of the evidence adduced
during trial, has found the appellants guilty of the offences and has sentenced them to
imprisonment, by its impugned judgment and order.
Analysis and consideration
25. I have perused the impugned judgment of the learned Trial court, the entire materials on record
and have given thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions made by learned counsel for the
appellants as well as the learned APP for the Sate.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 8
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
26. The contents of the FIR has already been discussed in detail earlier which disclose an allegation
of the deceased being subjected to cruelty on account of non-fulfillment of dowry demand and was
subsequently killed for the said reason by the accused persons.
27. Out of 7 witnesses examined by the prosecution, PW- Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of
2004 dt.10-10-2025 1, PW-2 and PW-6 have been declared hostile and have not supported the
prosecution case, while PW-3 and PW-4, who have not supported that case of the prosecution and
have yet not been declared hostile and PW-7 is the I.O. Therefore, the only witness, upon whose
evidence the prosecution case rests, is PW- 5, Jaimangal Sah, the informant of the case.
28. Before going on to analyse and examine the fact as to whether the evidence of this solitary
witness is sufficient to base conviction of the appellants, it would be desirable to first elucidate the
essential ingredients of Section 304B I.P.C., which are as under:
a. The death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury, or
must have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances;
b. The death must have been caused within seven years of her marriage;
c. Soon before her death, she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by
the husband or any relative of her husband; and d. Cruelty or harassment must be
for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry."
29. The moot question which now falls for consideration Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of
2004 dt.10-10-2025 is whether the prosecution has succeeded in establishing the said
ingredients/circumstances beyond reasonable doubts so as to sustain conviction under the
aforementioned provision.
30. On going through the discussions made hereinabove in the preceding paragraphs with regard to
the evidence of the witnesses, P.W.5, the informant, is apparently the only witness to be considered
alongwith the Investigating Officer, P.W. 7.
31. While analyzing the evidence of the informant PW-5, it is noticed that he has tried to support the
story of the prosecution, however he has failed to refer to any specific instances of demand of dowry
or torture meted out to the deceased. A vague allegation of demand of Rs. 50,000/- for running a
shop was made by the appellants alongwith other family members. So far as inflicting torture is
concerned, the FIR indicates that though the accused persons remained adamant on their demand
of Rs. 50,000/-, even after attempts of pacification, there is no allegation of subjecting the accused
to cruelty thereafter. The evidence of this witness needs to be viewed in close scrutiny as his initial
statement is a delayed one, inasmuch, despite having knowledge about his daughter being killed and
thrown away on 11-06-2001 itself, he filed his written report after a lapse of 3 days for which he has
not been able to Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 tender any plausible
explanation, hence, an adverse inference can be drawn that the FIR has been lodged after due
thought and deliberation, leaving it open for introduction and concoction of facts and other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 9
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
embellishments. It is also noticed from his evidence that he did not make any complaint earlier with
regard to any demand of dowry, torture or any threatening given to kill his daughter and upon a
conjoint reading of the deposition of the Informant alongwith the I.O. (PW-5) it is gathered that
some very vital facts have been introduced by the informant for the first time during trial and were
never stated before the I.O., including the fact about threatening to kill. Thus, the evidence of the
informant suffers from several infirmities and appears to be an afterthought, hence the same does
not appear to be cogent and worthy of reliance. The initial statement of the informant PW-5 forming
the basis of the FIR, takes us to the very first contention raised on behalf of the appellants with
regard to the inordinate delay in lodging the FIR. There is no reason indicated as to why despite
having knowledge about death of the deceased on 11-06-2001, the written report came to be filed
three days thereafter, i.e. on 14-06-2001. It is true that delay in lodging FIR cannot be the only
ground for shutting out the case of the prosecution but it indeed, is a valid ground available to the
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 defence to assail the veracity and
authenticity of such delayed First Information Report. The law in this regard is clear that on account
of non-recording of a prompt information, the FIR gets denuded of its assurance of truth and if not
satisfactorily explained, leads at times to collapse of prosecution.
32.At this juncture, it would be apt to refer to the case of Thulia Kali Vs. The State of Tamil Nadu
reported in (1972) 3 SCC 393 wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court, discussed the importance of a
prompt FIR and an extract of paragraph-12 of the said judgment is being reproduced hereunder:
12. ............First information report in a criminal case is an extremely vital and
valuable piece of evidence for the purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced
at the trial. The importance of the above report can hardly be overestimated from the
standpoint of the accused. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report
to the police in respect of commission of an offence is to obtain early information
regarding the circumstances in which the crime was committed, the names of the
actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of eye-witnesses
present at the scene of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first information report quite
often results in embellishment which is a creature of after-thought. On account of
delay, the report not only gets bereft of the Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of
2004 dt.10-10-2025 advantage of spontaneity, danger creeps in of the introduction of
coloured version, exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of deliberation
and consultation. It is, therefore, essential that the delay in the lodging of the first
information report should be satisfactorily explained......"
33.The aforesaid issue has also been taken up in the case of Meharaj Singh Vs. State of U.P. reported
in (1994) 5 SCC 188 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 12 and 13 has deliberated
upon delay in lodging the FIR as also the FIR being ante-timed and has found the same to be an
vital factor in doubting the case of the prosecution.
34.The case of Nand Lal & Ors. Vs. State of Chhattisgarh (Supra) may also be referred in this
context, paragraphs 30 and 31 whereof are being quoted hereunder: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 10
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
"30. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of this Court in Ramesh
Baburao Devaskar v. State of Maharashtra : (SCC p. 509, para
19) "19. In a case of this nature, enmity between two groups is accepted. In a situation
of this nature, whether the first information report was ante-timed or not also
requires serious consideration. First information report, in a case of this nature,
provides for a valuable piece of evidence although it may not be a substantial
evidence.
The reason for insisting on lodging of first information report without undue delay is to obtain the
earlier information in regard to the circumstances in which the crime had been committed, the
name of the accused, the parts played by them, the weapons which had been used as also the names
of eyewitnesses. Where the parties are at loggerheads and there had been instances Patna High
Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 which resulted in death of one or the other,
lodging of a first information report is always considered to be vital."
31. As held by this Court in Ramesh Baburao, the FIR is a valuable piece of evidence, although it
may not be substantial evidence. The immediate lodging of an FIR removes suspicion with regard to
over implication of number of persons, particularly when the case involved a fight between two
groups. When the parties are at loggerheads, the immediate lodging of the FIR provides credence to
the prosecution case."
35.In the facts of the present case, delay becomes an extremely vital circumstance, in the absence of
any corroborative evidence which could lend any support to the case of the prosecution.
36.It is not expected that there would be eye-
witnesses to the incident of killing, but there is absolutely no evidence even with regard to any
suspicion of foul play by the appellants in order to lend any support to the version of the informant,
as disclosed in the FIR and his deposition during trial. During analysis of evidence, it has already
been noticed earlier that not only the informant's co-villagers, PW-1, PW-2 and PW-6 have been
declared hostile, but PW-3 and PW-4, who are full-fledged prosecution witnesses and yet not
declared hostile, have also not supported the prosecution case and have rather made clear
averments with regard to the fact that the deceased had died on account of illness. The case of Raja
Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan (Supra) lays down in clear terms that Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 the evidence of a prosecution witness, who has not been held to be
hostile, becomes binding on the prosecution and there is no apparent reason found to sideline the
testimony of these two witnesses PW-3 and PW-4. Thus, the delay in the FIR, coupled with lack of
corroboration from any other evidence, gives a fatal blow to the case of the prosecution.
37.Now, it would be imperative to advert to examining the position as to whether the essential
ingredients of Section 304 B of the IPC as elucidated in the preceding paragraphs have been made
out against the appellants or not in order to prove and establish the case beyond all reasonable
doubt. Let us now examine the above-mentioned components individually to arrive at a conclusion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 11
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
as to whether they stand established, in order to sustain a conviction u/s 304-B IPC. Whether the
death has occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances:
38.The first question relates to the fact as to whether the death has occurred otherwise than under
normal circumstances, i.e. whether it is an unnatural death or not. The evidence available on record
is indicative of the fact that the deceased was suffering from diahorrhea for which she was taken to
Muzaffarpur for treatment and she died on account of her Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of
2004 dt.10-10-2025 illness. Although, there is no medical prescription in support of her illness or
treatment, but almost all the prosecution witnesses including those who have been declared hostile
i.e., P.Ws. 1, 2 and 6 and the other witnesses, being P.W. 3 and P.W. 4, have all consistently deposed
that the deceased had died on account of her illness. I may hasten to point out here, at the cost of
repetition, that P.W. 3 and P.W. 4 who are the co-villagers of the informant have not been declared
hostile by the prosecution and their evidence is thus binding upon the prosecution. The
investigating officer P.W. 7 has also deposed that the villagers had disclosed before him during
course of investigation that the deceased had been taken to Muzaffarpur for treatment as she was
suffering from diahorrhea. Besides, it would also appear from the first information report itself that
the informant (P.W.5), upon inquiry from the villagers, was also informed that his daughter had
been taken to Muzaffarpur by the accused persons, which lends credence to the defence version.
39.The above-mentioned analysis of evidence leads us to the inference and irresistible conclusion
that the factum of death of the deceased occurring otherwise than under normal circumstances, is
not established, thus the same cannot be categorized as 'unnatural death'.
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 Whether death has been caused
within 7 years of marriage:
40.So far as the issue of death being caused within seven years of marriage is concerned, there are
inconsistencies in the evidence of the witnesses in this respect too, in as much as while the
informant has stated the date of marriage to be 18.04.1995, the evidence of P.W. 1 in paragraph-4
and P.W. 4 in paragraph-2 discloses the fact that out of the two children born out of the wedlock of
the deceased and the appellant, the age of the eldest child was 9/10 years. Considering the fact that
the deposition of the witnesses was being recorded in the year 2002, a serious doubt is created with
respect to the fact that the death of the deceased which took place in the year 2001 was possibly
within seven years of marriage. The informant has also not been able to furnish any cogent evidence
to prove the date of marriage of the deceased. The second ingredient, thus, is also not proved beyond
all reasonable doubts.
Whether the deceased had been subjected to cruelty or harassment by the husband or any relative of
her husband, soon before her death:
41.This is the next necessary concomitant to constitute an offence under Section
304B IPC. There is virtually no evidence on the above-mentioned proposition but for
totally Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 bald and vague
allegations made by the informant in the FIR and in the deposition, which do not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 12
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
stand supported by any other oral or documentary evidence adduced by the
prosecution. The evidence of the witnesses are rather to the effect that there was a
love marriage between the deceased and the appellant Shambhu Sah and the
relationship between the appellants and the deceased inter se was rather cordial and
the witnesses have also deposed that the two children of the deceased are even
residing with appellant Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi at Patna.
42.Thus, apparently, the above-mentioned theory put-
forth by the prosecution that cruelty was meted out to the deceased 'soon before her death', by way
of the solitary evidence of the informant P.W. 5, which is not of sterling quality, does not seem to be
a credible theory at all in the background of complete dearth of cogent and impeachable evidence in
this regard.
43.It would be relevant to make a reference to the case of Baijnath Singh Vs. The State of MP,
reported in AIR 2016 SC 5313 wherein the ingredient of Section 304B of the IPC were deliberated
upon with special reference to the meaning of cruelty or harassment along with the consideration of
the presumption of guilt under Section 304B of the IPC as Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of
2004 dt.10-10-2025 engrafted in Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act. Paragraphs 27 to 30 of
the case of Baijnath Singh (supra) are being quoted hereunder:
27. The expression "dowry" is ordained to have the same meaning as in Section 2 of
the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. The expression "cruelty", as explained, contains in
its expanse, apart from the conduct of the tormentor, the consequences precipitated
thereby qua the lady subjected thereto. Be that as it may, cruelty or harassment by
the husband or any relative of his for or in connection with any demand of dowry, to
reiterate, is the gravamen of the two offences.
28. Section 113-B of the Act enjoins a statutory presumption as to dowry death in the
following terms:
"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.--When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person
had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 304-B of the Penal Code, 1860."
29. Noticeably this presumption as well is founded on the proof of cruelty or harassment of the
woman dead for or in connection with any demand for dowry by the person charged with the
offence. The presumption as to dowry death thus would get activated only upon the proof of the fact
that the deceased lady had been subjected to cruelty or harassment for or in connection with any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 13
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
demand for dowry by the accused and that too in the reasonable contiguity of death. Such a proof is
thus the legislatively mandated prerequisite to invoke the otherwise statutorily ordained
presumption of commission of the offence of dowry death by the person charged therewith.
30. A conjoint reading of these three provisions, thus predicate the burden of the prosecution to
unassailably Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 substantiate the
ingredients of the two offences by direct and convincing evidence so as to avail the presumption
engrafted in Section 113-B of the Act against the accused. Proof of cruelty or harassment by the
husband or his relative or the person charged is thus the sine qua non to inspirit the statutory
presumption, to draw the person charged within the coils thereof. If the prosecution fails to
demonstrate by cogent, coherent and persuasive evidence to prove such fact, the person accused of
either of the abovereferred offences cannot be held guilty by taking refuge only of the presumption
to cover up the shortfall in proof.
44.The above noted judgment has also been considered and relied upon by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the recent cases of Charan Singh (supra). The fact that the presumption under Section 113B
of the Indian Evidence Act would be attracted, only when the prosecution has established that the
deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment in connection with any demand of dowry soon
before her death, also finds mention and discussion in the case of Karan Singh (supra).
Whether the cruelty or harassment inflicted is for, or in connection with any demand for dowry:
45.This final ingredient to constitute an offence under Section 304B of the IPC has also not been
proved or established by the prosecution as the witnesses have either not supported the prosecution
case at all or they have stated that there was a love marriage between the deceased and the Patna
High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 appellant and have not made any reference
to any dowry demand, other than such allegation being made by the informant, P.W. 5, who also
mentions about Rs. 50,000/- being demanded for running a shop, which , not be covered within the
definition of 'Dowry'as the same does not appear to be in connection with marriage.Moreover, his
solitary evidence in this regard is also not supported by other witnesses, rather specific
contradiction has been drawn by way of confronting the investigating officer, P.W.7, to the
statement of the informant recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who has negated the fact that the
informant had ever made any statement with regard to the said demand made by the appellants
before him during course of investigation. Thus, cruelty or harassment on account of dowry demand
also does not seem to be established by the evidence on record.
46.From an overall conspectus of the evidence, it transpires that the defence has been able to create
a grave doubt on the entire case of the prosecution, impeaching the credibility and sanctity thereof
on the vital aspect of the essential ingredients of Section 304B IPC not being proved, thereby
shaking the very foundation of the prosecution case and as already discussed above, the
presumption under Section 113B of Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025
the Indian Evidence Act can be invoked only when the essential ingredients get satisfied.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 14
Sunita Devi @ Sumitra Devi @ Urmila Devi vs State Of Bihar on 10 October, 2025
47.As a result of the above analysis, I am of the firm view that the prosecution has miserably failed
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubts and there are patent and glaring infirmities and several
loopholes in the case of the prosecution on account of which the entire edifice of the prosecution
crumbles. Therefore, on the basis of such scanty and deficient evidence, the vital circumstances,
extremely crucial for constituting an offence under Section 304B of the IPC not having been
established, the present case indisputably has not been proved beyond all manner of doubt, hence, it
would be unsafe to uphold the conviction of the appellants recorded by the learned trial court.
48.Thus, taking an overall perspective of the entire case, emerging out of the totality of the facts and
circumstances, as indicated hereinabove and for the foregoing reasons, we find that the prosecution
has miserably failed to prove the charges against the appellants beyond all reasonable doubts,
leaving the court with no choice but to acquit the appellants of the charges.
49.Accordingly, the finding of conviction recorded by the learned trial court, in my opinion is not
sustainable and Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.724 of 2004 dt.10-10-2025 requires
interference, therefore, the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 12.10.2004, passed
by of the appellants and the sentence awarded thereunder by the court of the learned 1st Additional
Sessions Judge, Darbhanga in Sessions Trial No. 40 of 2002 (arising out of Simri P.S. Case No. 36 of
2001) are hereby set aside.
50.The appellants of both the aforesaid appeals are stated to be on bail, hence they are discharged
from the liability of their bail bonds.
51.The aforesaid appeals thus stand allowed.
(Soni Shrivastava, J) devendra/-
AFR/NAFR NAFR
CAV DATE NA
Uploading Date 19.10.2025
Transmission Date 19.10.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83633933/ 15
