Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Sr. No.18
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRMC No.101/2018
IA No.01/2018
Sunny Bhagat .....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Anil Sethi, Advocate.
Vs
State and another ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG for
respondent No.1.
None for respondent No.2.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
1. Through the instant petition filed under Section 561-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(hereinafter for short, Cr.P.C.) petitioner seeks quashing of FIR No.0011/2018 dated 20.01.2018,
registered with respondent No.1/Police Station, R. S. Pura, for commission of offence punishable
under Sections 420, 406, 376, 323 & 505(2) RPC against the petitioner.
2. The case of the petitioner is that in the month of April, 2017 when the petitioner came on leave to
visit his parents at his native place, the family of respondent No.2 approached the family of
petitioner with a proposal of marriage between respondent No.2 and petitioner. Thereafter, a
meeting was arranged so that the girl and the boy could meet each other in furtherance of such
marriage proposal. Both the parties met with each other couple of times. The family of the petitioner
intimated the family of respondent No.2 that before approving such marriage, the petitioner's family
wanted to discuss the matter with the respectable members of their Biradari and after long
deliberations, the elders of the family of the petitioner and Biradari decided that the girl i.e.
respondent No.2 is not suitable for the petitioner as she belongs to other caste and such marriage
would be against the customs. It was also considered by the Biradari that the petitioner has many
liabilities to execute so it is not the time for the petitioner to solemnize his marriage. The marriage
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 1
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
proposal of respondent No.2 was not accepted and was declined by the family of the petitioner.
The family members of respondent No.2 did not take the rejection of the marriage proposal in right
manner rather started leveling false, frivolous and vague allegations against the petitioner and his
family members.
3. It is further contended that the family of petitioner never approved the marriage proposal of
respondent No.2's family and never extended any promise to marry respondent No.2 at all as
alleged in the complaint. In the said complaint, the police of Police Station R.S. Pura threatened the
petitioner that in case he refuses to marry respondent No.2, he will be involved in some criminal
case and if he wants to save himself then he has to agree to marry respondent No.2. In these
circumstances, the petitioner was left with no option but to succumb to the illegal pressure of
respondent No.2 and was forced to sign a compromise agreement against his free Will under threat
of arrest and pressure from respondent No.2 as well as concerned police. The petitioner filed a civil
suit seeking declaration of the said compromise agreement as null and void.
Respondent No.2, after signing of the compromise agreement by the petitioner, withdrew her earlier
complaints filed before respondent No.1.
Respondent did not stop here and filed the impugned FIR dated 20.01.2018 against the petitioner
alleging therein that the respondent No.2 has developed relationship with petitioner and the
petitioner had promised her for conducting marriage and in view of this promise, the relationship
between petitioner and respondent No.2 further developed. It is also alleged in the complaint that
petitioner has refused to marry respondent no.2.
4. That the petitioner is aggrieved of the impugned FIR No.0011/2018 dated 20.01.2018 and
challenged the same on the following grounds:-
i) That the impugned FIR is liable to be quashed as it does not disclose ingredient of
Section 375 RPC. None of the requirements which are sine qua non for registration of
FIR under Section 376 RPC are made out, thus, the impugned FIR is liable to be
quashed.
ii) That the circumstances for the quashment of the FIR as has been laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Bhajan Lal as reporte din 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335
are clearly made out in the present case. In view of the above stated facts, it is
apparent that the criminal proceedings have been initiated by the complainant
against the petitioner maliciously with the sole purpose of wrecking vengeance and
some how harass the petitioner to illegally extract money from him.
iii) That the impugned FIR is against law as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India in Deepak Gulati Vs. State of Haryana reported in 2013 VII SCC 675. In the
said case, Hon'ble Supreme Court has clearly laid down distinction between not
fulfilling a promise and mere breach of promise occurring due to the circumstances
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 2
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
beyond control.
iv) That in the impugned FIR, the incident alleged is vague one as nothing has been
discussed/mentioned by respondent no.2 viz. place of alleged sexual intercourse
committed by the petitioner with her, period/month or year of such incidence. It is
surprising as to why the complainant remained quiet for such a long period and never
complained of any such incident which otherwise has not taken place at all and the
FIR has been registered admittedly an afterthought when respondent No.2 failed in
involing the petitioner and making him to succumb to her pressure, coercion or
threats.
v) That the FIR impugned deserves to be set aside on the ground that the petitioner
has not made any false assurance or committed any cheating upon respondent No.2.
Respondent No.2 is a major and intelligent enough to know the consequences of
entering into relationship akin to matrimony and having sexual relationship with
petitioner. However, act of the respondent no.2 can at the best be called as
promiscuous
5. Respondent No.1/ State has filed status report. The specific stand taken is that
petitioner namely Sunny Bhagat has made the life of the complainant hell and the
accused has crossed all the limits to cheat the complainant and the accused time and
again has shattered the faith of the complainant and the complainant is not in a
position to face her relatives and the society. The accused person has committed the
offences punishable under Sections 420, 376, 323, 505(2) of RPC and on this count
FIR No.11/2018 stands registered and investigation of the case entrusted to SI
Kuldeep Kumar No.785603/J. The investigating officer visited on spot, prepared the
site plan. Statement of the complainant got recorded under Section 164-A before
JMIC RS Pura and medical of the victim conducted from CHC RS Pura and medical
report also obtained. It is further contended that the investigation of the case has
been stayed by this Hon'ble High Court vide order dated 15.05.2018.
6. Pursuant to the orders dated 06.03.2023 & 27.03.2023 passed by this Court, the
Registrar Judicial has recorded the statements of respondent No.2 & petitioner. The
same are placed on record, which read as under:-
Statement of Rekha Devi (respondent No.2); Age:31 years; D/o Hans Raj; R/o Village
Chack Mohd. Yar, Tehsil R.S. Pura, District Jammu on oath today i.e. 06.03.2023:
Stated, that I have amicably resolved all disputes and issues with Sunny Bhagat
(petitioner). A compromise deed dated 11.08.2022, duly attested on 11.08.2022 by
Notary Public, Jammu City, has also been executed between us in this regard and
same is also placed on the record of the file. Further, I have no grievance against the
petitioner. In view of our amicable settlement, I have no objection in case Hon'ble
Court quashes FIR No.11/2018 dated 20.01.2018 lodged at Police Station R.S. Pura,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 3
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
Jammu.
Statement of Sunny Bhagat (petitioner); Age:33 years; S/o Tarsem Lal; R/o Village
Chohala, Tehsil R.S. Pura, District Jammu on oath today i.e. 27.03.2023:
Stated, that I have amicably resolved all disputes and issues with Rekha Devi
(respondent No.2). A compromise deed dated 11.08.2022, duly attested on
11.08.2022 by Notary Public, Jammu City, has also been executed between us in this
regard and same is also placed on the record of the file. In view of our amicable
settlement, I pray before Hon'ble Court to quash FIR No.11/2018 dated 20.01.2018
registered at Police Station R.S. Pura, Jammu.
7. Petitioner in support of his case has placed reliance on a recent judgment of this
Court in case bearing CRM(M) No.122/2022 titled Neeraj Kumar Vs. UT of J&K and
Anr. [decided on 17.02.2023] whereby following the ratio of the judgment in the case
titled Kapil Gupta Vs. State of NCT of Delhi and anr. decided on 10.08.2022 in
Criminal Appeal No.1217 of 2022 and SLP(Crl.) No.5806 of 2022, it is held that the
High Court has inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.PC to quash the proceedings to
meet the ends of justice subject to the parameters that, if the parties have settled
their disputes amicably by a compromise even in a heinous and serious offence of
rape, if the application/petition is made at an earliest stage even though charge sheet
has been filed but charges are yet to be framed and trial has not commenced, and
even if the criminal trial is permitted to go ahead it will end in nothing else than an
acquittal.
8. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a case titled "Kapil Gupta vs State of NCT of
Delhi &Anr.", decided on 10.08.2022 in Criminal Appeal No. 1217 of 2022 and
SLP(Crl.) No. 5806 of 2022, while quashing FIR in rape case u/ss 376 IPC and
observing that as compromise has occurred between the parties, charges are yet to be
framed, and if trial is permitted to go, it will end in nothing else than an acquittal, in
paras 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 & 18 held as under:-
"12. No doubt that the learned ASG is right in relying on various judgments of this
Court which reiterate the legal position that in heinous and serious offences like
murder or rape, the Court should not quash the proceedings. It will be relevant to
refer to paragraph 29.5 to 29.7 of the judgment of this Court in the case of Narender
Singh versus State of Punjab, which read thus:
"29.5 While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the
possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would
put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
caused to him by not quashing the criminal cases.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 4
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
29.6 Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and serious
offences and therefore are to be generally treated as crime against the society and not
against the individual alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision
merely because there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
framed under this provision.
It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is
there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would
lead to proving the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate
parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the
victim can generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court
can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are
remote and bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal
proceedings whereas in the latter case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
compounding the offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court
can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony
between them which may improve their future relationship.
29.7 While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of
the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and even the chargesheet has not been filed.
Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is
still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but
after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above.
On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the
evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from
exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a
position to decide the case finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence
under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere
compromise between the parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of
the offender who has already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section
307 IPC and conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of
sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime."
13. It can thus be seen that this Court has clearly held that though the Court should be slow in
quashing the proceedings wherein heinous and serious offences are involved, the High Court is not
foreclosed from examining as to whether there exists material for incorporation of such an offence
or as to whether there is sufficient evidence which if proved would lead to proving the charge for the
offence charged with. The Court has also to take into consideration as to whether the settlement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 5
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
between the parties is going to result into harmony between them which may improve their mutual
relationship.
14. The Court has further held that it is also relevant to consider as to what is stage of the
proceedings. It has been observed that if an application is made at a belated stage wherein the
evidence has been led and the matter is at the stage of arguments or judgment, the Court should be
slow to exercise the power to quash the proceedings. However, if such an application is made at an
initial stage before commencement of trial, the said factor will weigh with the court in exercising its
power.
15. The facts and circumstances as stated hereinabove are peculiar in the present case. Respondent
No.2 is a young lady of 23 years. She feels that gong through trial is one case, where she is a
complainant and in the other case, wherein she is the accused would robe the prime of her youth.
She feels that if she is made to face the trial rather than getting any relief, she would be faced with
agony of undergoing the trial.
16. In both the cases, though the charge sheets have been filed, the charges are yet to be framed and
as such, the trial has not yet commenced. It is further to be noted that since the respondent No.2
herself is not supporting the prosecution case, even if the criminal trial is permitted to go ahead, it
will end in nothing else than an acquittal. If the request of the parties is denied, it will be amounting
to only adding one more criminal case to the already overburdened criminal courts.
17. In that view of the matte, we find that though in a heinous or serious crime like, rape, the Court
should not normally exercise the powers of quashing the proceedings, in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the present case and in order to give succor to respondent No.2 so that she is saved
from further agony of facing two criminal trials, one as a victim and one as an accused, we find that
this is a fit case wherein the extraordinary powers of this Court be exercised to quash the criminal
proceedings.
18. In that view of the matter, the appeal is allowed and proceedings in the criminal cases arising out
of following FIRs are quashed and set aside: 1. FIR No.569/2020 registered at Police Station,
Mehrauli, New Delhi (Rape) 2. FIR No.824/2020, registered at Police Station, Mehrauli, New Delhi
(Extortion)."
9. Ratio of the judgment (supra) squarely applies to the facts of the case in hand. Bare perusal of the
statements of petitioner and respondent No.2 placed on record demonstrates that the parties have
entered into a compromise whereby they have settled their disputes/issues, so there would be no
chance of conviction of accused in near future in case trial is held and concluded.
10. In view of the above, this petition is allowed. Consequently, FIR No.0011/2018 dated
20.01.2018, registered with respondent No.1/Police Station, R. S. Pura, for commission of offence
punishable under Sections 420, 406, 376, 323 & 505(2) RPC against the petitioner on the complaint
of respondent No.2, in view of compromise arrived at between the parties, is quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 6
Sunny Bhagat vs State And Another on 2 August, 2023
11. Disposed of accordingly along with all connected CM(s).
12. Copy of this order be sent to SHO Police Station, R.S.Pura, District Jammu for compliance.
( Vinod Chatterji Koul ) Judge Jammu 02.08.2023 Narinder Whether the order is speaking?
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145677667/ 7
