Suraj Kumar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
Suraj Kumar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26
June, 2019
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
1
Cr.A.No.4915/2019
Suraj Kumar Rathore Vs. State of M.P. & Anr.
Gwalior Bench Dated : 26.06.2019
Shri Ankur Maheshwari, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri H.D. Mishra, learned PP for respondent No.1/State.
Shri Arsad Ali and Shri BPS Tomar, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
With consent heard finally.
Present appeal has been filed under Section 14 (A)(2) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for brevity 'the Act') against the order dated 27-05-2019 passed
by Special Judge (Atrocities), Morena whereby the application of the appellant under Section 439 of
Cr.P.C. seeking bail has been rejected.
Appellant is in custody since 09-03-2019 in connection with Crime No.40/2019 registered at Police
Station Porsa District Morena for the offence punishable under Sections 366, 376, 363 of IPC, under
Section 3/4 of the POCSO Act and Sections 3(i)(w) and 3(ii)(v) of the Act.
It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that false case has been registered against the
appellant which is reflected from the statement of prosecutrix recorded under Section 164 of Cr.P.C.
Prosecutrix left her matrimonial home of her own volition. Medical examination of prosecutrix
nowhere reflects any sign of external injury or struggle. Charge-sheet has already been filed.
Confinement THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH since 09-03-2019 amounts to pretrial
detention. He undertakes not to move in the vicinity of victim in any manner and would not be a
source of harassment and embarrassment to the complainant party. Appellant further undertakes to
cooperate in trial and would make himself available as and when required by the trial Court. Thus,
prayed for grant of bail.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State opposed the bail application and prayed for the
dismissal of appeal.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the case diary. Considering the submissions made
by learned counsel for the parties and fact situation of the case, without expressing any opinion on
merits of the case, I deem it appropriate to allow this appeal in the following terms.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157611700/ 1
Suraj Kumar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
It is directed that the appellant be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond in the sum of
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rs. One Lac only) with one solvent surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the
concerned trial Court for his regular appearance before the trial Court on the condition that he shall
remain present before the Court concerned during the trial This order will remain operative subject
to compliance of the following conditions by the appellant:-
1. The appellant will comply with all the terms and conditions of the bond executed
by him;
2. The appellant will cooperate in the investigation/trial, as the case may be;
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
3. The appellant will not indulge himself in extending inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him/her from disclosing such facts to the
Court or to the Police Officer, as the case may be;
4. The appellant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused;
5. The appellant will not seek unnecessary adjournments during the trial; and
6. The appellant will not leave India without previous permission of the trial Court/Investigating
Officer, as the case may be.
7. Appellant shall not move in the vicinity of victim in any manner and would not be a source of
harassment and embarrassment to the complainant party, otherwise the relief of bail shall be
immediately withdrawn.
8. As per the undertaking given by counsel on behalf of the appellant, it is hereby directed that
appellant shall plant 5 saplings (either fruit bearing trees or Neem/ Peepal) alongwith tree guards or
has to make arrangement for fencing for protection of the trees because it is the duty of the
appellant not only to plant the saplings but also to nurture them.
"o`{kkjksi.k ds lkFk] o`{kkiks"k.k Hkh vko';d gSA " He shall plant saplings/ trees
preferably of 6-8 ft., so that they would grow into full fledged trees at an early time.
For ensuring the compliance, he shall have to submit all the photographs of
plantation of trees/ saplings before the concerned trial Court alongwith a THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH report within 30 days from the date of release of
the appellant. The report shall be submitted by the appellant before the trial Court
every month till conclusion of the trial.
It is the duty of the trial Court to monitor the progress of the trees because human
existence is at stake because of the environmental degradation and Court cannot put
a blind fold over any casualness shown by the appellant regarding compliance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157611700/ 2
Suraj Kumar Rathore vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
Therefore, trial Court is directed to submit a report regarding progress of the trees
and the compliance made by the appellant by placing a short report before this Court
every quarterly (every three months), which shall be placed under the caption
"Direction" before this Court.
Any default on behalf of appellant in plantation or caring of trees shall disentitle the
appellant from enjoying the benefit of bail.
The appellant shall be at liberty to plant these saplings/ trees at an place of his choice
if he intends to protect the trees on his own cost by providing tree guards or fencing.
This direction is made by this Court as a test case to address the Anatomy of Violence
and Evil by process of Creation and a step towards Alignment with Nature. The
natural instinct of compassion, service, love and mercy needs to be rekindled for
human existence as they are innately engrained THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH attributes of human existence.
"It is not a question of Plantation of a Tree but the Germination of a Thought."
A copy of this order be sent to the trial Court concerned for compliance.
Certified copy as per rules.
(Anand Pathak)
Anil* Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157611700/ 3
