Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8
December, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 29.11.2023
Pronounced on 08.12.2023
CRMC No. 386/2014
1. Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 years) .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
S/o Bihari Lal Bhagat, R/o H.
No. 36, Sector-3 Private,
Trikuta Nagar, Jammu.
2. Mohd Hanif (Age 44 years) S/o
Chowdhary Sain Ahmed, R/o
Ramzanpura, Janipur, Jammu.
Through: Mr. J. P. Gandhi, Advocate
Vs
1. Mohinder Kumar, S/o late Sh. Gian
Chand, R/o Prembli, Tehsil and
District Jammu.
2. Raj Kumar S/o late Sh. Gian Chand,
R/o Gho Manhasan, Tehsil and
District Jammu.
..... Respondent(s)
3. Salam Din, S/o Kala Khan, R/o
Tehan, Tehsil Kotranka Budhal,
Rajouri.
....Proforma Respondent
Through: None.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioners have filed the present petition under Section 561-A Cr.P.C, now Section 482 Cr.
P.C. for quashing the complaint, titled, "Mohinder Kumar vs. Mohd Hanief and others" pending
before the Court of Special Railway Magistrate, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as "the trial
court") and also the order dated 14.01.2012, whereby process has been issued against the
petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 1
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
2. Before this court proceeds further, it is apt to note that the respondent No.3, who was the third
accused along with the petitioners died during the pendency of the complaint. The petitioners have
sought the quashing of the aforesaid complaint on the ground that no offence is made out against
them and that the petitioner No. 1 had been serving as a Gazetted Officer and as per the requirement
of law under Section 197 Cr.PC, no criminal proceedings could have been initiated against him
without obtaining prior sanction from the Competent Authority,
3. Despite notice, the respondents have not chosen to appear, therefore, this Court heard the
arguments on behalf of the petitioners only.
4. Mr. J. P. Gandhi, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the contents of the complaint
reveal that no offence is made out against the petitioners and the learned trial court despite that has
issued the process against the petitioners. He further submitted that the process has been issued in
the mechanical manner.
5. Heard learned counsel for the petitioners and perused the record.
6. The averments made in the complaint are extracted as under :
"xxxxx " In the matter of:
Complaint under Section 403, 418, 420, 120-B 468, 471 RPC Sir, The
complainant/applicants most respectfully submits as under:
1. That complainant/applicant is permanent resident of J&K State and residing
aforesaid address and peace loving, law abiding citizen of India.
2. That the complainant/applicant had entered into agreement for purchase of land
from the person owner in possession and in lieu of that they had executed agreement
to sell and power of attorney in favour of complaint dated 04.01.2010 and same was
registered with the sub registrar, Jammu with regard to land bearing Kh. No. 204
old/254 new measuring 6 kanals situated at village Sajadpur Martha Tehsil and
District Jammu being law fully owners.
3. That the accused had hatch a conspiracy with one Kaka Ram and attested
fard-i-inkaf with regard to the land mutated under section 4 of the Agr. Reforms Act
whereby declaring he executants as owner with regard to land bearing Kh. No. 204
old/254 new measuring 2 kanals 9 marlas situated at village Sajadpur Martha Tehsil
and District Jammu, the accused person will be bound to spot inspection over the
land and thereafter, attested the mutation without affording opportunity to the
person in possession execute gift deed in favour of the Madan Lal Chouhan.
4. That the land already sold by the owner in possession to the complainant and
complainant is in possession without any interference over the land since the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 2
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
execution of said documents and till date is in cultivating possession over the said
land.
5. That in the said document i.e in thebody of the agreement to sell is reproduce as
under "that if first pary refuse to execute the sale deed of other necessary documents
in court of law in favour of second party or any person of his choice then First party
will repay the double amount of advance paid to the second party and if the second
party fails to pay the balance amount then advance paid will be forfeited."
6. That it was found or come to the knowledge of the complainant that the said land
was illegally transferred by the accused with mala fide intension to get undue benefits
and attested mutation with regard to the land supra and the accused person manage
a forged/illegal document in favour of the beneficiary.
7. That the accused with criminal intention on the one hand manoeuvred a forged
document self styled as fard-i-kaf thereby assuming/declaring full fledged owners of
the land to unknown person.
8. That the intentions of the accused at the time of execution of said document with
criminal intention to cause wilful loss to the complaint by the act of cheating
managed and prepared a false document as genuine knowing fully well that the said
land is mutated under section 4 and 8 of Agrarian Reforms Act, it is needless to
mention here that all this had been done to get undue benefits by the act of
fabrication, fraud and cheating, as such the accused persons with their mala fide
intention and criminal conspiracy for their personal benefits prepared illegal
document.
9. That the complainant is not aware of other accomplishes/ associates/abettors in
the commission of aforesaid crime, the accused have done all this in a pre-planned
manner with criminal intension, to use the forged document as genuine and by using
the same in this way to get benefits which as indicated above, and complainant came
to know of the same through concerned Patwari. A copy of the Girdwari and other
documents with regard to the said land is annexed herewith for your kind perusal.
10. That the intention of the accused at the time execution of said document is mala
fide with motive to cause loss to the complaint and loss has been caused to the
complainant due to their illegal act.
11. That the accused has cheated the complainant dishonestly, intentionally with mala
fide design to cause loss to the complainant.
12. That the cause of action has been accrued to the complainant at Jammu, when
agreement to sell has been executed at Jammu and offence has been committed by
the accused person within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 3
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
13. That accused has committed the offence intentionally in order to harm and
damage the complainant/applicant and illegally executed said document in favour of
the Balak Ram who had no where exists in the paper or neither he has co sharer or
tenants over the land belonging to complainant, the gift deed prepared and executed
by the said person with criminal conspiracy, the accused behaved in very decorous
manner, which is against the other and civilized societies.
An affidavit in support is annexed herewith It is therefore, requested that accused persons may
kindly be dealt under section 403, 418, 420, 120-B RPC.
x xxxxxxx"
7. A perusal of the complaint reveals that Mohinder Kumar and Raj Kumar through their attorney
holder, Rattan Lal Chauhan has filed a complaint against the petitioners and proforma respondent
No. 3 for commission of offences under Section 403, 418, 420, 120-B, 468 & 471 RPC. The
allegations levelled in the complaint are that the petitioners and proforma respondent No. 3 hatched
a conspiracy with one Kaka Ram and attested a fard Intikhab in respect of the land measuring 2
kanals 9 marlas situated at village Sajadpur Martha Tehsil and District Jammu mutated under
Section 4 of the Agrarian Reforms Act. It contended that the complainants are in possession of the
land in question ever since execution of the agreement to sell and power of attorney dated
04.01.2010 in their favour. It is further averred in the complaint that it came to the knowledge of the
complainants that the said land was illegally transferred by the accused persons to get undue
benefits with a mala fide intention and attested mutation with regard to the aforesaid land. It is
further averred that the petitioners and proforma respondent No. 3 managed a forged document in
favour of the beneficiaries, styled as "fard-a-kaf", whereby unknown person has been declared as
owner of the land. It is also alleged that the petitioners and proforma respondent No. 3 had
committed the offence intentionally in order to harm the respondents 1 & 2.
8. The learned trial court after reproducing the contents of the complaint which is not only full of
grammatical errors but is vague as well, has issued the process against the petitioners. There is
averment in the complaint that the forged document has been prepared by the petitioners for the
purpose of granting undue benefits to the alleged beneficiary, who has not been arrayed as an
accused. It is not forthcoming as to how the offences under section 403, 418 RPC are made out in
the complaint. The petitioner No.1 is Naib-Tehsildar and petitioner No.2 is Patwari. How they have
committed forgery is also not forthcoming from the record. It is evident that the complaint has been
filed only to harass the Government Employees.
9. A perusal of the record of the trial court reveals that one gift deed dated 09.10.2009 executed by
one Balak Ram S/o Paras Ram R/o Chak Chouhan in favour of Madan Lal Chauhan S/o Paras Ram,
R/o Chak Chouhana Tehsil and District Jammu has been placed on record. The respondent Nos. 1 &
2, in fact are aggrieved of the gift deed executed in favour of Madan Lal Chouhan by said Balak Ram
pursuant to the Fard Intikhab. If the gift deed has wrongly been executed, the same could have been
challenged but no criminal proceedings can be initiated against the petitioners more particularly
when they are not parties to the gift deed. Also the mutation attested pursuant to the gift deed can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 4
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
be assailed before the competent authority. The civil dispute in respect of execution of gift deed has
been given criminal colour for ulterior purpose.
10. The trial court has issued the process against the petitioners and proforma respondent No. 3 for
commission of offences under sections 403, 418, 420, 120-B, 468 & 471 RPC without recording its
satisfaction as to how the aforesaid offences are made out and what was the document before the
learned trial court, which was allegedly forged by the petitioners and respondent No. 3.
11. In "State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992" 1, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has laid down
the principles for the purpose of exercising inherent powers while examining the legality of
FIR/criminal proceedings:
102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers Supp (1) SCC 335 under Section 156(1) of the Code
except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the
Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and
the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is
an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 5
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved
party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.
(Emphasis added)
12. Further in "Mohammad Wajid & Anr. vs. State of U.P" 2 , , the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
observed as under:
"30. At this stage, we would like to observe something important. Whenever an
accused comes before the Court invoking either the inherent powers under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) or extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution to get the FIR or the criminal proceedings quashed
essentially on the ground that such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or vexatious
or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance, then in such
circumstances the Court owes a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more
closely. We say so because once the complainant decides to proceed against the
accused with an ulterior motive for wreaking personal vengeance, etc., then he would
ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well drafted with all the necessary pleadings.
The complainant would ensure that the averments made in the FIR/complaint are
such that they disclose the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence.
Therefore, it will not be just enough for the Court to look into the averments made in
the FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the 17 necessary
ingredients to constitute the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In frivolous or
vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty to look into many other attending
circumstances 2023 INSC 683 emerging from the record of the case over and above
the averments and, if need be, with due care and circumspection try to read in
between the lines. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
CrPC or Article 226 of the Constitution need not restrict itself only to the stage of a
case but is empowered to take into account the overall circumstances leading to the
initiation/registration of the case as well as the materials collected in the course of
investigation. Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple FIRs have been registered
over a period of time. It is in the background of such circumstances the registration of
multiple FIRs assumes importance, thereby attracting the issue of wreaking
vengeance out of private or personal grudge as alleged."
(Emphasis added)
13. In view of the above, the continuance of criminal proceedings would be nothing but an abuse of
process of law, as such, the present petition is allowed and the complaint, titled, "Mohinder Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 6
Surinder Bhagat (Age 52 Years) vs Mohinder Kumar on 8 December, 2023
and Anr. vs. Mohd Hanif and ors" pending before the learned Railway Magistrate Jammu as well as
process issued vide order 14.01.2012 are quashed.
(Rajnesh Oswal) Judge JAMMU 08.12.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154305506/ 7
