Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25
January, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 155
Author: B.P.Routray
Bench: B.P.Routray
HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
CRLMC No.759 of 2020
In the matter of an application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
-------------
Susil Kumar Pattnaik .... Petitioner
Versus
State of Odisha (Vigilance) .... Opposite party
For Petitioner -- Mr.Gautam Mishra,
Sr.Advocate
For Opp. Party -- Mr.Niranjan Moharana,
A.S.C .(Vigilance)
JUDGMENT
PRESENT:
THE HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE B.P.ROUTRAY Date of Hearing :27.11.2020 : Date of
Judgment:25.01.2021 B.P.ROUTRAY, J. The petitioner has challenged the order
dated 13.01.2020 of the learned Special Judge, Vigilance, Berhampur passed in
G.R.No.28 of 2013(V), wherein his prayer for discharge from the offences under
Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(c)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act (in
short "P.C.Act") and Sections 409/471/120-B of the Indian Penal Code (in short
"I.P.C.") has been rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 1
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
2. It is the case of the petitioner that he is presently working as A.B.D.O. of Dharakote Block in the
district of Ganjam. He was remained In- charge Executive Officer of Chikiti N.A.C. from 1.3.2008 to
6.8.2009. It is alleged that during the said period of his incumbency in Chikiti N.A.C., he, by
committing irregularity in tender process issued the work order to a non- existent farm run by the
co-accused-Priyabrata Biswal to procure the Cesspool Emptier resulting wrongful loss to the public
fund and unlawful pecuniary advantage to the accused persons. Concerning manipulation of tender
papers and use of forged document in the transaction, the chargsheet was filed by Vigilance Police in
Berhampur Vigilance P.S.Case No.28 dated 30.9.2013 for the aforestated offences. Consequently
cognizance for the offences was taken on 29.11.2016 and subsequently the charge was framed in the
impugned order by refusing his prayer for discharge.
3. It is submitted that, the Director of P.R. Department, Government of Odisha, who is the
sanctioning authority, has declined to issue sanction of prosecution against the petitioner and
despite such refusal of sanction, the learned court below has committed illegality in taking
cognizance of the offences against the petitioner as well as refusing his prayer for discharge.
It is argued on behalf of the petitioner that sanction of prosecution in respect of a public servant is
the mandate of law for his prosecution of the penal offences either under the P.C. Act or under the
I.P.C. When the prayer for sanction by the prosecuting agency has been refused by the competent
authority, the court cannot take cognizance of the offences as barred under Section 19 of the P.C. Act
as well as 197 of the Cr.P.C. It is also submitted that since the public servant is protected through
sanction from facing the prosecution, in absence of such approval from the competent authority, the
proceeding is vitiated against him. Accordingly, the petitioner prays for his protection.
4. The petitioner in support of his contention has relied on the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of State of Himachal vs. Nishant Sareen, reported in (2010) 14 SCC 527, Nanjappa
vs. State of Karnataka, reported in (2015) 14 SCC 186 and Anil Kumar and others vs. M.K.Aiyappa,
reported in (2013) 10 SCC 705.
5. On the contrary, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the Vigilance that admittedly the
sanction sought for under Section 19 of the P.C.Act against the petitioner has been refused by the
competent authority. But the sanction for prosecution of the petitioner for the offences under the
I.P.C. is not at all required and as such was never sought for. Learned counsel further submits that
since the offences under the I.P.C. have been alleged in addition to the offences under the P.C.Act,
the order taking cognizance and consequent prosecution against the petitioner is never vitiated as
the law has been settled in catena of decisions that no sanction is required for prosecution of the
public servant in such matters where he has misutilised his official position to commit the offences
as the same is not a part of his official duty. To support of his contention, he mainly relies on the
ratio decided in the case of Prakash Singh Badal and another vs. State of Punjab and others,
reported in AIR 2007 SC 1274 and additionally in other cases Viz. Rajib Ranjan and others vs.
R.Vijaykumar, reported in (2015) 1 SCC 513, P.K.Pradhan vs. State of Sikkim represented by the
Central Bureau of Investigation, reported in (2001) 6 SCC 704 and State, CBI vs. Sashi
Balasubramanian and another, reported in (2006) 13 SCC 252.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 2
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
6. On the backdrop of those submissions and counter submissions, the admitted facts as seen from
the record are that, the petitioner was working as In-charge Executive Officer of Chikiti N.A.C. from
1.3.2008 to 6.8.2009. It is also not disputed that the petitioner has issued Order No.887 dated
12.6.2009 directing to supply the machine. It is also admitted that the competent authority i.e., the
Director of P.R. Department, Government of Odisha has declined sanction of prosecution against
the petitioner for the offences under the P.C.Act. So far as the offences under the I.P.C. are
concerned, it is admitted on behalf of the Vigilance that no sanction was sought for those offences
against the petitioner. Thus, what is derived from the submissions that, the sanction for prosecution
has been refused in respect of the offences under the P.C.Act and no sanction is there in respect of
the offences under the I.P.C.
7. It reveals that, the case of the prosecution relating to sanction is segregated in two folds, one
under Section 19 of the P.C.Act and the other under Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. Coming to examine on
the point of sanction in respect of the offences under the P.C.Act, it is mentioned in the chargsheet
dated 3.10.2016 that, the Director, P.R. Department, Government of Odisha has declined to issue
sanction of prosecution against the accused, Susil Kumar Patnaik (petitioner), ex-E.O., Chikiti
N.A.C. under Section 19(1) of the P.C. Act to prosecute under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 of the P.C.
Act. Therefore when the sanction has been clearly refused by the competent authority for
prosecution against the petitioner, the order taking cognizance of the offences under the P.C.Act
against the petitioner by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge (Vigilance) does not seem appropriate.
Because Section 19 is clear that no cognizance can be taken for any offence under the P.C.Act against
a public servant without required sanction. The present one is a case of refusal of sanction and not a
case of mere absence of sanction. There is difference between a case where sanction has been
refused and a case where there is no sanction. When the sanction has been refused by the competent
authority in clear words, it means that the employer in his discretion has shielded his employee
from prosecution and it is to be remembered here that Section 19 is the statutory power in the hands
of the sanctioning authority with the object to ensure that a public servant does not suffer
harassment on false, frivolous or unsubstantiated allegations. Therefore when the competent
authority has refused to grant sanction for prosecution, the petitioner has got immune in his favour
from prosecution and in such cases of refusal of sanction, the prosecution against the public servant
is certainly vitiated.
8. It is true that the petitioner has not questioned the order taking cognizance but has challenged
refusal of his prayer for discharge and the question of framing the charge. But this will not preclude
him raising the question at the stage of framing charge. It cannot be said that the accused is
prohibited from exercising his right of discharge for the reason he has not questioned the order of
cognizance. Therefore the accused has every right to question the framing of charge against him and
for the same he need not necessarily challenge the order of cognizance.
9. Now coming to the question of sanction in respect of the offences under the I.P.C., it is the
admitted case of the Vigilance that no sanction has been sought for by the prosecution against the
public servants as the same is not required under Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. Here, the decisions of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Prakash Singh Badal (supra), Rajib Ranjan (supra) and
P.K.Pradhan (supra) have been strenuously relied on by the Vigilance Department.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 3
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
In the case of Prakash Singh Badal (supra), it has been observed as follows:
"35. The protection given under Section 197 is to protect responsible public servants
against the institution of possibly vexatious criminal proceedings for offences alleged
to have been committed by them while they are acting or purporting to act as public
servants. The policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection to public
servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted for anything done by them in the
discharge of their official duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted,
to confer on the Government, if they choose to exercise it, complete control of the
prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is available only when the alleged
act done by the public servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of his
official duty and is not merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing his
official duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is a reasonable connection
between the act and the performance of the official duty, the excess will not be a
sufficient ground to deprive the public servant from the protection. The question is
not as to the nature of the offence such as whether the alleged offence contained an
element necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public servant, but whether
it was committed by a public servant acting or purporting to act as such in the
discharge of his official capacity. Before Section 197 can be invoked, it must be shown
that the official concerned was accused of an offence alleged to have been committed
by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. It is not
the duty which requires examination so much as the act, because the act can be
performed both in the discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of it. The
act must fall within the scope and range of the official duties of the public servant
concerned. It is the quality of the act which is important and the protection of this
section is available if the act falls within the scope and range of his official duty. There
cannot be any universal rule to determine whether there is a reasonable connection
between the act done and the official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any such
rule. This aspect makes it clear that the concept of Section 197 does not immediately
get attracted on institution of the complaint case.
xxx xxx xxx
43. The question relating to the need of sanction under Section 197 of the Code is not
necessarily to be considered as soon as the complaint is lodged and on the allegations
contained therein. This question may arise at any stage of the proceeding. The
question whether sanction is necessary or not may have to be determined from stage
to stage.
xxx xxx xxx
54. Great emphasis has been led on certain decisions of this Court to show that even
in relation to the offences punishable under Sections 467 and 468 sanction is
necessary. The foundation of the position has reference to some offences in Rakesh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 4
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
Kumar Mishra case. That decision has no relevance because ultimately this Court has
held that the absence of search warrant was intricately (sic linked) with the making of
search and the allegations about alleged offences had their matrix on the absence of
search warrant and other circumstances had a determinative role in the issue. A
decision is an authority for what it actually decides. Reference to a particular
sentence in the context of the factual scenario cannot be read out of context.
55. The offence of cheating under Section 420 or for that matter offences relatable to
Sections 467, 468, 471 and 120B can by no stretch of imagination by their very nature
be regarded as having been committed by any public servant while acting or
purporting to act in discharge of official duty. In such cases, official status only
provides an opportunity for commission of the offence.
In the case of Rajib Ranjan (supra), it has been observed as follows:
"15. The sanction, however, is necessary if the offence alleged against public servant
is committed by him "while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duties". In order to find out as to whether the alleged offence is committed while
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, following yardstick is
provided by this Court in Dr. Budhikota Subbarao in the following words:
"6. ........If on facts, therefore, it is prima facie found that the act or omission for
which the accused was charged had reasonable connection with discharge of his duty
then it must be held to be official to which applicability of Section 197 of the Code
cannot be disputed."
16. This principle was explained in some more detail in the case of Raghunath Anant Govilkar v.
State of Maharashtra, which was decided by this Court on 8-2-2008 in SLP (Crl.) No.5453 of 2007,
in the following manner: (SCC pp.298-99, para 11) "11. '7..... "66........On the question of the
applicability of Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the principle laid down in two cases,
namely, Shreekantiah Ramayya Munipalli v. State of Bombay and Amrik Singh v. State of Pepsu was
as follows: (Amrik Singh case, AIR p.312, para 8) '8.......It is not every offence committed by a public
servant that requires sanction for prosecution under Section 197 (1) of Criminal Procedure Code;
nor even every act done by him while he is actually engaged in the performance of his official duties;
but if the act complained of is directly concerned with his official duties so that, if questioned, it
could be claimed to have been done by virtue of the office, then sanction would be necessary.
The real question therefore, is whether the acts complained of in the present case were directly
concerned with the official duties of the three public servants. As far as the offence of criminal
conspiracy punishable under Sections 120-B read with Section 409 of the Indian Penal Code is
concerned and also Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, are concerned they cannot be
said to be of the nature mentioned in Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. To put it
shortly, it is no part of the duty of a public servant, while discharging his official duties, to enter into
a criminal conspiracy or to indulge in criminal misconduct. Want of sanction under Section 197 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 5
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
the Code of Criminal Procedure is, therefore, no bar."
xxx xxx xxx
18. The ratio of the aforesaid cases, which is clearly discernible, is that even while discharging his
official duties, if a public servant enters into a criminal conspiracy or indulges in criminal
misconduct, such misdemeanor on his part is not to be treated as an act in discharge of his official
duties and, therefore, provisions of Section 197 of the Code will not be attracted. In fact, the High
Court has dismissed the petitions filed by the appellant precisely with these observations, namely,
the allegations pertain to fabricating the false records which cannot be treated as part of the
appellants' normal official duties. The High Court has, thus, correctly spelt out the proposition of
law. The only question is as to whether on the facts of the present case, the same has been correctly
applied." In the case of P.K.Pradhan (supra), it has been held as follows:
"5. The legislative mandate engrafted in sub-section (1) of Section 197 debarring a
court from taking cognizance of an offence except with the previous sanction of the
Government concerned in a case where the acts complained of are alleged to have
been committed by a public servant in discharge of his official duty or purporting to
be in the discharge of his official duty and such public servant is not removable from
office save by or with the sanction of the Government touches the jurisdiction of the
court itself. It is a prohibition imposed by the statute from taking cognizance.
Different tests have been laid down in decided cases to ascertain the scope and
meaning of the relevant words occurring in Section 197 of the Code: "any offence
alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official duty. The offence alleged to have been committed must have
something to do, or must be related in some manner, with the discharge of official
duty. No question of sanction can arise under Section 197, unless the act complained
of is an offence; the only point for determination is whether it was committed in the
discharge of official duty. There must be a reasonable connection between the act and
the official duty. It does not matter even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary
for the discharge of the duty, as this question will arise only at a later stage when the
trial proceeds on the merits. What a court has to find out is whether the act and the
official duty are so interrelated that one can postulate reasonably that it was done by
the accused in the performance of official duty, though, possibly in excess of the
needs and requirements of situation.
xxx xxx xxx
15. Thus, from a conspectus of the aforesaid decisions, it will be clear that for
claiming protection under Section 197 of the Code, it has to be shown by the accused
that there is reasonable connection between the act complained of and the discharge
of official duty. An official act can be performed in the discharge of official duty as
well as in dereliction of it. For invoking protection under Section 197 of the Code, the
acts of the accused complained of must be such that the same cannot be separated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 6
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
from the discharge of official duty, but if there was no reasonable connection between
them and the performance of those duties, the official status furnishes only the
occasion or opportunity for the acts, then no sanction would be required. If the case
as put forward by the prosecution fails or the defence establishes that the act
purported to be done is in discharge of duty, the proceedings will have to be dropped.
It is well settled that question of sanction under Section 197 of the Code can be raised
any time after the cognizance; may be immediately after cognizance or framing of
charge or even at the time of conclusion of trial and after conviction as well. But there
may be certain cases where it may not be possible to decide the question effectively
without giving opportunity to the defence to establish that what he did was in
discharge of official duty. In order to come to the conclusion whether claim of the
accused, that the act that he did was in course of the performance of his duty was
reasonable one and neither pretended nor fanciful, can be examined during the
course of trial by giving opportunity to the defence to establish it. In such an
eventuality, the question of sanction should be left open to be decided in the main
judgment which may be delivered upon conclusion of the trial."
10. It is the contention of the petitioner that the aforesaid decisions relied on by the Vigilance
Department are not applicable to the present facts of the case as they are distinguishable for the
reason that in none of such cases the grant of sanction under the P.C. Act was refused by the
competent authority.
11. It needs to be stated here that in the case of Prakash Singh Badal(supra) where the offences
alleged were both under the P.C. Act and I.P.C., the sanction was granted under the P.C.Act and
sanction was absent in respect of the I.P.C. offences. In the case of Rajib Ranjan (supra), no offence
under the P.C.Act was alleged and all the offences alleged well under the I.P.C. In the case of
P.K.Pradhan(supra), the offences were under both the I.P.C. and P.C.Act, but no sanction was
granted or refused since both the public servant accused persons have seized to continue as such
public servants at the time of taking cognizance.
12. Thus, the petitioner is found true in his contention that in such decisions as cited by the
Vigilance, grant of sanction was not declined. Even though the afore cited cases are found some how
different in the factual context with the present case, still the petitioner cannot stand on his leg to
discard the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court made in those decisions to distinguish those
cases completely non- applicable in the facts of present case. The Hon'ble Supreme Court have
decided the principles of law on requirement of sanction under Section 197 of the Cr.P.C. Law is well
settled that no question of sanction can arise under Section 197 unless the act complained of is an
offence, which was committed in the discharge of official duty. It is further clear from the
afore-stated observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that there must be a reasonable connection
between the act and the official duty where the official act either have been performed in the
discharge of official duty or in dereliction of it. It is also settled that in order to determine whether
the act committed in course of the performance of duty was a reasonable one or pretended or
fanciful and the best time of examining the same is the course of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 7
Susil Kumar Pattnaik vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) .... ... on 25 January, 2021
13. On the backdrop of the above stated principle, the time has again come to turn to the factual
aspect of the present case. As seen from the contentions of the chargsheet, the petitioner issued
quotation call notice for purchase of two emptier and other machinery and three farms have
submitted their quotations, which were opened on 12.6.2009. Amongst those three farms, except
the farm selected, two other farms were non-existent and the farm for which the order was placed to
the co-accused Priyabrata Biswal, its registration certificate was cancelled with effect from
21.12.2011 and it has submitted a fake manipulated sales tax clearance certificate. The machine
(cesspool emptier) was procured by the accused Priyabrata Biswal in pursuance to the order placed
by the petitioner at a low price through another registered farm belonging to him and the higher rate
was paid to the co-accused. Thus upon a close examination of such factual aspects in commission of
the offences including forgery and criminal conspiracy, it is found such a complicated issue which is
required to be appreciated in course of trial. So at this stage, it would not be appropriated to opine
that the alleged offences under the P.C.Act and the I.P.C. are interrelated and insegregable.
Therefore, the refusal for discharge and framing of charge for the offences under the I.P.C. against
the petitioner cannot be discarded at this stage.
14. In the result, the prayer of the petitioner is partly allowed where he is directed to be discharged
from the offences under the P.C.Act only. It is needless here to hold that the prosecution against the
petitioner for the alleged offences under the I.P.C. is not impeded and in respect of the same, the
prayer of the petitioner is rejected.
With the aforesaid observation, the CRLMC is disposed of.
................................
B.P.Routray, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 25th January, 2021/CRB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/50375102/ 8
