Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August,
2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
AT SRINAGAR.
WP(C ) No. 416/2024
&
Connected matters.
Reserved on:31.07.2025
Pronounced on: 30 .08.2025
WP(C ) No. 416/2024
Syed Tariq Ahmad & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 417/2024
Tariq Ahmad & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 448/2024
Tahir Hussain & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1096/2024
Shamim Ahmed & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1177/2024
Mukhtar Ahmad Shah & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1250/2024
Mohd Iqbal Mir and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1255/2024
Saba Tahir and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1261/2024
Mudasir Ahmad Wani & ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1262/2024
Muzamil Ahmad Kakroo and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1263/2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 1
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
Asiya Farooq Mir and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1550/2024
Dr. Farhat Abbas and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 1580/2024
Arshad Hussain Bhat and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
2
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
WP(C ) No. 3314/2023
Dr. Ahsan Ul Haq and ors vs. UT of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 3376/2023
Fayaz Ahmad Wani and ors vs. State of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 3378/2023
Wahid Ud Din Kar and ors vs. State of J&K and ors
WP(C ) No. 3379/2023
Manzoor Ahmad Shah and anr vs. State and ors
WP(C ) No. 3380/2023
Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit and ors vs. State and ors
WP(C ) No.3460/2023
Mohd Yousuf Nengroo and ors vs. UT and ors
For petitioners:
Mr. N.A.Beigh Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Mohd Murshid Advocate.
MKr. Bhat Fayaz Advocate
Ms Nighat Amin Advocate
Mr. Arif Sikander Mir Advocate
Ms. Syed Shabana Advocate
Mr. Mir Majid Bashir Advocate.
For Respondents:
Mr. Ilyas Nazir Laway G.A.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR,JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY PARIHAR JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar J 1 By this common judgment, above numbered writ petitions raising similar issues
are proposed to be disposed of.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 2
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 2 Being aggrieved by and with a view to assailing a common judgment
dated 13.10.2023 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Srinagar Bench, Srinagar ["the
Tribunal"] in TA No. 297/2021 and connected matters, the petitioners have, in these petitions,
invoked the extraordinary writ jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. 3 The petitioners claim that they have been working in the Higher Education Department
as contractual lecturers in different disciplines having been engaged on an academic arrangement
basis. Some of the petitioners claim that they have been continuously working since 2003, while
others claim to have been working as such since the year 2006, against clear vacancies.
4 On the apprehension that they may be replaced by similar arrangements as also for seeking their
regularization under the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Special Provisions) Act, 2010 ["the Act
of 2010"], the petitioners approached a Single Bench of this Court by way of WP(C) No. 2572/2019
and other connected matters, seeking, inter alia, the following reliefs:
(i) That Section 3(b)of the Act of 2010, to the extent it excludes the persons
appointed on academic arrangement from the applicability of the Act, be declared
ultra vires the Constitution, and that Section 10(2) and Section 10(2A) of the Act be
also struck down;
(ii) A writ in the nature of mandamus commanding upon the respondents to
regularize the services of the petitioners in terms of the Act of 2010; and
(iii) A writ of mandamus commanding upon the respondents not to replace the
petitioners by engaging other candidates on academic arrangement basis.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 5 WP(C) No. 2572/2019 and other connected matters were contested by
the respondents by filing their objections. Apart from taking preliminary objection regarding the
maintainability of the writ petitions on the grounds of delay and laches, the respondents pleaded
that Section 3(b) of the Act of 2010 disentitles persons appointed/engaged, inter alia, on academic
arrangement basis for a fixed term in any Government Department from the benefit of
regularization. It was pleaded that the engagement of the writ petitioners on a contractual basis for a
particular academic session was purely need-based, being dependent upon the enrolment of
students in a particular subject in a particular college. It was the plea taken by the respondents that
the policy of the Government in the Higher Education Department permits any student having
passed 10+2 examination to seek admission in the college of his/her choice to pursue as degree-
level course in any subject of his/her choice. This, according to the respondents, is unlike other
States in the Country where the Government colleges have a fixed subject-wise intake capacity of
students. It was, thus, pleaded that the number of students to be admitted in a college in a particular
subject becomes known only after the process of admission to the degree- level courses is completed
in a given year. The number of students admitted in a particular subject determines the requirement
of teaching faculty, thereby necessitating academic arrangements to meet the increased strength of
students in such subject/faculty. With a view to meeting such exigency, the Government creates a
pool of lecturers engaged on academic arrangement basis, who are then deployed to different
colleges depending upon the enrolment of students in a particular 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 3
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
subject. It was submitted that at the start of every academic session, applications are invited for
making contractual engagements only for one academic session year. It is unequivocally stipulated
in the Advertisement Notification(s) that the engagement is purely for one academic session or till
the post is filled up by posting a regular faculty member or by transfer, whichever occurs earlier. The
selected candidates are called upon to submit an undertaking on affidavit that they will abide by the
terms and conditions of their engagement and shall not claim any preferential right for
regularization or confirmation of their services.
6 It was pointed out that during the past five years, the Government in the Higher Education
Department had referred more than 600 posts of Lecturers in different disciplines/subjects to the
J&K Public Service Commission for making selections. In many cases, the appointments have been
made, whereas in some cases the selection matters are pending adjudication before this
Court/Tribunal. It was further averred by the respondents in their reply affidavit that, in the
beginning, academic arrangements used to be made for a period of 10 months excluding
summer/winter vacations, and this practice continued till the academic session 2009-10. However,
on the directions of the Court, the terms of academic arrangement were revisited, and the
candidates engaged after the academic session 2009-10 were given the contractual term from 1st of
March to the end of February for Kashmir Division, and from 1st of July to 30th June for Jammu
Division. It was also pleaded that the candidates engaged under academic arrangement are not paid
by the Government, but their remuneration is met out of the college fund. It was further submitted
that in view of the 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB amendment carried out to the Jammu and Kashmir
Education (Gazetted) Colleges Service Recruitment Rules, 2008, in terms of SRO 124 dated
21.04.2014, many of the candidates engaged on academic arrangement have been rendered
ineligible and, therefore, cannot be regularized. Not much was said about the vires of Section 3 (b)
of the Act of 2010.
7 WP(C) No. 2572/2019 and other connected matters were transferred to the Tribunal after the
enactment of the J&K Reorganization Act, 2019 and the constitution of the Tribunal. The Tribunal
clubbed all the petitions under the lead case TA No. 297/2021 titled Mukhtar Ahmed and others v.
State and others. 8 In light of the pleadings of the parties and having regard to the rival contentions,
the Tribunal framed following two questions for consideration:
(i) Whether the Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the constitutional validity of
Section 3 (b) of the Act of 2010 ?
(ii) Whether Section 3 (b) of the Act, which denies the benefit of regularization to the
applicants appointed on academic arrangement basis for a fixed term, is
discriminatory, unjust, unreasonable, and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India ?
9 With regard to question No. 1, the Tribunal, placing reliance on Constitution Bench Judgment of
the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 261,came to the
conclusion that the Tribunal constituted under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, a legislation
enacted under Articles 323-A and 323-B of the Constitution of India, is competent to hear even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 4
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
those matters where the constitutional validity of statutory provisions is challenged. The Tribunal,
however, cannot adjudicate 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB upon the constitutional validity of the very
legislation under which it has been constituted. Regarding question No.(ii), the Tribunal, after
referring to the case law on Article 14 of the Constitution of India, came to the conclusion that the
persons appointed on ad hoc, contractual and consolidated basis against clear vacancies, and those
appointed purely on academic arrangement basis for a fixed term, form two distinct classes; and
that such classification has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the Act of 2010,
namely, to provide regularization to ad hoc, contractual and consolidated employees working
against clear vacancies for a period of seven years and more. It is in these premises that the
challenge to the vires of Section 3 (b) of the Act of 2010 was rejected by the Tribunal and,
consequently, all the petitions, in terms of the common judgment impugned in these petitions, came
to be dismissed. 10 The impugned judgment is challenged by the petitioners, inter alia, on the
ground that the Tribunal has failed to appreciate that though the engagement of the petitioners was
designated as „contractual(cid:128) on academic arrangement basis, but, in essence, it was an engagement
on ad hoc basis and, therefore, the respondents could not have discriminated against them vis-à-vis
those who were similarly appointed, and described as „contractual(cid:128), „ad hoc(cid:128) or „consolidated(cid:128). It
is submitted that the Tribunal also failed to appreciate that the petitioners were similarly situate
with those engaged on ad hoc, contractual and consolidated basis, and, therefore, formed a single
class. Any further classification only on the basis of nomenclature was thus in direct conflict with the
right of equality and equal protection of laws envisaged under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 11 Per contra, the stand of the respondents, as taken in their objections
and reiterated by Mr. Laway, Government Advocate, appearing for the respondents, is that not only
the petitions filed by the petitioners before the Tribunal were hit by delay and laches, but also that
the petitioners have failed to demonstrate a case for declaring Section 3 (b) of the Act of 10 ultra
vires the Constitution of India. He would submit that the petitioners, having been engaged on
academic arrangement basis to meet the exigency arising out of an increase in admissions in a
particular subject in a particular college, and that too for a fixed term, cannot be equated with those
engaged against clear vacancies on ad hoc, contractual or consolidated basis in various Departments
and who have continued for years together. It is thus argued that the two categories form two
distinct classes and, therefore, the plea of the petitioners that unequals should be treated equally is
not in consonance with the spirit underlying the equality clause contained in Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. Mr. Laway also adverted to the policy decisions taken by the Government
from time to time for making academic arrangements in the Higher Education Department, and
would submit that, having regard to the nature of such engagements and the object for which these
were made, it is abundantly clear that engagements on academic arrangement basis constitute a
separate class of their own and, therefore, fall outside the purview of the Act of 2010.
12 Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, the instant
petitions throw up the following questions for determination:
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 5
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
(i) Whether Section 3(b), Section 10(2) and Section 10(2A) of the J&K Civil Services
(Special Provisions) Act, 2010 are ultra vires the Constitution of India ?
(ii) What is, in essence, the nature of appointment/engagement of the petitioners,
who as per the respondents, have been engaged on academic arrangement basis in
different subjects in the Government Degree Colleges of the erstwhile State of Jammu
and Kashmir and thereafter the UT of Jammu and Kashmir ?
(iii) Whether the engagement of the petitioners can be termed as contractual, or ad
hoc or consolidated so as to bring them within the ambit of the Act of 2010 ?.
13 Learned counsel appearing on both sides, particularly for the respondents, have not agitated the
issue with regard to the power of the Tribunal to hear matters involving challenge to the
constitutional validity of a statute.
Question No. (i):
14 This Court has, time and again, observed that successive Governments in the erstwhile State of
Jammu and Kashmir had been adopting different modus operandi to legalize and legitimize the
backdoor appointments made by them from time to time to please the voters and supporters of the
political dispensations. Prior to 1994, thousands of persons were brought into Government service
by initially engaging them as daily wagers, casual workers, seasonal workers and daily-rated workers
on the payment of wages fixed under the Minimum Wages Act. All such engagements were treated
as need-based, required for meeting emergent situations. These engagements were made purely on
the basis of „pick and choose(cid:128) method, and without adhering to any process of selection in
consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
15 Be that as it may, these engagements were continued for years together. With a view to giving
them permanent appointments 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB and legitimizing such illegal and
arbitrary engagements, the Government came up with a policy decision, which was spelled out in the
Jammu and Kashmir Daily Wage/Work-Charge Employees (Regularization) Rules, 1994, issued
vide SRO No. 64 of 1994. The said SRO paved the way for making thousands of appointments
against Class IV vacancies. Many candidates were accommodated by creating fresh posts of Helpers
and other class IV positions. Simultaneously with the engagement of daily wagers, the Government
also appointed several candidates on ad hoc basis against clear vacancies, with a stipulation that
their engagement would be for a period of 89 days or till the regular selection is made by the
Recruitment Agencies i.e., J&K Service Selection Board or the Jammu and Kashmir Public Service
Commission as the case may be. Right from the level of Orderlies to Gazetted Officers, appointments
were made in such capacity. These appointments too were made arbitrarily, by adopting a pick and
choose method, and without following any fair and transparent selection process in consonance with
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. These appointments were later on regularized by the
Government in terms of Government Order No. 1220-GAD of 1989 dated 11.09.1989. The said
Government order envisaged that the regularization of candidates appointed on ad hoc basis and
having served in that capacity for more than seven years would be regularized as a one-time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 6
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
exception, with a clear stipulation that the Government would ensure that no such appointments
were made in future. However, this stipulation was not adhered to, and the Government continued
to make temporary appointments in the name of ad hoc, contractual and consolidated engagements,
thereby avoiding its statutory obligation to 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB fill vacancies by resorting to
the recruitment process envisaged under law, which would require inviting applications from all
eligible candidates so as to provide them an opportunity to compete with others on the basis of
merit.
16 With a view to legitimizing temporary recruitments made in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India, and to lay down a framework for providing legal basis to such appointments
in Government service, the then State of Jammu and Kashmir enacted the Act of 2010. As the
Preamble of the Act indicates, it was enacted with the object of providing for regularization of
employees appointed on ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated basis. The benefit of the Act of 2010, as
is evident from the Preamble, was confined only to three categories of temporary appointments,
namely (i) ad hoc appointees, (ii) consolidated appointees, and (iii) contractual appointees. The
definitions of these three categories of appointments have been provided in clause (b), (e) and (f) of
Section 2 of the Act of 2010, which for facility of reference, are set out below:
"2. Definitions:
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) ....................................................
(b) "ad hoc appointee" means a person who has been appointed on ad hoc basis
against any post under the Government:
(c) ...............................................................
(d) ........................................................
(e) "consolidated appointee" means a person who has been appointed against any
post under the Government on consolidated monthly salary/wages;
(f) "contractual appointee" means a person who has been appointed on contract basis
against any post under the Government;................................................. .
(g) ............................................
(h) ..............................................
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
(i) ...............................................
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 7
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
(j) ...............................................
(k) ...............................................
(l) ...............................................
17 From a plain reading of the definitions of these three type of appointments, it is evident that, for
an appointment to qualify as ad hoc, consolidated, or contractual, the appointment of a person
against a civil post under the Government is a sine qua non. Section 3 of the Act of 2010 deals with
the application of the Act, and reads thus:
3. Application of the Act-
The provisions of this Act shall apply to such posts under the Government as are held by any person
having been appointed on ad hoc or contractual basis including those appointed on consolidated pay
provided that such appointments have been made against the clear vacancies, but shall not apply to
:--
(a) persons appointed in terms of Government Order No. 125-GAD of 2001 dated
01-02-2001, on contract basis in the personal sections of the Ministers or other
authorities enjoying the status of a Minister:
(b) persons appointed on tenure posts co-terminus with the life of the Project or
Scheme of the State or Central Government, as the case may be, and those appointed
on academic arrangement for a fixed term in any Government Department;
(c) non-governmental agencies or autonomous bodies or public sector undertakings
or corporations or government companies or societies or other local authorities
which have their own rules and regulations governing their functioning: and
(d) part-time or seasonal employees including those whose wages are paid from out
of the local funds or contingent grants.
18 A plain reading of Section 3 makes it clear that the provisions of the Act are applicable to such
posts under the Government as are held by persons appointed on ad hoc, contractual, or
consolidated basis, provided such appointments were 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB made against clear
vacancies. All other temporary arrangements, other than ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated
appointments, have been kept outside the purview of the Act of 2010. Section 3 further excludes the
following categories of persons from the benefit of the Act of 2010:
(i) the persons appointed on contract basis in the personal sections of Ministers or
other authorities enjoying the status of a Minster in terms of Government order No.
125-GAD of 2001 dated 01.02.2001;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 8
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
(ii) persons appointed on tenure posts co-
terminus with the life of the Project or Scheme of the State or Central Government, as the case may
be, and those appointed on academic arrangement for a fixed term in any Government Department;
(iii) Non-governmental agencies or autonomous bodies or public sector undertakings or cororations
or government companies or societies or other local authorities which have htier own rules and
regulations governing their functioning; and
(iv) Part-time or seasonal employees inclouding those whose wages are paid from out of the local
funds or contingent grants.
19 Section 5 of the Act of 2010 lays down certain conditions to be fulfilled by an ad hoc, contractual,
or consolidated appointee referred to in Section 3 of the Act for the purpose of regularization of his
services. Apart from other terms and conditions, an ad hoc, consolidated or contractual appointee
claiming the benefit of regularization under the Act of 2010 must possess the requisite qualification
and eligibility for the post, as prescribed under the Recruitment Rules governing the service or post,
on the date of his initial appointment. Section 10(2) and Section 10(2A) of the Act of 2010 are the
provisions enacted for giving effect to the regularization only of ad hoc, consolidated, or contractual
appointees.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 20 In order to appreciate whether the exclusion of „academic
arrangements(cid:128) made for a fixed term from the purview of regularization envisaged under the Act of
2010 is arbitrary, discriminatory, and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, we need to
delve, to some extent, into the concept of temporary arrangements as are known to service
jurisprudence. The definition of „ad hoc appointee(cid:128) given in Section 2(b) of the Act of 2010 is not
conclusive of its nature, and, therefore, we may have to look for the concept elsewhere.
21 Rule 14 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal ) Rules,
1956 ("Rules of 1956") is one such provision which explains the concept of "temporary
appointment", which, in essence, could be termed as an „ad hoc appointment(cid:128). Rule 14 reads as
under:
14. Temporary appointment:
(1) Where it is necessary in the public interest owing to an emergency which has
arisen and could not have been foreseen, to fill immediately a vacancy in a post
borne, on the cadre of service, class or category and the making of an appointment to
such vacancy in accordance with these rules would involve undue delay, excessive
expenditure or administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may appoint a
person otherwise than in accordance with these rules temporarily with the prior
approval of the Chief Minister to Coordination until a person is appointed. in
accordance with these rules but such temporary appointment shall in no case exceed
three months on. each occasion and not more than nine months in all; (2) A person
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 9
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
appointed under sub-rule (1) shall be replaced as soon as possible by a member of the
service of a candidate qualified and considered fit to held the post under these rules;
and, (3) A person appointed under sub-rule (1) shall not be regarded as a probationer
in such service, class or category or be entitled by reason only of such appointment to
any preferential claim to future appointment to such service class or category.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 22 It is thus evident that, with a view to meeting an emergency that has
arisen and could not have been foreseen, so as to immediately fill a vacancy in a post born on the
cadre of a service, class, or category, and where making of a regular appointment in accordance with
the Rules would involve undue delay, excessive expenditure, or administrative inconvenience, the
appointing authority, if it deems it necessary in public interest, may appoint a person temporarily,
with the prior approval of Chief Minister, for a period not exceeding three months on each occasion
and not more than nine months in all. Such person shall be replaced as soon as possible by a
member of the service or by a candidate qualified and considered fit to hold the post under the
Rules. Such person, as is provided in Rule 11 itself, is not entitled, by reason of such appointment to
any preferential claim for future appointment to the service or category. If such a person is
subsequently appointed in accordance with the R ules, his probation shall commence from the date
of such subsequent appointment, and not from the earlier temporary appointment, unless otherwise
determined by the Minister In-charge.
23 In the absence of any specific definition of "ad hoc appointment" the only provision that can be
referred to for understanding the appointments made on ad hoc basis is Rule 14 of the Rules of
1956, reproduced above. There is, however, no specific definition of ad hoc or contractual
appointees. A contractual appointment, as the term itself conveys, is an appointment for a fixed
term governed by the terms and conditions of contract of engagement. Such appointment may or
may not be against a vacant post. Similarly, a consolidated appointment, as the term suggests, is an
appointment 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB where a fixed sum per month is paid to an employee
engaged to perform the duties of a post. Such appointment too may or may not be against a vacant
post. The clear object with which the Act of 2010 has been enacted is to confer the benefit of
regularization on those who are engaged to perform the duties of a post held by them, either on ad
hoc, contractual, or consolidated basis. The benefit of regularization is, therefore, envisaged only for
those whose appointments were made against clear vacancies and who discharged the duties of the
post in the capacity of ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated appointees and to none else.
Appointments made on academic arrangement for a fixed term in any Government Department
were kept outside the purview of the Act of 2010. The academic arrangements typically refer to
temporary faculty positions or teaching roles in educational institutions, created to meet the specific
requirements of a particular academic session. These arrangements are generally governed by the
agreements entered into between the educational institutions and the candidates offering for such
appointments.
24 The academic arrangements are made annually, keeping in view the requirements of the
institutions arising out of admissions to various courses. The availability of substantive vacant post
is not a sine qua non for such arrangements. It is in consonance with this concept of academic
arrangement that the legislature, in its wisdom, excluded such fixed-term academic engagements
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 10
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
from the purview of the act of 2010. Therefore, the appointments made by the Government from
time to time against clear vacancies, whether on ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated basis, form a
class apart from (i) the appointments which are made against tenure posts co- terminus with the life
of a project or 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB scheme of the State and the Central Government, and (ii)
the appointments made on academic arrangement for a fixed term in the Government Departments.
As is rightly held by the Tribunal as also by a Single Bench of this Court in WP (c) No. 1797/2019,
there is an intelligible differentia in the classification made between the aforesaid categories of
appointments, and this classification made by the legislature has a nexus with the object sought to
be achieved, i.e providing regular appointments only to those who are engaged against clear
vacancies.
25 A Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court rendered by seven Judges in State of West
Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, 1952 AIR 75, is a locus classicus on the permissibility of reasonable
classification under Article 14 of the Constitution of India. It was authoritatively held therein that
although Article 14 does not permit class legislation, yet reasonable classification can be made by the
State without offending the mandate of equality enshrined in Article
14. Relevant extracts of paragraph (54) are noteworthy and are set out hereinbelow for ready
reference.
"54....... All persons are not, by nature, attainment or circumstances, equal and the
varying needs of different classes of persons often require separate treatment and,
therefore, the protecting clause has been construed as a guarantee against
discrimination amongst equals only and not as taking away from the State the power
to classify persons for the purpose of legislation. This classification may be on
different bases. It may be geographical or according to objects or occupations or the
like. Mere classification, however, is not enough to get over the inhibition of the
Article. The classification must not be arbitrary but must be rational, that is to say, it
must not only be based on some qualities or characteristics which are to be found in
all the persons grouped together and not in others who are left out but those qualities
or characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB
object of the legislation. In order to pass the test, two conditions must be fulfilled,
namely, (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which
distinguishes those that are grouped together from others and (2) that that
differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the
Act. The differ- entia which is the basis of the classification and the object of the Act
are distinct things and what is necessary is that there must be a nexus between them.
In short, while the Article forbids class legislation in the sense of making improper
discrimination by conferring privileges or imposing liabilities upon persons
arbitrarily selected out of a large number of other persons similarly situated in
relation to the privileges sought to be conferred or the liability proposed to be
imposed, it does not forbid classification for the purpose of legislation, provided such
classification is not arbitrary in the sense I have just explained. The doctrine, as
expounded by this Court in the two cases I have mentioned, leaves a considerable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 11
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
latitude to the Court in the matter of the application of Article 14 and consequently
has the merit of flexibility".
26 It is thus trite law that the constitutional validity of a legislation is required to be tested by
applying the twin tests: (i) the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which
distinguishes those that are grouped together from others, and (ii) such differentia must have a
rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the legislation.
27 The equality before law or equal protection of laws does not mean that the State should provide
uniform treatment to everyone, even if they are not similarly situated. It emphasises the principle
that equals must be treated equally, and that treating unequals as equals would itself offend the
right to equality envisaged under Article 14 of the Constitution. With a view to achieve equality and
equal protection of laws, equals must be treated alike, while unequals must be treated
differently.The universal application of law to different classes of persons, who are differently
situated, is essentially a denial of the right to equality envisaged under Article 14 of the Constitution.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 28 Applying the twin tests to the legislation on hand, we find that
persons appointed on ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated basis against clear vacancies are different
from those who are engaged against tenure posts co-terminus with the life of a project or scheme, or
under academic arrangements made for a fixed term, i.e., one academic session alone. This
differentia between the two classes is rational, having regard to the object sought to be achieved by
the Act of 2010, which provides for the regularization of only those who have been working on ad
hoc, contractual, or consolidated basis against posts for more than seven years. Tenure
appointments, or for that matter academic arrangement appointments, are not intended to continue
beyond the tenure or academic session, and therefore constitute a class altogether different from ad
hoc, contractual, or consolidated appointments.
29 Viewed from any angle, we find no reason or justification to take a view different from the one
taken by the Tribunal, namely, that Section 3 (b), or for that matter Sections 10(2) and 10(2A) of the
Act of 2010 violate Article 14 of the Constitution and are, therefore. ultra vires. Question No.(i) is
answered accordingly. 30 Coming to Question No. 2, suffice it to say that what was initially
envisaged by the Government in the year 1991 was to make academic arrangements for providing
teaching faculty to various degree colleges of the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. The
necessity to resort to such academic arrangements had apparently arisen for the following reasons:
(i) the Department of Higher Education had decided not to fix any intake capacity of students across
Government colleges in 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB Jammu and Kashmir, which resulted in a huge
enrolment of students in the Government degree colleges; and (ii) the permanent teaching faculty
required to meet the needs of such huge enrolments was not available.
31 With a view to meeting the exigency that arose due to opening of admissions to degree courses
without fixing any intake capacity, a "pool fund" was created by adding a component to the fee
structure, and this fund was utilised to make need-based academic arrangements for faculty to meet
the fluctuating demand in each academic session. Although the Government has not been able to
place on record any formal policy, yet we have no manner of doubt that the object of making such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 12
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
arrangements was nothing other than what has been indicated above. This is also apparent from the
various documents on record, including the Government orders issued from time to time laying
down guidelines for engagement of candidates on an academic arrangement basis. It also cannot be
debated or disputed that some of the candidates came to be engaged on academic arrangement basis
against available vacancies in a college, while others were engaged even without the availability of
vacancies. The nature of such engagement was that it was to end with the expiry of the academic
session and was to be repeated only if a need would arise in the subsequent session. Thus, the
availability of a vacancy was not a sine qua non for making academic arrangements. However, it
cannot be ignored that some of the petitioners who were engaged against available posts on
contractual basis for a particular academic year were continued from year to year. Earlier, there
used to be a break in their 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB service due to winter/summer vacations, but
later, on the intervention of this Court/Tribunal, they were continued throughout the year and were
also paid even for the vacation period. This rendered their engagements continuous in nature.
32 It is true that in some cases, the petitioners were allowed to continue in their engagements on the
strength of interim directions passed in their favour by this Court or the Tribunal. Nonetheless, the
basis of such indulgence was that, having regard to the perennial nature of duties entrusted to the
academic arrangement appointees, it was not permissible to replace them by the similar
arrangements. In short, this Court at least found a right vested in the petitioners to continue in their
engagements till they were replaced by a candidate regularly appointed against the post, or till the
post is otherwise filled through transfer or adjustment of permanent faculty. It also cannot be lost
sight of that the process for adjustment of permanent faculty, either by direct recruitment or by
transfer, was not resorted to for years together . It needs to be emphasized that it is not the
nomenclature but the nature of the appointment and the terms and conditions subject to which it is
made that determines whether the appointment qualifies to be an ad hoc, contractual, or
consolidated. The appointments of the petitioners, having been made against sanctioned posts,
would certainly qualify as appointments envisaged for the benefit of regularization under the Act of
2010. Their appointments are governed by the terms and conditions of their contracts of
engagement, which are either contained in the guidelines issued by the Government from time to
time or incorporated in the advertisement notifications. This would render
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB the appointments of the petitioners contractual in nature, though
initially made only for one academic year.
33 Indisputably, the petitioners are paid a consolidated salary and not the salary in the pay scale of
Lecturer/Assistant Professor. That makes the appointment against a post on a consolidated basis.
Therefore, such appointments as have been made by the respondents from time to time prior to the
commencement of the Act of 2010, against clear vacancies, and continued either by repeating such
appointments every year by a limited competitive process or in compliance with interim directions
passed by a competent court of jurisdiction, shall be treated as contractual appointments on a
consolidated basis and would, therefore, definitely fall within the purview of the Act of 2010, the
nomenclature of the appointment i.e "academic arrangement" notwithstanding.
34 This Court cannot lose sight of the fact that for more than two decades, the respondents have
failed either to create additional posts or even to fill up the existing vacant positions of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 13
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
Lecturers/Assistant Professors in various degree colleges. The degree colleges are being run almost
entirely on the basis of such academic arrangements made year after year to cater to the needs of
students undergoing undergraduate courses.The reason is obvious and not too far to seek. These
appointments are cost-effective and save the time that would otherwise be incurred in following the
due process of selection in consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. By resorting to
academic arrangements from time to time, and by picking up candidates solely on the basis of
academic merit without subjecting 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB them to the arduous selection
process conducted by the J&K Public Service Commission, the respondents have undoubtedly
compromised both the quality of faculty and the standard of education imparted in the Government
Degree Colleges of the State/UT of Jammu and Kashmir. 35 It is true that the selection of candidates
for appointment as teaching faculty on an academic arrangement basis is not wholly arbitrary. An
advertisement notification inviting applications is issued, and eligible candidates are allowed to
participate and compete in the selection process. The object of the selection process is to ensure that
candidates are picked up on the basis of their academic merit. However, since these arrangements
are, by their very nature, temporary, as such many meritorious candidates with better and higher
qualifications do not participate and instead feel satisfied with their appointments as
Teachers/Lecturers in the School Education Department or in other lower positions in various
Government Departments. Such candidates may be waiting for the Public Service Commission to
issue an advertisement notification so that they can apply and compete with other eligible
candidates for appointment as Assistant Professors in the Higher Education Department on a
permanent basis. The process of making academic arrangements and thereafter regularizing the
services of such appointees after a few years definitely deprives other meritorious candidates of their
right to employment and thus violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. The Act of 2010, which
aims at regularizing the services of temporary employees appointed on ad hoc, contractual, or
consolidated basis, therefore strikes at the root of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and is, on
the face of it, 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB unconstitutional. However, in the absence of any challenge
to the said Act, and in view of its subsequent repeal post reorganization of the State in terms of the
J&K Reorganization Act, 2019, this question is rendered academic and does not otherwise arise for
consideration in these petitions. Question No.2 is answered accordingly. Question No.3 36 In view
of the aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered opinion that the engagement of such
petitioners, who were appointed against clear vacancies prior to the commencement of the Act of
2010 and whose services have been continued from time to time either by the act of the respondents
or on the intervention of this Court or the Tribunal, on the principle that one temporary appointee
cannot be replaced by another, do fall within the category of ad hoc, contractual, or consolidated
appointments. Such engagements, therefore, cannot be excluded from the benefit of regularization
envisaged under the Act of 2010.However, the engagements of those petitioners whose
appointments are found to have been made over and above the sanctioned posts are definitely
outside the purview of the Act, for, holding of a vacant post by a temporary appointee for more than
seven years is sine qua non for claiming the benefit of regularization envisaged under the Act of
2010. An exercise in this regard is thus required to be conducted by the respondents to determine
which of the petitioners engaged prior to the commencement of the Act of 2010 have been working
continuously for more than seven years against substantive vacant posts created by the Government
in the Department of Higher Education.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 14
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB 37 For the foregoing reasons, we find merit in these petitions, and the
same are allowed by providing as under:
(i) The respondents shall constitute a High-Level Committee headed by the Chief
Secretary, with the Secretary to Government, Department of Higher Education; the
Secretary to Government, General Administration Department; the Secretary to
Government, Finance Department; and the Secretary to Government, Department of
Law, as its members, within a period of one month;
(ii) The Committee shall, within a period of two months, embark upon an exercise to
identify those candidates who were appointed as Assistant
Professors/Librarians/PTIs prior to the commencement of the Act of 2010, against
clear vacant posts; who were in position on the said date;
and who have rendered continuous service for a period of seven years or more;
(iii) Such candidates who are found by the Committee to have been appointed against vacant posts
prior to the commencement of the Act of 2010, and who satisfy the eligibility criteria, shall be
considered for regularization under the Act of 2010 within one month thereafter;
(iv) The regularization of those found entitled under the Act shall be given retrospective effect from
the date they are found eligible for such regularization i.e those who completed continuous service
of seven years on or before the commencement of the Act of 2010 shall be regularized from the date
of commencement of the Act, while those who completed seven years of service after the
commencement of the Act shall be regularized from the date on which they actually completed seven
years of continuous service.
(iv) No fresh academic arrangements shall be made by the Government against clear vacancies of
Assistant Professors, Librarians, and PTIs borne on the Jammu and Kashmir Education Gazetted
Colleges Service Recruitment Rules 2008 and efforts shall be made to immediately refer all such
vacant posts to the Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission for selection. The Committee
shall also examine the desirability of creating additional posts of teaching faculty, Librarians, and
PTIs 2025:JKLHC-SGR:244-DB in various degree colleges to meet the current and future demand
of admissions and shall take requisite steps for creation of such additional posts, to be filled up only
under the Jammu and Kashmir Education Gazetted Colleges Service Recruitment Rules 2008
Jammu and Kashmir Rules through a selection process conducted by the Public Service
Commission; and,
(v) All academic arrangements made de hors the vacancies or outside the sanctioned strength of
Assistant Professors, Librarians, and PTIs shall be dispensed with from the next academic session,
unless such engagements are required to meet the exigency of the situation obtaining in the next
academic year and thereafter. Any such engagements, if made, shall be treated as fresh
engagements, purely contractual in nature, and shall not confer any right of regularization under
any law in force or that may be framed by the Government in future.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 15
Syed Tariq Ahmad & Ors vs . Ut Of J&K And Ors on 30 August, 2025
(vi) These directions shall not be applicable to Teaching Associates engaged on contractual basis and
their engagements shall be governed by the terms and conditions of their appointments.
Disposed of in the above terms.
The pending files which have been received from the Tribunal be sent back to the concerned
Benches of the Tribunal.
Registry shall place a copy of this judgment in each of the files.
(SANJAY PARIHAR) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
30.08.2025
Sanjeev
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63419754/ 16
