Syed Sarwar Amin vs Asma Farooq on 23 February, 2023
Syed Sarwar Amin vs Asma Farooq on 23 February, 2023
Page |1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRMC No. 41/2019
Reserved on: 21.02.2023
Announced on: 23.02.2023
Syed Sarwar Amin
...Petitioner (s)
Through: Mr. Intikhab H. Shah, Advocate
Vs.
Asma Farooq.
...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr.Irfan Khan, Advocate .
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.A. CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The present petition has been filed under section 561-A of since repealed J&K CrPC (akin to
section 482 of Central CrPC) for quashing the application filed by the respondent herein under
Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, wherein the Court of Learned
Special Mobile Magistrate, Jammu (hereinafter referred as 'Trial Court'), vide order dated
05.10.2018 ordered the petitioner herein to pay Rs. 5000/- per month to complainant (respondent
herein) as interim maintenance which is impugned in the present petition.
2. Aggrieved of this order, the petitioner herein filed the instant petition. The impugned order has
been challenged on various grounds including the main plea that the impugned application is not
maintainable as the Special Mobile Magistrate, Jammu lacks Page |2 jurisdiction to entertain it as
provided in Section 27 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act and also petitioner
had already divorced his wife respondent on 07.08.2018.
3. Despite notice to respondent, objections have not been filed. However, learned counsel for the
respondent submits at bar that the alternative remedy was available to the petitioner for filing
appeal before Session Court but he has not chosen to it, as such, this petition is not maintainable
and prayed for its dismissal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74388218/ 1
Syed Sarwar Amin vs Asma Farooq on 23 February, 2023
4. Heard and considered.
5. Instead of going into the merits of the case, a preliminary point raised by learned counsel for the
respondent is required to be determined as to whether the instant petition is maintainable when
alternate remedy of challenging the impugned order was available to the petitioner. The impugned
order has been passed under the provisions of Jammu & Kashmir Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act.
6. Section 29 of the Act reads as under:-
"Appeal- There shall be an appeal to the court of Sessions within thirty days from the
date on which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggrieved person or
the respondents, as the case may be, whichever is later."
So, it can be deduced that as per Section 29 of the Act, all the orders passed under any of the
provisions of the Act, are appealable.
7. This Court under Section 561-A J&K Cr.PC has inherent powers to exercise. It has been a
consistent view of the Constitutional courts that when alternate efficacious remedy is available, the
inherent Page |3 jurisdiction of the court cannot be invoked. The Hon'ble Apex Court in a case titled
Waryam Singh & Anr. Vs. Amarnath & Anr., reported as 1954 AIR 215, was pleased to hold that the
power vested with the High Court in terms of Article 227 of the Constitution of India is to be
exercised most sparingly and only in appropriate cases in order to keep the subordinate courts
within bounds of their authority and not for correcting mere errors. The Hon'ble Apex Court again
in a case titled Shalini Shyam Shetty & Anr. Vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil, (2010) 8 SCC 329 and
Lasmikant Revchand Bhojwani & Anr. Vs. Pratapsingh Mohansingh Pardeshi reported as (1995) 6
SCC 576, reminded the High Courts that the inherent power cannot be assumed in terms ofArticle
227 as an unlimited prerogative to correct all species of hardships of wrong decision. Its exercise
must be restricted to grave dereliction of duty and flagrant abuse of fundamental principle of law
and justice.
8. This Court in an identical case titled Charanjeet Kour & Ors. Vs. Taranjeet Kour & Ors., reported
as 2018 KLJ 312, has taken similar view with regard to the inherent power under Section 561-A J&K
Cr.PC. This Court in a case titled Jatinder Nath Bakshi Vs. State of J&K & Ors., reported as 2009(3)
JKJ 679(HC), had held that the power under Section 561-A J&K Cr.PC has to be exercised sparingly
and in the rarest of rare cases. This inherent power cannot be exercised on mere drop of hat or
merely to correct any illegality committed by the subordinate court.
9. Impugned order by its nature is interim order. Notice under section 12(4) is served to petitioner
and impugned order is subject to objections from the petitioner herein.
Page |4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74388218/ 2
Syed Sarwar Amin vs Asma Farooq on 23 February, 2023
10.In the considered opinion of this Court, the petitioner herein instead of filing appeal under
Section 29 of the Jammu & Kashmir Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2010 before
the Sessions court, has rushed to this Court invoking its inherent power, which otherwise has to be
used cautiously and sparingly. The petitioner had the alternate efficacious remedy available under
the statute, and to invoke the inherent power of this Court is an abuse of process.
11. The impugned order has been passed by the Learned Magistrate in an application under Section
23 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2010 moved alongside with main
complaint under Section 12(1) of the Act and this interim order has been passed in-ex-parte issuing
notice to the respondents for appearance and it was also to direct the petitioner herein to pay sum of
Rs. 5000/- to the complainant-respondent as interim maintenance, the order was subject to
objections from otherside. The petitioner had thus an opportunity of appearing before the learned
Judicial Magistrate and to raise all the plea raised in this petition by filing a reply before the Court
below and also had a right to file the application before the Ld. Judicial Magistrate for dropping the
proceedings against him.
12. In this background of the aforesaid discussion and without going into the merits of the rival
contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties it is provided that the petitioner may file
his reply to the petition under Section 12 of D. V. Act raising all the available pleas and he may also
file an application before the Ld. Magistrate for dropping all the proceedings against him in case, the
same is done by the petitioner the Ld. Magistrate shall after hearing the Page |5 parties pass
appropriate order in accordance with expeditiously preferably within a period of 30 days from the
date such application is made by the petitioner before the Ld. Magistrate.
13. This petition in terms of inherent jurisdiction is thus not maintainable and is liable to be
dismissed for the afore-stated reasons without going into its merits.
14. Petition, is, accordingly dismissed as not maintainable. Interim direction(s), if any, shall stand
also vacated.
15. Copy of this order shall be sent down to the concerned learned Magistrate, for information and
compliance.
(MA CHOWDHARY) JUDGE Jammu 23.02.2023 Mujtaba
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74388218/ 3
