Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March,
2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 21.02.2023
Pronounced on: 02.03.2023
Bail App No. 109/2021
c/w
CRM(M) No. 274/2021
(O&M)
Syed Shahid Hamdani .....Appellant(s)/ Petitioner(s)
Through: - Mr. P. N. Raina, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. J. A. Hamal, Advocate
Vs.
UT of J&K and another ...RESPONDENT(S)
Through: - Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG
Mr. Zulker Nain Sheikh, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
CRM(M) No. 274/2021
1) In the instant petition, the petitioner has challenged FIR No. 53/2021 for offences under Sections
376, 420 and 506 of RPC registered with Police Station, Bahu-Fort, Jammu.
2) If appears that the complainant, respondent No. 2 approached the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class
(Munsiff), Jammu with an application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. seeking a direction upon the
SHO, Police Station, Trikuta Nagar, Jammu to register an FIR and investigate the case. Vide order
dated 03.02.2021, passed by the learned Magistrate, the SHO, Police Station, c/w Bahu Fort,
Jammu was directed to register FIR against the petitioner and to carry out the investigation. It
would be profitable to reproduce the relevant extracts of the complaint as under:
"2. That the applicant came in contact with one Shahid Hamdani in the month of
June 2017 and both the parties having similarities in temperaments and mutual
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 1
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
understandings started meeting each other frequently. During this time both the
parties developed feelings for each other and accordingly expressed their mutual
feelings to each other.
3. That said Shahid Hamdani expressed his desire to marry the applicant and in
order to understand each other in a much better and efficient manner the said Shahid
Hamdani proposed that they should start living together in a live-in relationship. The
applicant was not initially opened to this suggestion and asked him that instead of
living in a live-in relationship they should get married to each other. However the
said Shahid Hamdani needed some time to get settled in his carrier and till that time
the parties start living together in a live-in relationship in the house of applicant
situated at Jalalabad,Sunjwan, Jammu.
4. That the parties reside together without any disturbance from any person till
February 2019 and thereafter, he went back to his native palace. During this time the
parties were in constant contact with each other and he assured that he will persuade
his family for the marriage with the applicant. However despite the various attempts,
the family of the said Shahid Hamdani that they will eliminate both of them as their
marriage is not acceptable to them.
5 That the things became worse when the family members of the accused came to
know that the applicant and said Shahid Hamdani were living together in a live-in
relationship. The said family members of the accused openly extended threats to the
applicant, that they will eliminate the applicant in case she insisted for marriage with
Shahid Hamdani. However, despite all the odds the applicant as well as Shahid
Hamdani decided to get marry with each other and date of marriage was decided in
the second week of October 2019. The said Shahid HamdanI was supposed to meet
the applicant on 04.10.2019 at Jammu. However he never reached Jammu and there
is no information about the well being of said Shahid Hamdani.
6 That thereafter the applicant unaware of the nefarious designs of the accused filed a
Habeas Corpus Petition in the Hon'ble High Court of J&K seeking production of the
said accused. However, the accused again appeared before the applicant and
expressed her inability to marry him as he was under family pressure. He again
assured that he will marry the applicant in the month of November 2020 and
thereafter c/w started visiting the applicant again at her residence situated at
Sunjawan where he again developed physical relation with the applicant.
7 That thereafter he never kept his promise of marriage and in the month of January
2021 met the applicant and told her that he never intended to marry her and in case
the applicant will file any case he will eliminate her and also circulate her photos and
videos on social media...."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 2
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
3) Apart from narration of the above contents of complaint lodged by the prosecutrix/respondent
No. 2, it is pertinent to mention here that during investigation of the case her statement under
Section 164 Cr. P.C. has also been recorded. In her statement, she has supported the allegations
made in the complaint.
4) Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner has contended that a bare perusal of the
contents of the impugned FIR, even if taken to be true, would reveal that no offence under Section
376 IPC, read with Sections 420 and 506 IPC is made out against the petitioner. According to the
learned Senior Counsel, if at all what has been alleged by the complainant is taken to be true, it
appears to be a case of consensual sex between two adult persons, which is not punishable under
law. Learned Senior Counsel has submitted that the facts emanating from the record would clearly
show that there was a long standing relationship between the petitioner and the prosecutrix, which
has gone wrong but the same cannot amount to an offence under Section 376 IPC.
5) Learned Counsel appearing for respondent No. 2/prosecutrix as also the learned Counsel
appearing for the State, have argued that powers of this Court under Section 482 Cr. P.C to quash
the criminal proceedings are very c/w limited in nature and that such powers should be exercised
sparingly. According to the learned counsel, the allegations made by the prosecutrix in the
complaint, which are supported by her statement made under Section 164 Cr,P.C needs to be
investigated and that the prosecution cannot be scuttled at this stage.
6) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused record of the case.
7) The scope and powers of the High Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C is by now well settled by
various judgments of the Supreme Court on the subject. In State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal, 1999
Supp (1) SCC 335, it has been held that powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C to quash criminal
proceedings should be exercised with circumspection only in deserving cases, but nonetheless the
Supreme Court has recognized the powers of the High Court to quash the criminal proceedings by
taking resort to the jurisdiction under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. One of the parameters laid down by the
Supreme Court in the said case, which is relevant to the instant case is where the allegations made in
the FIR, even when they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence, the High Court would be within its jurisdiction to quash the FIR and the
proceedings emanating therefrom. These principles have been reiterated and re-affirmed by the
Supreme Court it its later judgments, the latest being M/s Neeharika Infrastructure vs the State of
Maharashtra 2021 SCC online SC 315.
c/w
8) From the above analysis of law on the subject, it is clear that if, this Court comes to a conclusion
that the allegations made in the complaint/FIR lodged by respondent No. 2/complainant do not
make out a case against the petitioner then the same deserves to be quashed or else the petition is
required to be dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 3
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
9) The contention of the respondent No.2/complainant is that she has contacted physical relations
with the petitioner on the basis of consent, which was obtained on the promise of marriage, meaning
thereby that she had given her consent for sexual intercourse to the petitioner out of misconception.
10) Section 375 of IPC defines the offence of rape. The offence of rape means a sexual act committed
by a man inter alia without the consent of the woman. Explanation to Section 375 IPC provides that
consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement by a woman by words, gestures or any form of
verbal or non-verbal communication, communicating willingness to participate in the specific sexual
act.
11) Section 90 of IPC defines the consent given under fear or misconception. It states that if a person
doing the act knows, or has a reason to believe that the consent was given in fear or misconception
then it is not the "consent" as intended by the Code. Thus, if the consent has been given under
misconception of a fact, the same can be termed as no consent and when a person indulges in sexual
activity with a woman on the basis of such c/w consent, it would be presumed that there was no
consent on the part of the woman.
12) In Dr. Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar vs. State of Maharashtra and others, (2019) 18 SCC 191, the
Supreme Court while deliberating on the issue of consent, has observed as under:
"An inference as to consent can be drawn if only based on evidence or probabilities of
the case. "Consent" is also stated to be an act of reason coupled with deliberation. It
denotes an active will in mind of a person to permit the doing of the act complained
of"
13) Again in Kaini Rajan vs. State of Kerala, (2013) 9 SCC 113, the Supreme Court while considering
the meaning of consent in the context of Section 375 IPC has observed as under:
"12. ... "Consent", for the purpose of Section 375, requires voluntary participation not
only after the exercise of intelligence based on the knowledge of the significance of
the moral quality of the act but after having fully exercised the choice between
resistance and asset. Whether there was consent or not, is to be ascertained only on a
careful study of all relevant circumstances."
14) From the above, it is clear that consent as required under Section 375 IPC, means an active
understanding of the circumstances, actions and consequences thereof and a person, who makes a
choice after evaluating all the facts and circumstances and the possible consequences of such
actions, consents to such an action. It is also clear that an inference to such an action can be drawn
on the basis of the conduct of the prosecutrix while considering the question of consent for the
purpose of Section 375 of IPC.
c/w
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 4
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
15) In order to understand as to what would constitute consent on the basis of misconception of a
fact in the context of the cases relating to sexual relationship on the basis of promise of marriage, it
would be apt to refer to some of the cases, where this issue has been dealt with.
16) In Udhay vs. State of Karnataka, (2003) 4 SCC 46, the Supreme Court while dealing with the
case of sexual intercourse on the basis of promise to marry has observed as under:
"25. There is yet another difficulty which faces the prosecution in this case. In a case
of this nature two conditions must be fulfilled for the application of Section 90 IPC.
Firstly, it must be shown that the consent was given under a misconception of fact.
Secondly, it must be proved that the person who obtained the consent knew, or had
reason to believe that the consent was given in consequence of such misconception.
We have serious doubts that the promise to marry induced the prosecutrix to consent
to having sexual intercourse with the appellant. She knew, as we have observed
earlier, that her marriage with the appellant was difficult on account of caste
considerations. The proposal was bound to meet with stiff opposition from members
of both families. There was therefore a distinct possibility, of which she was clearly
conscious, that the marriage may not take place at all despite the promise of the
appellant. The question still remains whether even if it were so, the appellant knew,
or had reason to believe, that the prosecutrix had consented to having sexual
intercourse with him only as a consequence of her belief, based on his promise, that
they will get married in due course. There is hardly any evidence to prove this fact.
On the contrary, the circumstances of the case tend to support the conclusion that the
appellant had reason to believe that the consent given by the prosecutrix was the
result of their deep love for each other. It is not disputed that they were deeply in
love. They met often, and it does appear that the prosecutrix permitted him liberties
which, if at all, are permitted only to a person with whom one is in deep love. It is
also not without significance that the prosecutrix stealthily went out with the
appellant to a lonely place at 12 o'clock in the night. It usually happens in such cases,
when two young persons are madly in love, that they promise to each other several
times that come what may, they will get married..."
c/w
17) In Shivashankar vs. State of Karnataka, (2019) 18 SCC 204, the Supreme Court while dealing
with a case of relationship that had continued for about eight years held that it is not a case of rape
and observed as under:
"4.In the facts and circumstances of the present case, it is difficult to sustain the
charges leveled against the appellant who may have possibly, made a false promise of
marriage to the complainant. It is, however, difficult to hold sexual intercourse in the
course of a relationship which has continued for eight years, as 'rape' especially in the
face of the complainant's own allegation that they lived together as man and wife"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 5
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
18) In Dr. Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar (supra), the Supreme Court after analyzing the case law on
the subject, has observed as under:
"Thus, there is a clear distinction between rape and consensual sex. The court, in
such cases, must very carefully examine whether the complainant had actually
wanted to marry the victim or had mala fide motives and had made a false promise to
this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the later falls within the ambit of cheating or
deception. There is also a distinction between mere breach of a promise and not
fulfilling a false promise. If the accused has not made the promise with the sole
intention to seduce the prosecutrix to indulge in sexual acts, such an act would not
amount to rape. There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees to have sexual
intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused and not solely on
account of the misconception created by accused, or where an accused, on account of
circumstances which he could not have foreseen or which were beyond his control,
was unable to marry her despite having every intention to do. Such cases must be
treated differently. If the complainant had any mala fide intention and if he had
clandestine motives, it is a clear case of rape. The acknowledged consensual physical
relationship between the parties would not constitute an offence under Section 376 of
the IPC. "
19) In a recent case of Shambu Kharwar vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Anr., 2022 SCC Online SC
1032, the Supreme Court after noting the facts of the said case has observed as under:
"12. In the present case, the issue which had to be addressed by the High Court was
whether, assuming all the allegations in the charge-sheet are correct as they stand, an
offence punishable under Section 376 IPC was made out. Admittedly, the appellant
c/w and the second respondent were in a consensual relationship from 2013 until
December 2017. They are both educated adults. The second respondent, during the
course of this period, got married on 12 June 2014 to someone else. The marriage
ended in a decree of divorce by mutual consent on 17 September 2017. The
allegations of the second respondent indicate that her relationship with the appellant
continued prior to her marriage, during the subsistence of the marriage and after the
grant of divorce by mutual consent.
13. In this backdrop and taking the allegations in the complaint as they stand, it is
impossible to find in the FIR or in the charge- sheet, the essential ingredients of an
offence under Section 376 IPC. The crucial issue which is to be considered is whether
the allegations indicate that the appellant had given a promise to the second
respondent to marry which at the inception was false and on the basis of which the
second respondent was induced into a sexual relationship. Taking the allegations in
the FIR and the charge-sheet as they stand, the crucial ingredients of the offence
under Section 375 IPC are absent. The relationship between the parties was purely of
a consensual nature. The relationship, as noted above, was in existence prior to the
marriage of the second respondent and continued to subsist during the term of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 6
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
marriage and after the second respondent was granted a divorce by mutual consent."
20) From the foregoing analysis of the law on the subject, it is clear that where allegations in the FIR
do not indicate that the promise by the accused was false or that the complainant had engaged in
sexual relations on the basis of this promise, it cannot be stated that offence of rape is constituted.
21) Coming to the facts of the instant case, the prosecutrix/complainant has stated that she came
into contact with the petitioner in the Month of June, 2017, whereafter she met him frequently and
both of them developed feelings for each other. She goes on to state that the petitioner expressed his
desire to enter into wedlock with her and in order to understand, he proposed to her live-in-relation,
which was agreed to by the prosecutrix/respondent No. 2. The material on record reveals that the
petitioner and respondent No. 2 lived with each other in the first instance upto February, 2019 from
June 2017. During this period they tried to persuade the family of the c/w petitioner so that their
marriage could be solemnized but there was resistance from the family of the petitioner but still they
decided to get married.
22) It is not the case of the prosecutrix that right from the inception, the petitioner had extended
false promise of marriage to her, with a view to exploit her sexually. It is clear from the contents of
the complaint and the statement of the prosecutrix recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. that the
petitioner and the prosecutrix lived together for several years and they developed love and feelings
for each other. In fact, the prosecutrix has herself stated that the family of the petitioner was not in
favour of their live- in-relationship and they resisted their marriage but in spite of this, she
continued to have relationship with the petitioner.
23) In the year, 2019, the petitioner is stated to have left the company of the prosecutrix, which
prompted her to file a Habeas Corpus Petition before this Court, whereafter, in the month of
November, 2020, the petitioner is stated to have again assured the prosecutrix to marry her.
Thereafter, the petitioner is stated to have again developed physical relationship with the
prosecutrix.
24) Once the petitioner had left the company of the prosecutrix and once she came to know that the
family of the petitioner is not in favour of their marriage and live-in-relationship, prudence
demanded that the prosecutrix, who is a mature girl of 38 years, should not have allowed the
petitioner to stay with her once again and to have physical relationship with her. The circumstances
of the case clearly indicate that the petitioner and the c/w prosecutrix were in love with each other
and they had feelings for each other, which prompted them to have physical relations with each
other. Thus, it is not a case of false promise to marry but it is a case of consensual sex between two
adult parties, which can be inferred from the facts and circumstances of the case.
25) The prosecutrix has admitted that the petitioner wanted to have sometime before entering into
wedlock with her and for this purpose she proposed to have live-in-relationship with her, meaning
thereby that at the initial stage the petitioner had not indicated his intention to marry the
prosecutrix but he only wanted to ascertain as to how their relationship will work out, whereafter he
was to make up his mind as to whether or not he would enter into wedlock with the prosecutrix. This
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 7
Syed Shahid Hamdani vs Ut Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
goes on to show that there was no promise of marriage from the petitioner at the time of initiation of
their relationship.
26) In the instant case, a bare perusal of contents of the FIR reveals that there was no false promise
of marriage on the part of the petitioner which had persuaded the prosecutrix to enter into sexual
relationship with him. The facts on record show that the petitioner and prosecutrix had a long
standing relationship of three to four years and they had lived together as partners for about two
years. It is also revealed that the prosecutrix despite knowing that there would be resistance on the
part of family of the petitioner to their proposed marriage, because she was ten years elder to the
petitioner, still then she continued to have relationship with the petitioner. These facts clearly show
that it is not a case of sexual intercourse on the basis of false c/w promise of marriage but a case of
two adult consenting parties living together and having physical relationship. Thus, no offence is
constituted against the petitioner from the contents of the impugned FIR and the material collected
by the investigating agency during the investigation of the case.
27) For the foregoing reasons, it is a fit case where this court should exercise its power under Section
482 Cr.PC. to quash the impugned FIR and the proceedings emanating therefrom. The petition is,
accordingly, allowed and the impugned FIR and the proceedings emanating therefrom are quashed.
28) Disposed of.
29) Case diary be returned to the learned counsel appearing for the State
counsel.
In view of the order passed in petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C, the bail application has been
rendered infructuous. The same is disposed of accordingly.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 02.03.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116320315/ 8
