T. Ankeya @ T.Ankaya vs State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Party on 31 January, 2025
T. Ankeya @ T.Ankaya vs State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Party on
31 January, 2025
Author: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
Bench: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
BLAPL No.10885 of 2024
T. Ankeya @ T.Ankaya ..... Petitioner
Represented By Adv. -
S.K.Dwibedi
-versus-
State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Party
Represented By Adv. -
Mr. M.R. Mohanty,
A.G.A.
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR
MOHAPATRA
ORDER
31.01.2025 Order No.
02. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as learned Additional Government Advocate for
the State-Opposite Party.
3. The present bail application under Section 439 of Cr.P.C., has been filed by the Petitioner for
regular bail relating to Khandapara P.S. Case No.72 of 2024, corresponding to Spl. G.R. Case No.17
of 2024, pending before the learned Special Judge -cum- Additional Sessions Judge, Nayagarh, for
alleged commission of offence punishable under Sections 20(b)(ii)(C), 25 & 29 of NDPS Act.
4. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that earlier this matter was not before any other Bench
of this Court. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner is an
innocent driver who is languishing in custody since 14.03.2024. He further contended that in the
meantime the investigation has been completed and the final charge-sheet has been filed on
08.09.2024. Further, referring to the allegations made in the FIR, learned counsel for the Petitioner
submitted that the Petitioner, happens to be a local person and the driver of the Bolero Pick-up
vehicle bearing Regd. No. OD-02-C-6178. He further contended that a total of five accused persons
were sitting the back of the said vehicle and that a joint seizure has been made from five accused
persons to the tune of a total quantity of 83 kg. of contraband Ganja. Learned counsel for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48090382/ 1
T. Ankeya @ T.Ankaya vs State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Party on 31 January, 2025
Petitioner at this juncture submitted that the vehicle in question is a public transport vehicle and
that while returning, the Petitioner had given lift to some other persons on the back side of the said
vehicle. He further contended that a total of five co-accused persons excludes in the present
Petitioner were in the said vehicle.
5. In the aforesaid background, the learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that since the
vehicle is a public transport vehicle, some of the passengers were given lift by the driver, it cannot be
conclusively said that the alleged contraband Ganja was recovered from the exclusive and conscious
possession of the present Petitioner. In such view of the matter, learned counsel for the Petitioner
submitted that the bar under Section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act would not be attracted to the facts of the
present case. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further submitted that the Petitioner does not have
any criminal antecedent and that since the Petitioner belongs to the locality, therefore, there is no
chance of his absconding. In such view of the matter, it was contended that in the event the
Petitioner is released on bail, he is ready and willing abide by any terms and conditions as this Court
deems fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
6. Learned Additional Standing Counsel on the other hand opposed the bail application of the
Petitioner on the ground that a case under the alleged Sections is well made out against the present
Petitioner. She further contended that as per the seizure list, the alleged contraband article was
recovered from the possession of the present Petitioner and that taking into consideration the
quantity of contraband article seized, the bar under Section 37 of the NDPS Act would be attracted
in the present case. She further contended that taking into consideration the fact that such cases are
increasing day- by-day in the State of Odisha, no leniency should be shown to the petitioner. In such
view of the matter, she submitted that the bail application of the Petitioner be rejected at this
juncture.
7. Having heard the learned counsels appearing for the respective parties and on a careful
examination of the surrounding facts and circumstances of the seizure, further keeping in view the
period of detention of the Petitioner in jail custody, and taking into consideration the fact that the
Petitioner is a driver of the pick-up van and was situated in the front of the vehicle whereas the
contraband article was found in the back of the pick-up van, this Court is inclined to release the
Petitioner on bail subject to imposition of stringent conditions. In the event it is found by the
learned court below that the Petitioner is having any similar criminal antecedent, then this order
shall automatically stand revoked. Violation of any of the terms and conditions shall entail
cancellation of bail.
8. Hence, it is directed that the Petitioner be released on bail in the aforesaid case on furnishing bail
bond of Rs.40,000/- (Rupees Forty Thousand) with two local solvent sureties each for the like
amount to the satisfaction of the learned court in seisin over the matter subject to the following
terms and conditions:
I) The Petitioner shall also file an affidavit before the Trial Court with regard to
indicating there his residential details other details like Aadhar No., Phone No. before
the jurisdictional police station & further release of the Petitioner shall be subject to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48090382/ 2
T. Ankeya @ T.Ankaya vs State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Party on 31 January, 2025
verification of such details as would be furnished by any relative of the Petitioner in
the shape of an affidavit.
II) he shall not be involved in any offence of similar nature while on bail;
III) he shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence or try to threaten or influence
the witnesses in any manner whatsoever;
IV) he shall not make any default in attending the court during trial on each date
without fail;
V) he shall appear before the concerned Police Station once in a fortnight preferably
on 'Sunday' in between 10.00 A.M. to 1.00 P.M. till conclusion of the trial.
9. Accordingly, the BLAPL stands disposed of.
Issue urgent certified copy as per Rules.
( Aditya Kumar Mohapatra )
Judge
Rubi
Signed by: RUBI BEHERA Page 4 of 4.
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Date: 04-Feb-2025 10:41:17
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48090382/ 3
