T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25
September, 2020
Crl.R.P.No.498/2011
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 25TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE K.S.MUDAGAL
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION No.498/2011
BETWEEN:
T.VENKATARAMAIAH
S/O. SRI THIMMAIAH
AGED ABOUT 61 YEARS
R/AT NO.157/5, 8TH CROSS
BHAHUBALINAGAR
JALAHALLI VILLAGE & POST
BENGALURU- 560 013 ...PETITIONER
(BY SRI SRINIVASA.D.C., FOR
SRI C.G.GOPALASWAMY, ADVOCATES)
AND:
ESHA.G
S/O. SRI GANGADHAR
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS
R/AT NO.16, 1ST MAIN
1ST CROSS, GAYATHRINAGAR
6TH PHASE, J.P.NAGAR
BENGALURU- 560 021 ...RESPONDENT
(BY SRI H.A.MANJUNATHA PRASANNA, ADVOCATE)
THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION IS FILED UNDER
SECTION 397 OF CR.P.C. PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE
JUDGMENT AND SENTENCE DATED 05.02.2011 PASSED BY
THE FAST TRACK COURT-I, BENGALURU CITY IN CRIMINAL
APPEAL NO.655/2002 AND TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT
AND SENTENCE DATED 24.10.2002 PASSED BY THE III
ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE,
BENGALURU IN C.C.NO.31589/2000.
THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION COMING ON FOR
ORDERS THIS DAY, THE COURT THROUGH VIDEO
CONFERENCE MADE THE FOLLOWING:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 1
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
Crl.R.P.No.498/2011
2
ORDER
"Whether the impugned order of conviction and sentence passed by the XIII Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru in C.C.No.31589/2000 as confirmed by the Fast Track Court I,
Bengaluru City in Criminal Appeal No.655/2002 suffers infirmity, incorrectness and illegality"? is
the question involved in this case.
2. Petitioner was the accused and respondent was the complainant in C.C.No.31589/2000. For the
purpose of convenience the parties will be referred to henceforth with their ranks before the trial
Court.
3. The complainant filed the complaint as per Ex.P8 in P.C.R.No.1080/2000 against the accused
alleging that the accused borrowed loan of Rs.3,50,000/- from him for his business purpose and
towards discharge of the said debt he issued cheque Ex.P1 dated 15.07.2000 drawn on State Bank of
India, Dollars Colony Branch, Bengaluru. The said cheque was presented by the complainant to the
petitioner's Bank at State Bank of Mysuru, Gayathrinagar Branch on 15.07.2000. On 17.07.2000,
the bank dishonored the cheque with an endorsement "insufficient funds". The complainant issued
notice dated 24.07.2000 as per Ex.P4 calling upon the accused to pay the cheque amount. The said
notice sent through registered post was returned with endorsement "not claimed". The notice was
sent under certificate of posting also as per receipt Ex.P6.
4. On filing the complaint, the trial Court summoned the accused and tried him. The accused
admitted that the cheque Ex.P1 relates to his account and his signature on Ex.P1. But he denied
availment of loan from the complainant. His defence was that he had purchased lathe machines
from Sri Meenakshi Industries of which one Murthy was the Proprietor. He further claimed that
towards the sale proceeds of lathe machines, as security he had issued three cheques including
Ex.P1. He further claimed that Murthy misusing the said cheques set up the complainant and got
filed false complaint. His further defence was that the complainant had no capacity to lend
Rs.3,50,000/-. His third defence was that the complainant works with one Tulsiram a money lender
as recovery agent and Tulsiram got filed several similar complaints through the complainant against
some other persons as he had lent un-accounted money.
5. The complainant was examined as PW.1 and on his behalf Ex.P1 to Ex.P11 were marked. Ex.P9 to
Ex.P11 were the cheques issued by the accused in favour of Sri Meenakshi Industries which were
also dishonoured. On confronting them to the accused, he admitted issuance of Ex.P9 to Ex.P11 and
that they were dishonoured.
6. Accused himself got examined as DW.1 and got marked Ex.D1 and Ex.D2, the correspondence
between himself and Mr.Murthy, the Proprietor of Sri Meenakshi Industries regarding purchase of
machineries worth Rs.1,05,000/- and issuance of the cheques regarding that transaction. In the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 2
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
cross-examination of PW.1 as well in the evidence, accused set up the same defence.
7. The trial Court on hearing the parties rejected the defence of the accused on the following
grounds:
(i) When the accused admitted that the cheque belongs to his account and his
signature on the same, presumption under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 ('NI Act' for short) that the cheque was issued towards discharge of some
legal liability arises.
(ii) Accused has failed to rebut the said presumption available under Section 139 of
the NI Act by examining Murthy.
(iii) Three cheques allegedly issued to Murthy were Ex.P9 to Ex.P11 and therefore
that defence fails.
8. Holding so the trial Court convicted the accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of
the NI Act and sentenced him to pay fine of Rs.4,75,000/-, in default, to undergo simple
imprisonment for four months. Out of fine amount of Rs.4,75,000/-. Rs.4,50,000/- was ordered to
be paid to the complainant as compensation.
9. Accused challenged the said judgment before Fast Track Court-I, Bengaluru in Criminal Appeal
No.655/2002. Learned Sessions Judge by the impugned judgment and order confirmed the order of
conviction. However, modified the order of sentence reducing the fine amount to Rs.3,55,000/- and
in default, sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for four months. Further, the First Appellate
Court awarded Rs.3,50,000/- to the complainant as compensation.
10. The grounds of confirmation of conviction by the First Appellate Court were as follows:
(i) Accused failed to place convincible evidence that the complainant had no lending
capacity.
(ii) According to the accused himself, the complainant is doing money lending
business without valid licence. Therefore, his defence regarding lending capacity is
inconsistent.
(iii) Accused has failed to prove that Ex.P1 was issued to Murthy towards purchase of
machinery.
(iv) Fact of the accused not initiating any legal action against Murthy for misusing the
cheque improbabalizes his defence.
(v) Notice Ex.P4 was issued to the admitted address of the accused. Therefore the
same is presumed to be served. Non-controverting the allegations in the notice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 3
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
regarding lending of the money operates adversely against the accused.
(vi) By the circumstances listed above, the accused has failed to rebut the
presumption under Section 139 of NI Act. Therefore, the trial Court was justified in
convicting him.
11. Reiterating the grounds urged in the petition and by referring to the deposition of PW.1, Sri
Srinivasa.D.C, learned Counsel for the accused seeks to assail the order of conviction and sentence
passed by the Courts below on the following grounds:
(i) As per the evidence of PW.1 himself, at the time of the incident, he was hardly 26
years old.
(ii) Though PW.1 claims that he was working as Real Estate Agent and Travel Agent,
he did not produce any material like certificate of registration with professional tax
authorities to show that he was working as such and had any income.
(iii) As per the evidence of PW.1 himself he had with him only Rs.1,50,000/- and
borrowed Rs.2,00,000/- from his father and lent Rs.3,50,000./- to the accused.
(iv) As per the evidence of PW.1, his father was a tailor. Absolutely, no evidence was
placed to show that the father or the son had that much income to lend the money.
(v) Though PW.1 claimed that he had funds in his account, he did not produce his
bank account statement. The evidence of PW.1 itself rebuts the presumption under
Section 139 of NI Act.
(vi) When the complainant claims to have borrowed Rs.2,00,000/- from his father
and lent Rs.3,50,000/-, simultaneously he claims to have lent Rs.2,35,000/- to
Shashidhara Desai and another loan to Prashanth and filed similar complaints
against them.
That falsifies his case of lending money to the accused.
(vii) When the accused in the cross-examination of the complainant improbabalized the lending
capacity of the complainant, the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act stands rebutted. He
can rely on such evidence of the complainant itself and need not lead defence evidence in that
regard.
12. In support of his contention, he relies upon the following judgments:
(i) Basalingappa vs. Mudibasappa1
(ii) APS Forex Services Private Limited vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 4
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
Shakti International Fashion Linkers & Ors.2
13. Per contra, Sri H.A.Manjunatha Prasanna, learned Counsel for the respondent-complainant
seeks to justify the impugned order of conviction and sentence on the following grounds:
(i) When the accused admits that the cheque belongs to his account and his signature
on the cheque, presumption under Section 139 and 118 of NI Act arise.
[2019] 5 SCC 418 [2020] AIR (SC) 945 Therefore, the burden was on the accused to rebut the said
presumption by examining Murthy which the accused did not do.
(ii) Even after filing of the complaint, the accused did not take action against Murthy for misuse of
the cheque. That demolishes the defence of the accused regarding misuse of cheque by Murthy.
(iii) The alleged three cheques issued by the accused to Murthy were returned as Ex.P9 to Ex.P11 as
admitted by the accused himself. Therefore, the accused failed to rebut the presumption.
(iv) When the presumption under Section 139 of NI Act is not rebutted, the defence of lending
capacity looses significance. Even otherwise, the First Appellate Court rightly relied upon the
suggestion of the accused himself to the complainant that he is doing money lending business.
14. In support of his contentions, he relies upon the following judgments of the Supreme Court:
(i) K.Bhaskaran v. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan3 (1999) 7 SCC 510
(ii) K.N.Beena vs. Muniyappan and Anr.4
(iii) APS Forex Services Private Limited vs. Shakti International Fashion Linkers &
Ors.
15. As already pointed out, the facts that the cheque belonged to the account of the accused and his
signature on the same were not disputed. Therefore, the only question in the case is whether
presumption available under Section 139 of the NI Act stood rebutted.
16. Section 139 of the NI Act reads as follows:
"139. Presumption in favour of holder It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is
proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in
section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability."
17. Reading of the above provision makes it clear that on proof of receipt of cheque by holder a legal
presumption that the cheque was received for discharge of debt or any liability has to be raised. How
that burden has to be rebutted was dealt in Basalingappa's case referred to supra.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 5
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
AIR 2001 SC 2895
18. Both the Courts below proceeded on the premise that when the accused contended that the
cheques were issued to Murthy, it was incumbent on the accused to examine said Murthy to rebut
the said presumption. The Courts below lost sight of the defence that the said Murthy has turned
hostile to the accused and set up the complainant to file the complaint. Therefore, it was totally
onerous to expect the accused to prove the role of Murthy in the transaction by examining him.
19. Whether the accused is bound to lead the defence evidence to rebut the presumption or he can
rely on the evidence of the complainant himself to rebut the presumption has been dealt by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Basalingappa's case referred to supra at para 23 of the judgment which
reads as follows:
"23. We having noticed the ratio laid down by this Court in above cases on Sections
118(a) and 139, we now summarise the principles enumerated by this Court in
following manner:-
(i) Once the execution of cheque is admitted Section 139 of the Act mandates a
presumption that the cheque was for the discharge of any debt or other liability.
(ii) The presumption under Section 139 is a rebuttable presumption and the onus is
on the accused to raise the probable defence.
The standard of proof for rebutting the presumption is that of preponderance of probabilities.
(iii) To rebut the presumption, it is open for the accused to rely on evidence led by him or accused
can also rely on the materials submitted by the complainant in order to raise a probable defence.
Inference of preponderance of probabilities can be drawn not only from the materials brought on
record by the parties but also by reference to the circumstances upon which they rely.
(iv) That it is not necessary for the accused to come in the witness box in support of his defence,
Section 139 imposed an evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden,
(v) It is not necessary for the accused to come in the witness box to support his defence."
(Emphasis supplied)
20. In the light of the above judgment, it is clear that the accused can rely on the evidence of the
complainant himself to rebut the presumption and to probabalize his defence.
21. In the case on hand, the accused had seriously disputed the lending capacity of the
complainant-PW.1. PW.1 as on 16.12.2000 the date of sworn statement was stated to be hardly 26
years old. The cheque was allegedly issued on 15.07.2000. In his chief examination, PW.1 did not
whisper anything about his lending capacity. In the cross-examination though he claimed that he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 6
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
was working as Real Estate Agent and Travel Agent and earning Rs.15,000/- to Rs.20,000/- per
month from such business and he has bank statement to that effect, he did not produce that. He
admits that he did not get himself registered for such professions with the concerned authorities by
paying professional tax etc.
22. When in the notice and in the complaint, PW.1 claimed that he had lent his own funds, in his
cross-examination he says that he borrowed Rs.2,00,000./- from his father. But he himself admits
that his father is running small tailoring shop and no evidence was adduced to show his father's
lending capacity.
23. Though PW.1 admits that he has lent the loan to one Shashidhara Desai and Prashanth, in the
cross-examination, he states that he does not know how much amount he advanced to Shashidhara
Desai in 1999 which probabalizes the defence that the complainant is only a dummy holder of the
cheques for the transactions of other money lenders. Further, he admitted that he lent
Rs.2,35,000/- in December 1999 to Shashidhara Desai. On pooling Rs.3,50,000/-, how he could
lend Rs.3,50,000/- to the accused and others simultaneously was neither explained nor proved. He
claims to have lent some money to one Prashanth also. He admits that he filed similar cases against
Prashanth & Shashidhara. At another breath he claims he lent Rs.3,50,000/- to the accused and
some amount to Shashidhara Desai alone.
24. PW.1 admits that Tulsiram is carrying on money lending business and licence is essential for
doing money lending business. However, the First Appellate Court misinterpreted such suggestions
of PW.1 as the admissions of the accused that the complainant is money lender. Whereas the
defence of the accused was that the complainant was proxy to Tulsiram to recover the loan lent by
him to others. PW.1 further states that he does not remember that in the year 1999 how much
amount was involved in that money transaction.
25. The aforesaid admissions of PW.1 themselves raised doubts about his lending capacity and
lending of the loan, consequently, the presumption under Section 139 of the NI Act stood rebutted
by the admissions of the complainant in his cross-examination. In such event, the burden reversed
to the complainant to prove his lending capacity as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Basalingappa's case referred to supra.
26. In APS Forex Services Private Limited's case referred to supra in para 6.4 of the judgment, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:
"6.4 Now so far as the reliance is placed by Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of
the accused on the decision of this Court in the case of Basalingappa (supra), on
going through the said decision, we are of the opinion that the said decision shall not
be applicable to the facts of the case on hand and/or the same shall not be of any
assistance to the accused. In that case before this Court, the defence by the accused
was that the cheque amount was given by the complainant to the accused by way of
loan. When the proceedings were initiated under Section 138 of the N.I. Act the
accused denied the debt liability and the accused raised the defence and questioned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 7
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
the financial capacity of the complainant. To that, the complainant failed to prove
and establish his financial capacity. Therefore, this Court was satisfied that the
accused had a probable defence and consequently in absence of complainant having
failed to prove his financial capacity, this Court acquitted the accused. In the present
case, the accused never questioned the financial capacity of the complainant. We are
of the view that whenever the accused has questioned the financial capacity of the
complainant in support of his probable defence, despite the presumption under
Section 139 of the N.I. Act about the presumption of legally enforceable debt and
such presumption is rebuttable, thereafter the onus shifts again on the complainant
to prove his financial capacity and at that stage the complainant is required to lead
the evidence to prove his financial capacity, more particularly when it is a case of
giving loan by cash and thereafter issuance of a cheque. That is not a case here."
(Emphasis supplied)
27. Therefore, this case is fully covered by the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Basalingappa's case and APS Forex Services Private Limited's case referred to supra.
28. Learned Counsel for the complainant submits that APS Forex Services Private Limited's case,
presumption was raised in favour of the complainant. The reading of the judgment shows that in
that case defence of lack of lending capacity of the complainant was not raised. Therefore, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court distinguished the judgment of Basalingappa's case and held that
presumption under Section 139 of NI Act was not rebutted.
29. In K.Bhaskaran's case relied upon by the learned Counsel for the complainant, the defence was
that the complainant had snatched the cheques and misused them and there was no defence about
lending capacity. Similarly K.N.Beena's case referred to supra does not indicate that any defence
regarding lending capacity of the complainant was raised. Therefore the said judgment is also not
applicable.
30. In the light of the discussions made above, the order of sentence passed by the trial Court and
the First Appellate Court are contrary to the evidence on record and the judgments of the Supreme
Court in Basalingappa's case and APS Forex Services Private Limited's referred to supra regarding
the principle of rebuttal of presumption available under Section 139 of NI Act. Therefore, the
petition is allowed.
The impugned orders of conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court and the First Appellate
Court are hereby set aside.
The petitioner accused is acquitted of the offence punishable under Section 138 of NI Act.
Fine amount, deposited by the accused if any, shall be refunded to him.
Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 8
T Venkataramaiah vs Esha G S/O Sri Gangadhar on 25 September, 2020
JUDGE ND/KSR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92779445/ 9
