T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition
Officer on 6 January, 2023
Author: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
Bench: N.S.Sanjay Gowda
-1-
WP No.104106/2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, R
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 6TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE N.S.SANJAY GOWDA
WRIT PETITION NO.104106/2022 (LA-RES)
BETWEEN:
T. Younis @ Unees
S/o. Haji T. Ameer Sab,
Age 56 years Occ: Business,
R/o.: Ward No.13, Amarawati,
Taluka Hosapete.
... Petitioner
(By Shir Mallikarjunswamy B.Hiremath, Advocate)
AND:
1. Special Land Acquisition Officer
& The Competent Authority,
National Highway Authority of India,
Vidya Nagar, 4th Main Road, 5th Cross,
Opp: Gangaparameshwari Kalyan Mantapa,
Vidyanagar, Ballari-583 104.
2. National Highway Authority of India,
By its Project Director,
Hosapete-583 101.
... Respondents
(By Sri. Vinayak S. Kulkarni, AGA for R1
Smt. Shilppa Shah, Advocate for
Sri. Shivaraj Ballolli, Advocate for R2)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 1
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
This Writ Petition is filed under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India, praying to issue a writ of certiorari
quashing the impugned endorsement dated 20.05.2022,
produced at Annexure-F, issued by the 1st respondent bearing
No. SLAO/ NHAI/ BLR/ NH-13(50) 2022-23/55 & etc.
-2-
WP No.104106/2022
This writ petition, having been heard and reserved for
Orders, coming on for pronouncement, this day, the Court
made the following:
ORDER
1. Two endorsements issued by the Special Land Acquisition Officer (for short, "the Competent
Authority"), National Highway Authority dated 20.05.2022 and 20.09.2022 vide Annexures-F and
F1 respectively are challenged in this writ petition by the landowner.
2. The Competent Authority, by the above- mentioned endorsements, has informed the petitioner
that the payment of the compensation in respect of the acquired lands belonging to the petitioner in
Sy.Nos.503/A2 & 503/B2 of Amaravati Village, Hospet Taluk cannot be made because the National
Highway Authority of India (for short, "NHAI") had received a legal opinion that it should not
release the payment due to the pendency of the applications filed under Section 33 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, "the A & C Act") and the payment would be released by NHAI
only after the award attains finality.
3. The admitted facts of the case are that a notification under Section 3A of the National Highways
Act, 1956 (for short "the Act"), declaring the intention of the Government to acquire the lands was
published on 15.12.2009. This was followed by a declaration under Section 3D of the Act, which was
published on 14.12.2010.
4. The Competent Authority determined that a sum of Rs.12,916/- per sq. mtrs. was the
compensation payable to the landowner. This order determining the compensation was passed
under Section 3G (1) of the Act on 05.12.2011.
5. This amount determined by the Competent Authority was not acceptable to the NHAI and hence
it invoked its right to seek for determination of the amount payable as compensation by the
Arbitrator i.e., by the Deputy Commissioner, by making an application under Section 3G (5) of the
Act.
6. In these proceedings, the landowner also challenged the amount determined by the Competent
Authority as being inadequate and sought for re- determination of the amount
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 2
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
7. The Arbitrator, on 16.02.2013, modified the award of the Competent Authority and proceeded to
award a sum of Rs.14,64,545/- per acre in respect of dry lands and a sum of Rs.30,00,000/- per acre
for the converted lands.
8. Being aggrieved by the said modification of the award by the Arbitrator, the petitioner-landowner
filed two applications seeking for setting aside the award under Section 34 of the A & C Act read
with Section 3G (6) of the Act. One application was filed challenging the reduction of the market
value and another application was filed challenging the dismissal of their counter-claim made for
enhancement before the Arbitrator.
9. The District Court, by its order dated 10.04.2014, and in the exercise of its power under Section
34(4) of the A & C Act directed the Arbitrator to hold an enquiry and give findings on the points
mentioned in the order, while keeping the application filed under Section 34 of A & C Act pending.
10. Pursuant to the said order of the District Court, the Arbitrator proceeded to conduct an enquiry
and passed an order dated 14.10.2015.
11. The District Court thereafter proceeded to consider the application filed under Section 34 of A &
C Act and by an order dated 16.03.2019, set aside the order passed by the Arbitrator, by which he
had reduced the compensation payable and thereby confirmed the order of the Competent Authority
which had determined compensation payable at Rs.12,916/- per sq. mtr.
12. Being aggrieved, NHAI preferred appeals to this Court. In these appeals, the landowner also filed
Cross Objections. This Court, by an order dated 01.10.2020, allowed the appeals of the NHAI and
remanded the matter to the Arbitrator for determination of the amount payable as compensation.
The Cross Objections of the landowners were dismissed as withdrawn.
13. Pursuant to the said order of remand, the Arbitrator, by his order dated 03.02.2022, dismissed
the application filed by the NHAI and thereby confirmed the award of the Competent Authority. The
Arbitrator also directed the Competent Authority to extend the statutory benefits of solatium,
additional market value and interest as provided under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act.
14. Thus, the order of the Competent Authority determining compensation payable at Rs.12,916/-
per sq. mtrs. was affirmed by the Arbitrator on 03.02.2022.
15. The landowner thereafter filed an application for correction of certain errors in the award on
10.02.2022 and the said application was allowed, and the errors were corrected by the District Court
on 11.02.2022.
16. Thereafter on 08.03.2022, NHAI filed an application under Section 33(1)(a) of the A & C Act to
modify the award.
17. The landowner also filed an application under Section 33(4) of the A & C Act seeking for
modification of the award and sought for a grant of 50% additional amount over & above the market
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 3
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
value.
18. The petitioner, during the pendency of these applications, also made an application on
06.05.2022 seeking for release of the compensation deposited to the Competent Authority. The
Competent Authority, however, refused to make the payment by issuing an endorsement dated
20.05.2022 at Annexure-F.
19. It is also pertinent to state here that the application that had been filed by the NHAI and the
application filed by the petitioner seeking for modification of the award were both dismissed by the
Arbitrator on 04.07.2022.
20. The landowner thereafter made one more application seeking for release of the compensation
amount. However, the Competent Authority issued an endorsement dated 20.09.2022 at
Annexure-F1, once again refusing to make the payment.
21. This endorsement dated 20.09.2022 at Annexure-F1 and the earlier endorsement dated
20.05.2022 at Annexure-F are the subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
22. It is also stated by the landowner (in his synopsis) that a review petition that had been filed in
August-2022 seeking for review of the order passed by the Arbitrator on 04.07.2022, by which, the
application filed by the landowner and NHAI, was dismissed.
23. It is also stated that NHAI has filed an application under Section 34 of the A & C Act challenging
the award of the Deputy Commissioner dated 03.02.2022, by which, the award of the Competent
Authority was confirmed. It is stated that in these applications filed under Section 34 of the A & C
Act, a prayer has been made for a stay of the award of the Arbitrator and the same is yet to be
considered.
24. It is also stated that the landowner has also filed an application under Section 34 of the A & C
Act and the same is also pending adjudication.
25. The case urged by the petitioner-landowner is that the Competent Authority has no jurisdiction
to refuse payment of compensation after passing the award. It is contended that the statutory Rules
require the compensation determined by the Competent
- 10 -
Authority should not only be deposited immediately but should also be immediately disbursed. It is
contended that the Competent Authority does not have the power to withhold the compensation for
any reason whatsoever, and at any rate, it does not have the power to seek for the consent of the
NHAI to disburse the compensation amount.
26. The NHAI, on the other hand, contends that when it still had time to file an application seeking
for setting aside the award under Section 34 of the A & C Act, it had a right to demand the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 4
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
Competent Authority not to disburse the compensation amount, since the application filed by NHAI
to set aside the award would be frustrated. It is contended that under the statutory Rules, NHAI is
obliged to deposit the compensation amount only if a decision is taken not to challenge the award.
27. It is contended that once a decision is taken to challenge the award, there would be no liability to
deposit the compensation amount and since admittedly an
- 11 -
application had been filed seeking for setting aside the award, the Competent Authority was
perfectly justified in refusing the payment of compensation.
28. The questions that are, therefore, required to be considered in this writ petition are as follows:
(i) Whether the Competent Authority possess the jurisdiction to refuse payment of
compensation awarded to the land-loser?
(ii) Whether the Competent Authority can seek for the opinion of the Executing
Agency for disbursal of the compensation and refuse payment based on the opinion
of the Executing Agency?
29. An overview of the provisions of the Act would be necessary for the determination of the
aforementioned.
30. The Act has been enacted to provide for the declaration of certain Highways to be National
Highways and for matters connected therewith.
- 12 -
31. Section 2 of the Act provides for the declaration of certain Highways to be National Highways
and Sections 3A to 3J relate to the acquisition of lands for the purpose of the Act.
32. The scheme of the Act is that a notification is issued declaring the intention of the Government
to acquire the lands for the purpose of a National Highway (Section-3A) and thereupon power has
been conferred on a person authorized to enter the land for making a survey (Section-3B).
33. The Act contemplates that any person interested in the lands can file objections and thereby
object to the acquisition. On such objections being filed, the Competent Authority is required to give
an opportunity of hearing to the objector or his counsel and thereafter make an order to either allow
the objections or disallow the objections (Section-3C).
- 13 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 5
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
34. On an order being passed disallowing the objections, a report is required to be submitted to the
Central Government and on receipt of the report, the Central Government is required by way of a
notification in the Official Gazette to declare that the lands should be acquired. On the publication of
the declaration, the lands stand vested absolutely in the Central Government free from all
encumbrances (Section-3D).
35. On the land vesting in the Central Government and the amount determined by the Competent
Authority with respect to the land has been deposited, the Competent Authority is required, by
issuing a notice in writing, to direct the owner or any other person, who is in possession, to
surrender or deliver the possession and on the failure of the said person, the Competent Authority,
is empowered to inform the Commissioner of Police or Collector of the District, who shall thereafter
be required to enforce the surrender (Section-3E).
- 14 -
36. The Act requires that in respect of the lands which are acquired, the determination of amounts
payable as compensation is required to be made by an order of the Competent Authority. The
Competent Authority before determining the amount is required to issue a public notice and after
hearing the interested persons, determine the amount payable as compensation for the acquired
lands [Section-3G(3)].
37. If the amount determined by the Competent Authority is unacceptable to either of the parties,
the amount shall on an application by either of the parties be determined by the Arbitrator
[Section-3G(5)].
38. Both the Competent Authority and the Arbitrator are required to take into consideration the
factors mentioned in Section 3-G (7) of the Act while determining compensation.
39. The Act stipulates that, before taking possession of the land, the amount determined under
- 15 -
Section 3-G of the Act, that is either by the Arbitrator or by the Competent Authority should be
deposited by the Central Government in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Rules with the
Competent Authority.
40. For the purposes of this case, Section 3H of the Act11 would be relevant.
41. The Act also requires that as soon as the amount has been deposited, the Competent Authority
shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the amount to the person or persons entitled thereto.
42. If, however, there are several persons claiming to have an interest in the amount deposited, the
Competent Authority is required to determine, in his opinion, as to the persons, who are entitled to
receive an amount. If there is a dispute regarding the apportionment, the Competent Authority is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 6
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
required to refer the dispute to Section 3H of the Act is extracted at the end of the judgment at page
Nos.41 & 42
- 16 -
the Civil Court within whose jurisdiction the land acquired is situate [Section-3H (3) & (4)].
43. The Act specifically provides that in cases where the amount determined by the Arbitrator is in
excess of the amount determined by the Competent Authority, the Arbitrator is entitled to award
interest at the rate of 9% p.a. on such excess amount from the date of taking possession till the date
of actual deposit. [Section-3H(5)]
44. It also stipulates that where the amount determined by the Arbitrator is more than the amount
determined by the Competent Authority, that excess amount along with interest, should be
deposited by the Central Government in the manner laid down by the Rules made in this behalf.
45. It also stipulated that the provisions relating to the payment of the amount to the person entitled
to or the determination as to who was entitled to receive the compensation or reference to the Civil
Court if there was a
- 17 -
dispute, shall be as is provided for in cases where the determination is made by the Competent
Authority under Section 3G [Section-3H (6)].
46. The intent of the statutory rule is that irrespective of whether the amount was determined by the
Competent Authority as compensation payable to the land loser or the amount was determined by
the Arbitrator, that amount is required to be deposited by the Central Government before the
Competent Authority in the manner laid down by Rules specified in that behalf. Once a statutory
rule has been prescribed for the deposit of the amount determined, the beneficiary i.e., the NHAI is
bound to comply with it and it has no right to withhold the deposit.
47. In fact, in both cases, the statutory provision also stipulates the amount deposited before the
competent authority is required to be paid immediately on deposit to the person or persons entitled
to it and the Competent
- 18 -
authority is given no discretion in the matter of payment of compensation
48. It should be borne in mind that possession of the land is permitted to be taken under Section 3E
(1), only after the amount determined as compensation has been deposited as provided under
Section 3H(1).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 7
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
49. Thus, the requirement of depositing the amount determined as compensation and its disbursal
to the person concerned is statutorily provided and would thus have to be followed scrupulously and
no deviation from the Rules would be permissible.
50. The Central Government, in the exercise of powers conferred under the Act has framed Rules in
1998, which were repealed and replaced by a new set of Rules in 2019. For having a comprehensive
understanding of the issue, both the Rules would have to be examined and considered.
- 19 -
51. In 1998, the National Highways (Manner of Depositing the Amount by the Central Government
with the Competent Authority for Acquisition of Land) Rules, 199822 was framed.
52. Under the 1998 Rules i.e., till the 2019 Rules came into force, the statutory Rules required that
the Executing Agency (i.e., the National Highways Authority of India in the case of National
Highways) should deposit the amount determined by the Competent Authority or by the Arbitrator
under Section 3G of the Act, with the competent authority, by way of a Demand Draft within a
period of 7 days from the date of such determination.
53. Thus, the NHAI is required, by law, to deposit within a period of 7 days with the competent
authority, by way of a demand draft, the amount determined as compensation by the Competent
Authority or by the Arbitrator.
The National Highways (Manner of Depositing the Amount by the Central Government with the
Competent Authority for Acquisition of Land) 1998 is extracted at the end of the judgment at page
no.42.
- 20 -
54. The statutory mandate of Section 3H of the Act, read with the Rules framed regarding deposit
fundamentally demand that the amount determined as compensation is deposited within a week.
The lawmakers were aware that the NHAI did have an option to approach the Arbitrator, if the
amount determined by the competent authority was unacceptable to it and yet it chose to prescribe a
time limit of 7 days to deposit. This statutory intent, therefore, excludes any option being given to
the NHAI to withhold or delay the deposit of compensation.
55. It may be pertinent to notice here that the NHAI has not been given the option to withhold the
deposit, if it is contemplating a challenge to the amount determined either by the Competent
Authority or by the Arbitrator and the NHAI is simply required to deposit the compensation
determined within 7 days by way of a Demand Draft.
56. Furthermore, on the deposit being made within 7 days of the determination as aforesaid, as
required by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 8
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
- 21 -
the statutory mandate of Section 3H(2) of the Act, the Competent Authority is also obliged to pay
the amount to the person or persons entitled on behalf of the Central Government. The legislature
by using the expression "As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited" has made it crystal
clear that the disbursal of the compensation cannot and should not be delayed.
57. It is thus clear from the statutory scheme, the amount determined as compensation by the
competent authority is not only to be deposited within 7 days before the competent authority but is
also required to be disbursed immediately thereafter to the landowner.
58. The intent behind this prescription of deposit within 7 days and payment immediately thereafter
in explicit terms is rather clear. The Legislature was conscious of the fact that the acquisition of land
was always a tedious and time-consuming process and to speed up this process, the Act provided for
vesting of the land immediately after the declaration was made.
- 22 -
59. It was also aware that obstacles would be laid by the land loser if payment of compensation was
delayed and it hence imposed arbitration statutorily as the mode of determining the compensation
and significantly, it stipulated a statutory mandate, that the compensation should be deposited
within 7 days of the determination by the Competent Authority and should also be disbursed to the
land loser immediately thereafter.
60. It should also be kept in mind that, by virtue of Section 3E (1) of the Act, the NHAI cannot take
possession until the amount determined as compensation under Section 3G of the Act is deposited
as provided under Section 3H(1) of the Act.
61. Thus, it is imperative, as per the statutory rules framed, that the NHAI should deposit the
compensation within 7 days of the determination by way of a demand draft with the Competent
Authority and the said authority is also statutorily obliged to disburse the compensation
immediately thereafter.
- 23 -
62. This statutory fiat cannot be defeated by the NHAI on the ground that it has a right to challenge
the determination of compensation and unless that right is exhausted, they have an option to
withhold payment. It is settled law, that when a statutory procedure is prescribed there can be no
deviation from that procedure. This would be true, more so, when it relates to payment of
compensation to a person who has lost his land.
63. The consequence of this statutory mandate is that the NHAI cannot delay or withhold the
deposit of the amount determined as compensation and on deposit being made, the Competent
Authority cannot also delay or withhold the disbursal of the compensation for any reason.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 9
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
64. The argument, therefore, that NHAI possesses the right not to deposit the compensation, if it
has decided to challenge the determination of the amount payable as compensation, is wholly
untenable.
- 24 -
65. It is to be kept in mind that when the Rules were framed, the Legislature was obviously aware
that NHAI had a right to challenge the determination of the amount payable by the Competent
Authority by making an application to the Arbitrator and yet it made a statutory rule that the
amount was to be deposited within 7 days of the determination. The NHAI, therefore, cannot escape
the obligation of depositing the amount determined by the Competent Authority and the Competent
Authority is also obliged to pay the compensation immediately thereafter.
66. The only option available to NHAI to prevent the disbursal of compensation on the
determination of the amount payable by the Competent Authority is to obtain an interim order from
the Arbitrator restraining the Competent Authority to disburse the amount. The NHAI cannot,
therefore, avoid the deposit of the amount and the consequential disbursal on any reason
whatsoever.
67. It is also to be noticed that the lawmakers were aware of the fact that the Arbitrator could also
award an
- 25 -
amount in excess of the sum determined by the Competent Authority, in which event, the liability to
pay interest was also prescribed. It also to be noticed that as against such a higher determination of
the amount payable as compensation by the Arbitrator, the Legislature was obviously aware that
NHAI had a remedy of making an application under Section 34 of the A & C Act and yet it did not
provide for an exception to the rule relating to the deposit of the amount determined as
compensation within 7 days. Thus, even in cases where the Arbitrator has determined the amount in
excess of the amount determined by the competent authority, the NHAI cannot delay or postpone
the deposit and the consequential disbursal of the compensation.
68. The only option even in such cases would be for the NHAI to make an application to the District
Judge in its application under Section 34 of the A & C Act and seek for a stay of the disbursal of the
compensation.
- 26 -
69. It is quite probable that it was not even in the contemplation of the Legislature that the NHAI
could be challenging the determination made of the amount payable and therefore, did not provide
for a delay in the deposit. But then, this can only be in the realm of speculation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 10
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
70. The inescapable conclusion, therefore, is that NHAI is bound to deposit the amount determined
as compensation within 7 days of the determination before the Competent Authority and the
Competent Authority is immediately thereafter required to disburse the compensation to the land
loser as provided under Section 3H(2) to (4).
71. In the instant case, the Competent Authority determined the amount payable as Rs.12,916/- per
square meter on 05.12.2011 and consequently, as per the statutory rule prevailing as on 2011 i.e., the
1998 rules, the amount payable ought to have been deposited before the competent authority by way
of a demand draft on or
- 27 -
before 12.02.2011 and immediately thereafter the said amount was required to be paid by the
Competent Authority to the land loser.
72. However, the said amount has not been deposited by the NHAI and the amount has also not
been paid to the land loser and there is thus a clear infraction of the statutory rule.
73. In the instant case, the order determining the compensation payable by the Competent
Authority, was challenged by the NHAI by approaching the Arbitrator and the Arbitrator by his
order dated 16.02.2013 reduced the compensation determined.
74. Thereafter, the decision of the Arbitrator was challenged by making an application under Section
34 of the A & C Act to the District Court and the District Court by an order dated 10.03.2014, after
concluding that decision of the Arbitrator suffered from illegalities, while keeping the application
under Section 34 of the A & C Act
- 28 -
pending, directed the Arbitrator to hold an enquiry and give separate and independent findings
regarding the nature of the properties that had been acquired, in the exercise of its powers under
Section 34 (4) of the A & C Act.
75. The Arbitrator, pursuant to the said direction, proceeded to record a finding on 14.10.2015 and
the District Court thereafter proceeded to set aside the award itself by its order dated 16.03.2019.
Thus, the order of the Competent Authority dated 05.02.2011 was confirmed by the District Court
on 16.03.2019.
76. This order of the District Court was set aside by this Court on 01.10.2020 and the matter was
once again remanded to the Arbitrator and the Arbitrator by his order dated 03.02.2022, has
affirmed the order of the Competent Authority and rejected the application filed by NHAI under
Section 3G (5) of the Act.
- 29 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 11
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
77. An argument is, therefore, advanced that the award became final only on 03.03.2022 and
therefore, the 2019 Rules would be applicable.
78. As stated above, the Competent Authority determined the amount payable by his order dated
05.02.2011 and NHAI was basically required to deposit the amount on or before 12.02.2011.
79. However, since there has been continuous litigation relating to the determination of the amount
during the pendency of which 2019 Rules have been framed, it would also be necessary to examine
whether under the 2019 Rules, there was any exemption provided in the matter of deposit of the
compensation.
80. On 18th of January 2019, the 1998 Rules were replaced by the National Highways (Manner of
Depositing the Amount by the Central Government; making requisite
- 30 -
funds available to the Competent Authority for Acquisition of Land) Rules, 201933.
81. The Rule basically requires the NHAI to ensure a Bank account is maintained with requisite
funds, to which the Competent Authority has access and has authorization to withdraw, subject to
limits set by NHAI. The Competent Authority is empowered to withdraw from the said account and
disburse the compensation to the landowners.
82. Two significant factors are to be noticed in this Rule.
83. The first factor is that the Rule stipulates that when a demand is made by the Competent
Authority before the announcement of the award, the NHAI is required to issue authorization limits
to the Bank in favour of the Competent Authority for withdrawal and disbursements to the
landowners through electronic The 2019 Rules is extracted at the end of the judgment at page no.42
& 43.
- 31 -
banking mechanism. Thus, NHAI is put on notice even before the award is announced to issue
instructions to the Bank regarding the limits to which the Competent Authority is authorised to
withdraw.
84. The second factor is that the Rule also specifically stipulates that the Competent Authority was
entitled to without any reference to the land acquiring agency, for disbursement to the landowners
or persons interested. Thus, the Competent Authority is specifically discharged from the obligation
to inform NHAI about the disbursal of the compensation, thereby, meaning that NHAI had no role
at all to play in the disbursal of compensation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 12
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
85. The further inference of the Rule is that the only role of the NHAI is to ensure that the
Competent Authority is enabled to withdraw funds from the Bank account to be maintained by
NHAI and nothing more.
- 32 -
86. The Rule also goes on to stipulate two timelines to ensure the withdrawal of the amount by the
Competent Authority:
87. In case of a determination by the Competent Authority under Section 3G of the Act, the period
prescribed is 15 days. In cases, where the NHAI is not aggrieved of the determination, there would
no impediment for the deposit.
88. If, however, the order of the Competent Authority was unacceptable to the NHAI and it wanted
to make an application to the Arbitrator for determination, NHAI would still, nevertheless, must
ensure that the Competent Authority is enabled to withdraw the amount determined by it for
disbursal to the landowner, by issuing necessary instructions to the Bank.
89. It should be noticed that in such cases the Rule does not entitle the NHAI to withhold the
withdrawal if it decides to approach the Arbitrator. Thus, in cases of
- 33 -
determination of the amount payable as compensation is made by the Competent Authority, there is
no escape from the need to ensure arrangements are made for the withdrawal by the Competent
Authority and it is a must.
90. In case of a determination of the amount by the Arbitrator under Section 3G (7) of the Act, the
excess amount together with interest is also required to be deposited within 30 days of the
Arbitrator's award.
91. However, an exception is sought to be made in such a case. The Rule states that "unless such
award has been challenged by either of the aggrieved parties"
meaning thereby, that the NHAI need not ensure the withdrawal, if within 30 days of
the award, the award has been challenged by either of the parties.
92. Thus, if an Arbitrator's award is not challenged within 30 days from the date of the award, NHAI
would be bound to ensure that instructions are in place for withdrawal by the Competent Authority.
- 34 -
93. The consequence of this stipulated timeline is that the NHAI, if it wants to be discharged of the
obligation to ensure the facilitation of withdrawal of the amount by the Competent Authority will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 13
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
have to necessarily file an application under Section 34 of the A & C act, challenging the award of the
Arbitrator within 30 days.
94. This, no doubt, may lead to an anomalous situation where the time limit provided for making an
application under Section 34 of the A & C Act to challenge the award is sought to be curtailed or
reduced. However, on closer scrutiny, this would not be true. This is because the time limit
stipulated to the NHAI under this Rule is to only ensure the Competent Authority is facilitated to
withdraw and disburse the compensation and not for challenging the award.
95. If the NHAI wants to be discharged of the obligation to facilitate the withdrawal, then, it would
have to make an application under Section 34 of the A & C Act
- 35 -
within 30 days of the award made by the Arbitrator. If NHAI does not make an application under
Section 34 of the A & C Act within 30 days, it will invite the statutory obligation to facilitate the
withdrawal of the compensation amount by the Competent Authority. This, therefore, does not in
any way alter the time limit for challenging the award under Section 34 of the A & C Act.
96. Having regard to the fact that the Act is a special statute, whereby arbitration is statutorily
imposed, the prescription of a distinct timeline would also be permissible.
97. However, in the present case, this provision relating to deposit pursuant to the award of the
Arbitrator will not arise at all. This is because, under the Rules, the requirement to deposit within 30
days would arise only if the amount awarded by the Arbitrator is in excess of the amount determined
by the Competent Authority. In this case, the Arbitrator has only confirmed the order of the
Competent Authority awarding Rs.12,916 per sq. mtr. and
- 36 -
it has not awarded any amount in excess of the amount awarded by the Competent Authority. Thus,
the question of applying this exception to withhold payment of compensation would not at all arise.
98. As a consequence, the argument of NHAI that it had the option of withholding the compensation
since it had decided to challenge the award passed by the Arbitrator is without any merit and
deserves to be rejected.
99. It is no doubt true, that the provisions of the Act may amount to frustrating the right of NHAI to
challenge the award of the Arbitrator, if the land loser is permitted to withdraw the amount.
However, if the statute, by clear and express terms, contemplates a withdrawal of the compensation
even before the time limits to challenge the award expires, the said statutory mandate cannot be
nullified.
- 37 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 14
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
100. The only option available to NHAI in such cases is to ensure that it challenges the order of the
Competent Authority within 15 days or within 30 days from the date of the award of the Arbitrator
and obtain an interim order restraining the Competent Authority from disbursing the
compensation. If this is not done by NHAI, the inevitable consequence would be that the Competent
Authority should be facilitated to withdraw the amount and disburse the same to the land loser.
101. In this case, the Competent Authority passed its order determining the compensation on
05.02.2011 and the amount was required to be deposited on or before 12.02.2011 as per the 1998
Rules. This, has however, not been done.
102. The Arbitrator, after the order of remand, passed his award on 16.03.2019 rejecting the claim of
NHAI and upholding the order of the Competent Authority. Thus, NHAI was required to facilitate
the withdrawal by
- 38 -
the Competent Authority within 30 days i.e., on or before 15.04.2019.
103. As stated above, this date of passing of the Arbitrator's award on 16.03.2019 would not be
relevant for the deposit, since the Arbitrator did not award any amount in excess of the amount
determined by the Competent Authority.
104. Lastly, the District Court dismissed the application filed by NHAI on 03.02.2022 and the
applications for correction, etc., were also dismissed on 04.07.2022 and assuming for the sake of
argument, that 04.07.2022 is the starting point, even then, NHAI was required to ensure the
withdrawal of the compensation amount by the Competent Authority on or before 03.08.2022.
105. Admittedly, NHAI has failed to ensure the deposit was made within 7 days of the original
decision of the Competent Authority i.e., before 12.02.2011.
- 39 -
106. The NHAI has also not ensured that the Competent Authority was enabled to withdraw the
amount within 30 days from 04.07.2022, the date of the Arbitrator's award and admittedly no
interim order has been granted by the District Court restraining the Competent Authority to
disburse the compensation.
107. The NHAI has, on the other hand, contended that it had a right not to release the payment since
the applications filed under the A & C act were still pending adjudication. This is clearly
impermissible for the reasons enumerated above.
108. In this view of the matter, it is hereby held that the Competent Authority does not possess the
jurisdiction to refuse payment of compensation awarded to the land- loser and the Competent
Authority cannot also seek for the opinion of the Executing Agency for disbursal of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 15
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
compensation and refuse payment based on the opinion of the Executing Agency.
- 40 -
109. Consequently, the impugned endorsements dated 20.05.2022 and 20.09.2022 at Annexures-F
and F1 respectively issued by the Competent Authority to refuse payment cannot be sustained and
the same are quashed.
110. The NHAI shall, therefore, discharge its statutory obligation to facilitate the Competent
Authority to withdraw the compensation amount determined by the Competent Authority and
disburse the compensation to the land loser.
111. Since the NHAI has withheld the compensation payable to the landowner, it would have to
necessarily be liable to pay interest on the compensation which became payable from 12.02.2011 till
the date of payment. Since Section 3H(5) of the Act prescribes interest at 9% per annum on the
excess amount awarded by the Arbitrator, in my view, it would be just and proper to direct NHAI to
pay interest at 9% per annum on the compensation amount determined by the Competent Authority
from
- 41 -
12.02.2011 i.e., the date which it became payable till the date of payment.
112. The NHAI is directed to ensure that this entire process of payment of compensation to the
petitioner- landowner is completed within 30 days from the date of receipt of this order.
Writ Petition is accordingly allowed.
SD JUDGE 3H.Deposit and payment of amount- (1) The amount determined under section 3G shall
be deposited by the Central Government in such manner as may be laid down by rules made in this
behalf by that Government, with the competent authority before taking possession of the land. (2)
As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under sub-section (1), the competent
authority shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the amount to the person or persons
entitled thereto. (3) Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount deposited under
sub-section (1), the competent authority shall determine the persons who in its opinion are entitled
to receive the amount payable to each of them.
(4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or any part thereof or to any person
to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authority shall refer the dispute to
the decision of the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose jurisdiction
the land is situated. (5) Where the amount determined under section 3G by the arbitrator is in
excess of the amount determined by the competent authority, the arbitrator may award interest at
nine per cent. per annum on such excess amount from the date of taking possessions under section
3D till the date of the actual deposit thereof.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 16
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
- 42 -
(6) Where the amount determined by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount determined by the
competent authority, the excess amount together with interest, if any, awarded under sub-section
(5) shall be deposited by the Central Government in such manner as may be laid down by rules
made in this behalf by that Government, with the competent authority and the provisions of
sub-sections (2) to (4) shall apply to such deposit.
G.S.R. 12(E)- In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (aa) of sub-section (2) of section 9 of the
National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956), the Central Government hereby makes the following
rules, namely:-
1. Short, title and commencement:- (1) These rules may be called the National
Highways (manner of depositing the amount by the Central Government with the
competent authority for acquisition of land) Rules, 1998.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. The manner of depositing money with the competent authority,-
(1) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the executing agency authorised by the Central Government
in this behalf shall deposit,-
(a) the amount determined under section 3G of the Act, and
(b) where the amount determined by the arbitrator under Section 3G of the Acts is in excess of the
amount determined by the competent authority, the excess amount together with interest, if any,
awarded by the arbitrator, within seven days of such determination or award by the competent
authority or by the arbitrator, as the case may be, with the competent authority through demand
draft. (2) The competent authority shall deposit the amount received under sub-rule (I) in a separate
Public Deposit Account in the Public Account of India and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4) of
section 3H of the Act shall apply to such deposit. Explanation- For the purpose of this rule,-
(a) 'Act' means the National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956)
(b) the expression 'executing agency' shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under clause (d)
of rule 2 of the National Highways Rules, 1957. 2019 Rules- (3) The manner of making requisite
funds available to the competent authority shall be as follows:-
(i) Subject to provisions of the Act, the executing agency authorised by the Central
Central Government in this behalf, shall open and maintain an account with one or
more Scheduled Commercial Banks for remittance of the amount for land acquisition
across the country, with arrangements for access to such account by the competent
authority for specific jurisdiction as per authorisation of limits by the executing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 17
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
agency. The executing Agency shall, on the demand raised by the competent
authority before announcement of the Award, issue requisite authorisation limits in
favour of the competent authority for withdrawal of amount from such account as per
requirement from time to time for disbursement to the landowners or persons
interested therein through an electronic banking machanism as per extant Reserve
Bank of India regulations and the said authorisation limits, revolving in nature, shall
entitle the competent authority to withdraw money from such account as per
requirements, without any further reference to the land acquiring agency, for
disbursement to the landowners or persons interested therein, as follows:-
- 43 -
(a) The amount determined under section 3(G) of the Act within fifteen days of the
raising of demand by the competent authority, and
(b) Where the amount determined by the Arbitrator under sub-
section (7) of Section 3G of the Act is in excess of the amount determined by the competent
authority, the excess amount, together with interest, if any, awarded by the Arbitrator, within 30
days of the communication of Arbitrator's award, unless such Award has been further challenged by
either of the aggrieved parties.
Explanation: The authorisation limits, revolving in nature, are explained with the help of an
illustration as under:-
Say, the amount of award is Rs.200 crore for which the CALA places demand on the
acquiring/executing agency. The executing agency shall issue an authorisation in
favour of CALA to draw an amount up to Rs.200 crore from the Central account, in
limits of Rs.50.00 crore at any point in time. As the CALA keeps disbursing the
amount, the limit of Rs.50.00 crore shall keep getting automatically recouped and so
on till the utilisation of total amount of authorisation of Rs.200 Crore.
(ii) The executing agency, authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, shall
ensure that the requisite account is maintained with a Scheduled Commercial Bank,
against which an authorisation limit is issued in favour of the competent authority for
disbursement of the compensation amount, duly determined under Section 3(G) of
the Act, to the landowners or persons interested therein. Further, the said
authorisation limit shall be utilised by the competent authority for the intended
purpose of disbursement and shall be duly reflected in the books of accounts of the
executing agency for the purpose of proper monitoring the reconciliation thereof and
any interest earned therein shall be credited into the said account and shall belong to
the executing agency.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 18
T Younis S/O Haji T Ameersab vs Special Land Acquisition Officer on 6 January, 2023
(iii) In cases where the executing agency of a project is any State Government of
Union territory, the amount shall preferably be disbursed through the Public
Financial Management System of the Ministry of Finance.
(iv) The competent authority shall, in turn, disburse the compensation amount to the
landowners of the persons interested therein preferably by electronically crediting
the said amount into their respective bank accounts.
SD JUDGE Vnp/pks*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143915188/ 19
