Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on
22 May, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr.No.2
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP (Cri) No. 77/2022
Reserved on : 19.04.2023
Pronounced on :22.05.2023
Tabrez Hussain alias Tabrez, Age 30 Years, S/o ....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Mohd Iqbal R/o W.No.7, Muslim Mohalla Reasi,
District Reasi (presently lodged in Central Jail
Kot Bhalwal, Jammu)Through his father Mohd
Igbal.
Through :- Sh. S$.S. Ahmed, Advocate
Vis
1. Union Territory of J ammu & Kashmir rough .... Respondent(s)
Home Department, Civil Secretariat, 4k ammu;
The Divisional 1 Commissioner, Ji
Aw
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
questioning the legality, propriety and correctness of impugned detention order No. PIT NDPS-14 of
2022 dated 17.09.2022 passed by respondent No. 2 (Divisional Commissioner Jammu)_alongwith
the proceedings conducted u/s 3 of the Prevention of Ulicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substance Act 1988 (PIT NDPS) r/w SRO 247 of 1998 dated 27.07.1988, and has
sought the quashment of the impugned detention order and mandamus to the respondents to
release the petitioner forthwith on the following grounds:-
(i) that the petitioner is a law abiding, peace loving and respectable citizen of India
and is a Boomer Operator has been serving in NEC Company at Uttrakhand and prior
to this the petitioner was serving with Gammon Company at Gool for the
construction of railway track;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 1
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
(ii) that unfortunately the petitioner was falsely implicated in case FIR No. 172/2021
u/ss 8/20/21/22 NDPS Act of Police Station Reasi wherein the allegation is of the
alleged recovery of two challis of charas and similarly similar allegations have been
leveled in yet another FIR No. 191/2021 u/s 8/20/21/22/29 NDPS Act of Police
Station Reasi, however, in both these cases the quantity was non-commercial, as
such, petitioner as such was granted bail by the Court of Sessions Judge Reasi;
(iii) that all of a sudden without any lawful justification the respondent No.2 on the
recommendation of respondent No.3 vide detention Order No. PITNDPS-14 of 2022
dated 17.09.2022 ordered the detention of the petitioner under Section 3 of the
Prevention of Ilicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act 1988
and presently the petitioner is lodged at Central Jail Kot Bhalwal Jammu;
(iv) that in the dossier of District Police Headquarter Reasi it was wrongly projected
that petitioner is a notorious drug peddler who is involved in drug
trafficking/possession of narcotic substances leading to spread of drug addiction
among the general public especially youth of the area, whereas, as already pointed
out the petitioner is a Boomer Operator and not a drug paddler;
(v) that the petitioner is illiterate and cannot write or read, and from his wife has only
learnt to write three alphabets "Tab" as mark of his signatures and is only versed with
Dogri/Punjabi/Urdu Languages, petitioner has been provided the whole material i.e.
detention order No. PIT NDPS 14 of 2022 dated 17-09-2022 with grounds of
detention and copies of dossiers alongwith copy of FIRs, FSL report, seizure memo,
copies of challan in Hindi Language, all these documents are in English or Hindi
Language and the petitioner was entitled to such documents in translated form in
Dogri/Punjabi/Urdu, non-supply of these relevant material has vitiated the detention
of petitioner;
(vi) that the detention of the petitioner is also illegal and vitiated on the grounds that
the Detaining Authority has deliberately and intentionally preferred not to inform the
petitioner that he can make representation to the Detaining Authority itself, and if
the Detaining Authority would have provided all the materials in the language
understood by the petitioner and informed the petitioner about the right to make a
representation before the Detaining Authority, the petitioner would have been in a
position to make an effective representation before the Detaining Authority and the
petitioner would has apprised the Detaining Authority about the correct factual
position and would have cleared all the suspicions/speculations raised against the
petitioner by the sponsoring authority, and in view of this fact that Detaining
Authority did not inform the petitioner about making representation before the
Detaining Authority, the order of detention is required to be quashed and set aside
being illegal, void-abinito and against the settled position of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 2
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
2. Respondent No. 2 (Divisional Commissioner Jammu) has filed counter, wherein passing of the
impugned detention order has been defended, and it has been specifically pleaded, that the
petitioner/detenue has been detained for his repeated and continuous involvement in the Illicit
Traffic of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances which poses serious threat to the health and
welfare of the people and has deleterious effect on the national economy, the detention order was
passed by him only after careful examination of the dossier, the relevant record made available by
SSP Reasi and after following due procedure of law under the relevant provisions of the Prevention
of Hlicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1988. It is contended, that the
detention warrant was duly executed upon the petitioner/detenue and the copy of the detention
warrant, grounds of detention and other relevant record was read over and explained to the
petitioner/detenue in the language he understands and the above documents were handed over to
the petitioner who was informed about his right to make representation to the Government as well
as to the detaining authority against the order of detention.
Sh. S.S. Ahmed, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner/ detenue, has sought the setting aside
of the impugned detention order by vehemently articulating arguments, that petitioner/detenue has
been supplied whole material i.e. detention order alongwith communication dated 17.09.2022,
grounds of detention, copies of dossier, copies of FIRs, FSL report, seizure memo, supurdnama (in
Hindi) but all these documents are in English/Hindi, petitioner was entitled to all such documents
in translated form either in Dogri/Punjabi/Urdu and by not supplying the essential material,
petitioner's right to make effective representation to the Government or detaining authority has
been violated/infringed under Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of the J&K
Public Safety Act 1978, and such failure on part of the detaining authority to supply the essential
material vitiates whole of the detention order. It is argued, that the detaining authority has not
considered the fact that petitioner has already been bailed out by the competent courts, detention
order has been passed by detaining authority without application of mind which makes the
detention order void ab-initio and liable to be set aside. To support his arguments, learned counsel
has relied upon the judgment of the Coordinate Bench of this Court viz; WP (Cri) No. 44/2022,
decided on 07.02.2023 [Vishal Sharma alias Vishu vs Union Territory of J&K & Ors].
Sh. Suneel Malhotra, learned GA has vehemently supported the impugned detention order against
the petitioner and has sought its affirmation by projecting arguments, that the petitioner/detenue is
involved in as many as two FIRs viz; G) FIR No. 172/2021 under Section 8/20/21/22 NDPS Act of
Police Station Reasi & Gi) FIR No. 191/2021 under Sections 8/20/21/22/29 NDPS Act Police Station
Reasi, wherein from his possession contraband heroine has been recovered on different dates of
occurrences. It is argued, that petitioner/detenue is habitual criminal involved in illicit trafficking
leading to spread of drug addiction among the general public especially the youth of the area, the
criminal activities of the petitioner/detenue are prejudicial to the society at large besides
detrimental to the peace and tranquility and menace to the public order, petitioner/detenue is
engaged in sale and purchase of illicit traffic in narcotics drugs and psychotropic substances which
poses a serious threat to the health and lives of the young generation, petitioner/detenue has close
nexus with the gang of criminals involved in illicit trafficking of drugs in clandestine manner to earn
huge and easy bucks and has spread the network of drug peddling in the entire UT of J&K. It is
moreso argued, that petitioner/detenue has no respect for law and order and public tranquility
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 3
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
causing serious threats prejudicial to the security of UT of J&K, keeping in view the continuous and
repeated involvement of the petitioner/detenue in the narcotic trade, respondent No. 3 vide his
endorsement No. Pros/Dossier-07/2022/41156-59 dated 10.09.2022 recommended the detention of
the petitioner/detenue to prevent him from indulging in illicit traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, and in a view to prevent the petitioner/detenue from further committing
any illicit trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and to secure the health and welfare of public at large
petitioner/detenue has been rightly and correctly detained under Section 3 of The Prevention of
Hlicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1988 t/w SRO 247 dated
27.07.1988. It is argued, that as per the detention record, petitioner has been supplied all the
essential detention record including the copies of detention order (02 leaves), notice of detention
(O01. leaf), grounds of detention (02 leaves), Dossier of detention (06 leaves), copies of FIR,
statements of witnesses and other related relevant documents (25 leaves) [Total 36 leaves] through
Executing Officer Inspector Kulbir Singh PID No. EXJ-005622 of Police Station Reasi, moreso, the
impugned detention order has been read over in English and explained to the petitioner/detenue in
Hindi/Dogri language understood by him fully, and he has also been informed of his right to make
representation to the Government as well to the Detaining Authority if he desires, the order of
detention has been passed by respondent No. 2 on 19.09.2022 and the same has been executed upon
the petitioner without any delay.
. I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the averments of the petition, counter
affidavit filed by the respondent No. 2, detention record made available by the respondents and the
relevant law on the subject matter coupled with the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for
petitioner.
6. The 1" argument canvassed by learned counsel for the petitioner is, that the petitioner has not
been supplied with essential material of detention record which has debarred him from making
effective representation to the Government or to the detaining authority which has vitiated the
detention order. It is apt to reiterate here, that bare perusal of the detention record clearly
demonstrates that the impugned detention order No. PIT NDPS-14 of 2022 passed by respondent
No. 2 (Divisional Commissioner Jammu) on 17.09.2022 on the strength of material like dossier
submitted by respondent No. 3 (SSP Reasi) vide his endorsement No. Pros/Dossier-07/2022/41156-
59 dated 10.09.2022 has been supplied to the petitioner. The grounds of detention have been clearly
delineated by respondent No. 2 which reads as under: -
"You Tabrez Hussain @ Tabrez S/o Mohd Igbal caste Mir R/o W.No.07 Muslim
Mohalla District Reasi aged 29 years, as per dossier of Senior Superintendent of
Police Reasi do hereby inform that you are a notorious criminal/Drug
peddler/habitual smuggler engaged in the sale and purchase of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances which poses a serious threat to the lives
of young generation. Your criminal act is spoiling the future of youth of the area by
providing/supplying the contraband substance to them and posing a serious threat to
the lives of young generation of the country and even to the economy of the Union
Territory of J&K. Some of your criminal activities which are highly prejudicial to the
maintenance of the public order and UHlicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 4
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
Psychotropic Substances are enumerated as under:-
1. FIR No. 172/202 1 U/S 8/20/21/22 NDPS Act of P/S Reasi:-
On 01.09.2021, SPO Jamal Din, posted at Naka Simbal Chowak Reasi has produced a
docket written by HC Surinder Kumar in P/S Reasi that during naka checking duty at
Naka Simbal Chowak Reasi at about 00.15 hrs, you were riding on scooty bearing
registration No. JK20-7967 coming from Katra towards Reasi side. On seeking police
party, you tried to escape from the spot, on suspicion, the police officials chased your
scooty and took you under custody. During enquiry your disclosed your identity as
Tabrez Hussain @ Tabrez S/o Mohd Iqbal caste Mir R/o W.No.07 Muslim Mohalla
District Reasi. During your personal search, police personnel recovered Chitta like
substances in aluminum foil paper and two challis of "Charas" like substances from
the right pocket of your pent. On_ this information, the instant case was registered
against you at P/S Reasi. After completion of all required/legal formalities in the
instant case the challan has been produced before the competent court of law.
2. FIR No. 191/2021 U/S 8/21/22/29 NDPSAct of P/S Reasi:-
On 25.09.2021, Sgct Mahroof Ahmed reported at P/S Reasi that during patrolling
duty along with nafri posted at Naka SimbalChowaReasithat during naka checking
duty at Naka Simbal Chowak Reasi at about 00.15 hrs, onescooty bearing registration
No. JK20-7967 coming from Katra towards Reasi side driven by you. On seeking
police party, you alaongwith your accomplice tried to escape from the spot, however,
the naka police chased you and apprehended you and your accomplice. During
enquiry you disclosed your identity as Tabrez Hussain @ Tabrez S/o Mohd Iqbal
caste Mir R/o W.No.07 Muslim Mohalla District Reasi and your accomplice disclosed
his identity as Sajad Ahmed S/o Abdul Aziz caste Manhas. During your personal
search, police has recovered Chitta like substances in aluminum foil paper and two
challis of "Charas" like substances from the right pocket of your pent. On this
information, the instant case was registered against you at P/S Reasi. After
completion of all required/legal formalities the challan has been produced before the
competent court of law on 30.10.2021.
Keeping in view your continuous and repeated involvement in criminal as well as
Narcotic Ssubstance cases, Sr. Superintendent of Police, Reasi has recommended that
you may be detained under the provisions of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
From the facts and circumstances mentioned above, it is evident that you are a
drugpeddler involved in possession and transportation of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, which as per Section 2 of The Prevention of [hicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 means "illicit traffic", such
"illicit traffic" poses serious threat to the health and welfare of the peopleofUnion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 5
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
Territory of J&K at large.
Now, therefore, with a view to prevent you from further committing any offence of
Hlicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and to secure the health
and welfare of public at large, | have reached to the conclusion that it has become
imperative to detain you U/S 3 of The Prevention of Hlhcit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988".
Detention record further demonstrates that the order of detention dated 17.09.2022
has been served upon the petitioner/detenue without any delay, whereby, the copies
of detention order (O02 leaves), notice of detention (Q1 leaf), grounds of detention
(02 leaves), Dossier of detention (06 leaves), copies of FIR, statements of witnesses
and other related relevant documents (25 leaves) [Total 36 leaves] through Executing
Officer Inspector Kulbir Singh PID No. EXJ-005622 of Police Station Reasi and
receipt thereof has been given by the petitioner/detenue by writing his name in
English which clearly indicates that the petitioner understands English language also.
Moreso, the execution report depicts that the contents of detention warrant and grounds of
detention have been read over to the petitioner/detenue in English and also explained to him in
Hindi/Dogri language which he fully understands and in lieu thereof petitioner has appended his
signature on the execution report. In view of the detailed record submitted by the respondents it is
discernable, that the petitioner/detenue has been supplied whole of the detention record/essential
material so as to enable him to make effective representation against the said detention order before
the Government or Detaining Authority and therefore, no right much less any right of the petitioner
guaranteed to him under Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of Public Safety
Act has been violated. The arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner that non-supply of
record/documents/ essential material to the petitioner has debarred him from making effective
representation are far from reality, legally unsustainable, repelled, rejected and discarded.
. The 2™ argument urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is, "that the petitioner has been
supplied the record of detention/the grounds of detention by detaining authority in English
language which is not understood by the petitioner who only understands Dogri/Urdu Language,
thereby, has seriously prejudiced the right of the petitioner to make effective representation before
the detaining authority thereby vitiating the detention order''.
It is pertinent to mention here, that the detention record on its bare perusal demonstrates that the
detention order dated 17.09.2022 passed by respondent No. 02 has been executed by Inspector
Kulbir Singh PID No. EXJ- 005622 of Police Station Reasi who took the custody of petitioner on
19.09.2022. The notice of detention, contents of detention warrant and grounds of detention have
been read over to petitioner/detenue in English language and explained to him in Hindi/Dogri
language which has been fully understood by the petitioner and in lieu whereof petitioner has signed
in English. Moreso, as many as 36 leaves of detention record has been supplied to the petitioner who
has been informed to make representation to the Government as well as to the detaining authority
against the detention order if he desires. In WP (Crl) No. 44/2022, decided on 07.02.2023 [Vishal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 6
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
Sharma alias Vishu vs Union Territory of J&K & Ors] relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, detention
order of the detenue was quashed on the ground, that from the date of registration of last FIR
against the detenue on 26-02-2021, the dossier was submitted by SSP Jammu dated 29-08-2022
after an interval of 18 months. Facts of the case law relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner are
distinguishable from the case in hand. The arguments of learned counsel for petitioner that the
impugned detention order has not been communicated to the petitioner and made him understood
in the language which he understands is far from reality, misconceived under law, dismissed and
rejected.
. Although right of personal liberty is most precious right, guaranteed under the Constitution, which
has been held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a person independent of the
Constitution, yet the personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal charge or is
convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. A person is not to be deprived of his
personal liberty except in accordance with procedure established under law and the procedure as
laid down in Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India, (1978 AIR SC 597), is to be just and fair. Where a
person is facing trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his personal liberty owing
to criminal charge framed against him, he has an opportunity to defend himself and to be acquitted
of the charge in case prosecution fails to bring home his guilt. Where such person is convicted of
offence, he still has satisfaction of having been given adequate opportunity to contest the charge and
also adduce evidence in his defence. However, framers of the Constitution have by incorporating
Article 22 (5) in the Constitution left room for detention of a person without a formal charge and
trial and without such person held guilty of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment by a
competent court. Its aim and object is to save the society from activities that are likely to deprive a
large number of people of their right to life and personal liberty. In such a case it would be
dangerous for the people at large to wait and watch as by the time ordinary law is set into motion,
the person having dangerous designs, would execute his plans, exposing general public to risk and
causing colossal damage to life and property. It is for that reason, necessary to take preventive
measures and prevent the person bent upon to perpetrate mischief from translating his ideas into
action. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India, therefore, leaves scope for enactment of preventive
detention law.
The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is not to punish him
for something he has done, but to prevent him from doing it. The basis of detention is the
satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of likelihood of detenue acting in a manner
similar to his past acts and preventing him by detention from doing the same. The Supreme Court in
Haradhan Saha vs. State of W.B. (1975) 3 SCC 198, points out that a criminal conviction, on the
other hand, is for an act already done, which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There
is no parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the Act. One is a
punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one case, a person 1s punished to prove his guilt
and the standard is proof, beyond reasonable doubt, whereas in preventive detention a man is
prevented from doing something, which is necessary for reasons mentioned in the Act, to prevent.
10.Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978,
guarantee safeguard to detenue to be informed, as soon as may be, of grounds on which order of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 7
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
detention is made, which led to the subjective satisfaction of detaining authority and also to be
afforded earliest opportunity of making representation against order of detention. Detenue is to be
furnished with sufficient particulars to enable him to make a representation, which on being
considered, may obtain relief to him. Detention record, made available by learned counsel for
respondents, reveals that detention order was made on proper application of mind, to the facts of
the case and detenue was delivered at the time of execution of detention order, the material and
grounds of detention and also informed that he had a right to represent against his preventive
detention. Perusal of detention order depicts its execution. It further reveals, that the copy of
detention warrant, grounds of detention, notice of detention, copy of dossier etc. were received by
the petitioner-detenue which were read over and explained to. detenue in Hindi/Dogri languages,
which detenue understood fully in token of which the signatures of detenue had been obtained. It
also divulges that detenue was informed that he can make representation to the government and
detatning authority. The grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity.
The detenue has been informed with sufficient clarity what actually weighed with Detaining
Authority while passing detention order. Detaining Authority has narrated facts and figures that
made the authority to exercise its powers under Section 8 J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and record
subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be placed under preventive detention in order to
prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
11.Further, although grounds of detention are by and large is replica of dossier, yet one cannot lose
sight of the fact that two (02) FIRs have been lodged against the petitioner/detenue under various
sections of the NDPS Act which made basis to book him under the Public Safety Act, so as to prevent
him from acting in a manner similar to his past acts or engaging in activities prejudicial to security
of the State or maintenance of public order. Further, the sponsoring authority has not only supplied
the material, viz; dossier, containing gist of the activities of the detenue, but has also supplied the
material in the shape of FIRs. All this material was before the detaining authority when it arrived at
subjective satisfaction that activities of the detenue were prejudicial to maintenance of public order
and requires preventive detention of detenue. Further, if in any given case a single act is found to be
not sufficient to sustain the order of detention that may well be quashed, but it cannot be stated as a
principle that one single act cannot constitute the basis for detention. On the contrary, it does. In
other words, it is not necessary that there should be multiplicity of grounds for making or sustaining
an order of detention. The same views and principles were reiterated by the Apex Court in Goutam
Jain vs. Union of India, AIR 2017 SC 230. In the present case, the petitioner- detenue seems to be a
notorious criminal and has become a terror figure among the people of the area as against him two
FIRscame to be registered in police station, Reasi under various sections of the NDPS Act in the year
2021. Since the actions taken against the petitioner-detenue under the ordinary law from time to
time have not been proved to be deterrent, as such the respondents had no other option but to keep
him in preventive detention.
12.Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the Founding Fathers
enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the State to detain
a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanizing the harsh
authority over individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic power to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 8
Tabrez Hussain Alias Tabrez vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 22 May, 2023
detain a person without trial for security of the State and/or maintenance of public order must be
strictly construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of the
security of the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger
interest of the nation. These observations have been made by the Supreme Court in The Secretary to
Government, Public (Law and Order-F) and another vs. Nabila and another (2015) 12 SCC 127.
13.In the present case the petitioner has been involved (02) FIRs viz; (i) FIR No. 172/2021 of Police
Station Reasi & Gi) FIR No. 191/2021 of Police Station Reasi. In FIR No. 172/2021 U/S 8/20/21/22
NDPS Act registered with Police Station Reasi wherein Chitta like substances in aluminum foil
paper and two challis of Charas like substances have been affected from the petitioner. In FIR No.
191/2021 U/S 8/21/22/29 NDPS Act registered with Police Station Reasi, wherein Chitta like
substances in aluminum foil paper and two challis of Charas like substances have been affected from
the petitioner along with one other person Sajad Ahmed S/o Abdul. From the bare perusal of the
FIRs and the allegations therein against the petitioner, it is discernable, that the petitioner is a
notorious criminal, has become a terror figure among the people of the area, the actions taken
against him under ordinary law from time to time have not been proved to be deterrent. It seems
that petitioner/detenue instead of mending his ways has continuously been indulging in criminal
activities and has not shown any respect for the law of the land, as such, the petitioner/detenue has
created a sense of alarm, scare and a feeling of insecurity in the minds of the public of the area, has
become a chronic fear amongst the people of the area. Thus, the activities of the petitioner are of
notorious criminal and habitual of indulging in acts of illicit traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances cases. The record so produced reveals that the petitioner/detenue has been
indulging in illegal trade in an organized manner, which is a great threat for sustaining the
conservative values of the society and the drug trafficking also possess great threat to the society for
the reason that the proceeds of the drug sale can be utilized for financing of other criminal activities,
hence, petitioner has been rightly detained by Respondent No. 2.
14.For the foregoing discussion, the petition sans any merit and is accordingly, dismissed alongwith
connected application(s), if any.
15.Registry to return the detention record against proper receipt.
16.Disposed off accordingly.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Srinagar 22.05.2023 Issaq Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No Whether the
order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108670251/ 9
