Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10
February, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr.No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 37/2022
CrlM No. 5312/2022
Reserved on : 15.12.2022
Pronounced on : 10.02.2023
Talib Hussain, Age 28 Years; ....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
S/o Sh. Noor Alam, R/o Village Sirla Bhaga,
Tehsil and District Reasi;
Through his father Noor Alam
Through :- Mr. Sandeep Singh, Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir through
Financial Commissioner Home Department, ....Respondent(s)
J&K Government, Civil Secretariat, Srinagar;
2. Divisional Commissioner, Jammu (Detaining
Authority);
3. Senior Superintendent of Police, Reasi;
4. Superintendent, Central Jail, Kot Bhalwal,
Jammu;
Through :- Mr. Suraj Singh, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
questioning the legality, propriety and correctness of impugned detention order No. PIT NDPS-02
of 2022 dated 18.04.2022 passed by respondent No. 2 - Divisional Commissioner Jammu alongwith
the proceedings conducted under Section 3 of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substance Act 1988 (PIT NDPS) r/w SRO 247 of 1998 dated 27.07.1988 and has
sought the quashment of the impugned detention order on the following grounds:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 1
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
i. that the essential material/documents viz copies of FIR alleged in the dossier, site
plan, statements of prosecution witnesses recorded under 161 Cr.PC have not been
supplied to the petitioner which has prevented him to make effective representation
before the Government/detaining authority, non-supply of such documents/material
amounts to infraction of constitutional right of petitioner guaranteed under Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of J&K Public Safety Act which
vitiates the detention order; ii. that the detaining authority has not considered the
fact that petitioner has already been bailed out by the competent courts, the
detention order has been passed by the detaining authority without application of
mind which makes the detention order void ab-initio and liable to be set aside; iii.
that the order of detention is bad on the ground that the same is required to be
passed in the language which the detenue understands, however, respondent No. 02 -
detaining authority while passing the impugned detention order has framed the same
in English language which is not understood to the petitioner thereby has seriously
prejudiced the right of petitioner.
2. Respondent No. 2 - Divisional Commissioner Jammu, has filed counter, wherein passing of the
impugned detention order has been defended, and it has been specifically pleaded, that the
petitioner/detenue is involved in Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances which
poses serious threat to the health and welfare of the people and has deleterious effect on the national
economy, the detention order was passed by him only after careful examination of the dossier, the
relevant record made available by SSP Reasi vide his communication No.
Pros/Dossier-04/2022/16260-63 dated 13.04.2022 and after following due procedure of law under
the relevant provisions of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act 1988. It is contended that the detention warrant was duly executed upon the
petitioner/detenue and the copy of the detention warrant, grounds of detention and other relevant
record was read over and explained to the petitioner/detenue in the language he understands and
the above documents were handed over to the petitioner who was informed about his right to make
representation to the Government as well as to the detaining authority against the order of
detention.
3. Mr. Sandeep Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has sought the setting aside of
the impugned detention order by vehemently articulating arguments, that petitioner/detenue has
not been supplied the detention record/material viz; copies of dossier, copies of FIRs, site plan,
recovery memo, statements of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C to enable him to make
effective representation against the impugned detention order, by not supplying the essential
material petitioner/detenue's right to make effective representation to the Government or detaining
authority has been violated/infringed under Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13
of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and such failure on part of the detaining authority to supply the
essential material vitiates whole of the detention order. It is argued, that the detaining authority has
not considered the fact that petitioner has already been bailed out by the competent courts,
detention order has been passed by detaining authority without application of mind which makes
the detention order void ab-initio and liable to be set aside. It is vehemently argued, that the
grounds of detention and dossier have been supplied to the petitioner in English language which he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 2
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
does not understand and the same has caused great prejudice to the petitioner who has been
debarred from making effective representation to the competent authority and on these counts even
the detention order requires to be quashed. To support his arguments, Mr. Sandeep Singh, learned
counsel has relied upon the judgment viz; WP (Crl) No. 55/2021, decided on 23.03.2022 by Jammu
and Kashmir High Court (Jammu Bench) [Hamraz Singh vs. Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir].
4. Mr. Suraj Singh, learned GA has vehemently supported the impugned detention order against the
petitioner and has sought its affirmation by projecting arguments, that the petitioner/detenue is
involved in as many as five FIRs viz; (i) FIR No. 41/2020 under Section 8/22 NDPS Act of Police
Station Reasi, (ii) FIR No. 60/2021 under Sections 8/21/22 NDPS Act Police Station Reasi, (iii) FIR
No. 142/2021 under Sections 8/21/22/29 NDPS Act Police Station Reasi, wherein from his
possession contraband heroine has been recovered on different dates of occurrences. It is argued,
that petitioner/detenue is habitual criminal involved in illicit trafficking leading to spread of drug
addiction among the general public especially the youth of the area, the criminal activities of the
petitioner/detenue are prejudicial to the society at large besides detrimental to the peace and
tranquility and menace to the public order, petitioner/detenue is engaged in sale and purchase of
illicit traffic in narcotics drugs and psychotropic substances which poses a serious threat to the
health and lives of the young generation, petitioner/detenue has close nexus with the gang of
criminals involved in illicit trafficking of drugs in clandestine manner to earn huge and easy bucks
and has spread the network of drug peddling in the entire UT of J&K. It is moreso argued, that
petitioner/detenue has no respect for law and order and public tranquility causing serious threats
prejudicial to the security of UT of J&K, keeping in view the continuous and repeated involvement of
the petitioner/detenue in the narcotic trade, respondent No. 3 vide his endorsement No.
Pros/Dossier-04/2022/16260-63 dated 13.04.2022 recommended the detention of the
petitioner/detenue to prevent him from indulging in illicit traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, and in a view to prevent the petitioner/detenue from further committing
any illicit trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and to secure the health and welfare of public at large
petitioner/detenue has been rightly and correctly detained under Section 3 of The Prevention of
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1988. It is argued, that as per the
detention record the petitioner has been supplied all the essential detention record including the
copies of detention order (02 leaves), notice of detention (01 leaf), grounds of detention (03 leaves),
dossier of detention (07 leaves), copies of FIRs, statement of witnesses and other related relevant
documents (42 leaves) [Total 55 leaves] through Executing Officer Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gautam
Inspector PID No. 006218/EXJ of P/S Reasi, moreso, the impugned detention order has been read
over and explained to the petitioner/detenue in Urdu/Kashmiri language understood by him fully
and he has also been informed of his right to make representation to the Government as well to the
Detaining Authority if he desires, the order of detention has been passed by respondent No. 2 on
18.04.2022 and the same has been executed upon the petitioner without any delay.
5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the averments of the petition, counter
affidavit filed by the respondent No. 2, detention record made available by the respondents and the
relevant law on the subject matter coupled with the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for
petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 3
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
6. Dealing with the first argument canvassed by learned counsel for the petitioner, that he has not
been supplied with essential material of detention record which has debarred him from making
effective representation to the Government or to the detaining authority which has vitiated the
detention order, it is apt to reiterate here, that bare perusal of the detention record clearly
demonstrates that the impugned detention order No. PITNDPS 02 of 2022 has been passed by
respondent No. 2 - Divisional Commissioner Jammu on 18.04.2022 on the strength of material like
dossier submitted by respondent No. 3 - SSP Reasi vide his endorsement No.
Pros/Dossier-04/2022/16260-63 dated 13.04.2022. The grounds of detention have been clearly
delineated by respondent No. 2 which reads as under:-
You Talib Hussain S/o Noor Alam caste Gujjar R/o Sirla Bhaga Tehsil and District
Reasi aged 33 years, as per dossier by Senior Superintendent of Police, Reasi do
hereby inform that you are a habitual criminal and involved in the various
crimes/drug trafficking leading to spread of drug addiction among the general public,
specially youth of the area. That you are acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the
society at large besides detrimental to the peace and tranquility and menace to the
public order. Due to your activities, and your network as well as muscle power, it is
oftently difficult lfor anyone to depose against you before the Police or in the Court of
law. You are engaged in sale and purchase of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances which poses a serious threat to the lives of young generation
of the country and even to the economy of the UT of J&K. You are posing threat to
the security of the UT of J&K and country, also to the health of general public at
large. Reportedly, you are auto driver by profession and have very close nexus with
the gang of criminals who have started illicit trafficking of drugs in a clandestine
manner to earn huge and easy bucks and also have spread the network of drug
peddling in the entire UT of J&K. You are surreptitiously been indulging in criminal
activity like drug mafia inside and outside Reasi District endangering not only the
youth but causing serious threats prejudicial to the security of UT of J&K. Moreover
you are also a History Sheeter of Police Station Reasi.
Some of your criminal activities are highly prejudicial to the maintenance of the
public order and Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances are
enumerated as under:-
1. FIR No. 41/2020 U/S 8/22 NDPS Act of P/S Reasi:-
On 27.04.2020 you were coming from Reasi alongwith other person on motorcycle
bearing registration No. JK20A-3214, stopped for checking, you disclosed your name
Talib Hussain S/o Noor Alam caste Gujjar R/o Sirla Bhaga and pillion as Arun Dev
Thakur S/o Kamail Singh R/o Sirla Bhaga District Reasi. On your personal search, a
silver foil cover was recovered from right pocket of your pent which contains narcotic
like substance Chitta weighing about 05 grams and on the personal search of pillion
rider namely, Arun Dev Thakur S/o Karnail Singh R/o Sirla Bhaga District Reasi
about 05 grams of Chitta like substance wrapped in silver foil was also recovered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 4
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
from his possession. On this case FIR No. 41/2020 u/s 8/22 NDPS Act was registered
at PS Reasi and Investigating Officer, after completion of all required/legal
formalities in the instant case challan produced before the Court of Ld. Principal
Sessions Judge, Reasi.
2. FIR No. 60/2021 U/S 8/21/22 NDPSAct of P/S Reasi:-
On 24.03.2021, during patrolling/checking duty at about 0930 hrs, the police party
found you coming from Katra towards Reasi, on suddenly seeking the police party,
you tried to hide yourself but you was eventually apprehended. On questioning, you
disclosed your identity as Talib Hussain S/o Noor Alam caste Gujjar R/o SirlaBhaga,
Tehsil & District Reasi. During your personal search, Heroin like substance was
recovered from your possession. On this, case FIR No. 60/2021 U/S 8/21/22 NDPS
Act of P/S Reasi and after completion of all required/legal formalities in the case and
the investigation of case closed as challan and produced before the Court of Ld.
Principal Sessions Judge, Reasi.
3. FIR No. 142/2021 U/S 8/21/22/29 NDPS Act of P/S Reasi:-
On 07.07.2021 when the police party was on patrolling duty, laid a naka near Siar
Baba at about 2030 hrs, you along with 03 other persons were coming from Gujjar
Kothi Dhyan Garh towards Talwara on foot. On seeing police party you tried to fled
away from the spot. i/CPP Talwara along with other officials chased all of you and on
enquiry, you along with others disclosed names as
1. Ghulam ali S/o Abdul Kareem caste Gujjar R/o Talwara, 2.
Talib Hussain S/o Noor Alam R/o Sirla Bhaga, 3. Mohd Farooq S/o Ghulam Hussain R/o Tulli Bana
and 4. Mohd Usmann S/o Mohd Iqbal R/o Tulli Banna Tehsil Chassana District Reasi. During the
personal search, 01 Gram Chitta like narcotic substance was recovered from the right pocket of your
pent. During further course of enquiry you along with other accused stated that you have thrown
some of the materials (Chitta like narcotic substance) into the Chenab river. On this case FIR No.
142/2021 u/s 08/21/22/29 NDPS Act was registered at PS Reasi and after completion of all
required/legal formalities in the instant case, the investigation of case closed as challan and
produced before the Court of Ld. Principal Sessions Judge, Reasi.
You have also committed numerous offences in District Reasi and found involved in below
mentioned FIRs registered in PS Reasi.
1. FIR No. 33/2019 u/s 435/457 RPC r/w 4/25 Arms Act.
2. FIR No. 78/2022 u/s 279/304-A IPC,
3. Complaint Preventive measure u/s 110 Cr.PC dated 04.10.2021and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 5
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
4. Complaint Preventive measure u/s 36 Police Act dated 05.10.2021 Keeping in view your
involvement in criminal offences as well as continuous and repeated involvement in narcotic
substance cases, Sr. Superintendent of Police, Reasi vide letter dated 13.04.2022 has recommended
that you may be detained under the provisions of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988, as though you are granted bail in all cases but you are still
indulging in illicit trafficking in narcotic substances.
From above facts and circumstances, it is evident that you are drug peddler involved in repeated
cases of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, which as per Section 2 of The Prevention of
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 means "illicit traffic". Such
"illicit traffic"
poses serious threat to the health and welfare of the people of Union Territory of J&K
at large.
Now, therefore, with a view to prevent you from further committing any offence of
Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances and to secure the health
and welfare of public at large, I have reached to the conclusion that it has become
imperative to detain you U/S 3 of The Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
Detention record further demonstrates that the order of detention dated 18.04.2022
has been served upon the petitioner/detenue without any delay, whereby, the copies
of detention order (02 leaves), notice of detention (01 leaf), grounds of detention (03
leaves), dossier of detention (07 leaves), copies of FIRs, statements of witnesses and
other related relevant documents (42 leaves) [Total 55 leaves] through Executing
officer Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gautam Inspector PID No.006218/EXJ of Police Station
Reasi, and receipt thereof has been given by the petitioner/detenue by writing his
name in English which clearly indicates that the petitioner understands English
language also. Moreso, the execution report depicts that the contents of detention
warrant and grounds of detention have been read over to the petitioner/detenue in
English and also explained to him in Urdu/Kashmiri language which he fully
understands and in lieu thereof petitioner has appended his signature on the
execution report. In view of the detailed record submitted by the respondents, it is
discernable, that the petitioner/detenue has been supplied whole of the detention
record/essential material so as to enable him to make effective representation against
the said detention order before the Government or Detaining Authority and
therefore, no right much less any right of the petitioner guaranteed to him under
Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of Public Safety Act has been
violated. The arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner that non-supply of
record/documents/essential material to the petitioner has debarred him from
making effective representation are far from reality, legally unsustainable, repelled,
rejected and discarded.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 6
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
7. The second argument portrayed by learned counsel for petitioner is, that the
detaining authority has not considered the fact that petitioner has already been
bailed out by competent courts, thereby, the detention order has been passed by the
detaining authority without application of mind which vitiates whole of the detention
order.
Grounds of detention passed by respondent No. 02 dated 18.04.2022 in para 05
clearly depict that the detaining authority has made specific reference of the fact that
petitioner/detenue has been granted bails in all the cases registered against him, but
is still indulging in illicit trafficking in narcotic drugs. The detaining authority at the
time of passing the detention order has considered the fact that petitioner/detenue
was involved in so many FIRs and has been granted bails. The detaining authority
has applied its mind to the facts of the case and the allegations against the petitioner
and has passed the detention order in conformity with the provisions of law.
Arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner that the detention order has been
passed by the detaining authority without application of mind being utterly
misconceived under law are repelled, discarded and rejected.
8. The third argument urged by learned counsel for the petitioner is, that the
petitioner has been supplied the record of detention/the grounds of detention by
detaining authority in English language which is not understood to the petitioner,
thereby, has seriously prejudiced the right of the petitioner vitiating the detention
order.
It is pertinent to mention here, that the detention record on its perusal demonstrates
that the detention order dated 18.04.2022 passed by respondent No. 02 has been
executed by Inspector Rajesh Kumar Gautam PID 006218/Exj of PS Reasi who took
the custody of petitioner on 19.04.2022. The notice of detention and contents of
detention warrant and grounds of detention have been read over to
petitioner/detenue in English language and explained to him in Hindi/Dogri
language which has been fully understood by the petitioner and in lieu whereof
petitioner has signed in English. Moreso, as many as 55 leaves of detention record
has been supplied to the petitioner who has been informed to make representation to
the Government as well as to the detaining authority against the detention order if he
desires. The arguments of learned counsel for petitioner that the impugned detention
order has not been communicated to the petitioner and made him understood in the
language which he understands is far from reality, misconceived under law,
dismissed and rejected. The case law relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner
titled Hamraz Singh vs. Union Territory of J&K [WP (Crl) No. 55/2021] in view of the
facts of the present case is distinguishable and inapplicable to the case in hand.
9. Although right of personal liberty is most precious right, guaranteed under the
Constitution, which has been held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a
person independent of the Constitution, yet the personal liberty may be curtailed,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 7
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
where a person faces a criminal charge or is convicted of an offence and sentenced to
imprisonment. A person is not to be deprived of his personal liberty except in
accordance with procedure established under law and the procedure as laid down in
Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India, (1978 AIR SC 597), is to be just and fair. Where a
person is facing trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his personal
liberty owing to criminal charge framed against him, he has an opportunity to defend
himself and to be acquitted of the charge in case prosecution fails to bring home his
guilt. Where such person is convicted of offence, he still has satisfaction of having
been given adequate opportunity to contest the charge and also adduce evidence in
his defence. However, framers of the Constitution have by incorporating Article 22
(5) in the Constitution left room for detention of a person without a formal charge
and trial and without such person held guilty of an offence and sentenced to
imprisonment by a competent court. Its aim and object is to save the society from
activities that are likely to deprive a large number of people of their right to life and
personal liberty. In such a case it would be dangerous for the people at large to wait
and watch as by the time ordinary law is set into motion, the person having
dangerous designs, would execute his plans, exposing general public to risk and
causing colossal damage to life and property. It is for that reason, necessary to take
preventive measures and prevent the person bent upon to perpetrate mischief from
translating his ideas into action. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India, therefore,
leaves scope for enactment of preventive detention law.
10. The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is
not to punish him for something he has done, but to prevent him from doing it. The
basis of detention is the satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of
likelihood of detenue acting in a manner similar to his past acts and preventing him
by detention from doing the same. The Supreme Court in Haradhan Saha vs. State of
W.B. (1975) 3 SCC 198, points out that a criminal conviction, on the other hand, is for
an act already done, which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There is
no parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the
Act. One is a punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one case, a person is
punished to prove his guilt and the standard is proof, beyond reasonable doubt,
whereas in preventive detention a man is prevented from doing something, which is
necessary for reasons mentioned in the Act, to prevent.
11. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety
Act 1978, guarantee safeguard to detenue to be informed, as soon as may be, of
grounds on which order of detention is made, which led to the subjective satisfaction
of detaining authority and also to be afforded earliest opportunity of making
representation against order of detention. Detenue is to be furnished with sufficient
particulars to enable him to make a representation, which on being considered, may
obtain relief to him. Detention record, made available by learned counsel for
respondents, reveals that detention order was made on proper application of mind, to
the facts of the case and detenue was delivered at the time of execution of detention
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 8
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
order, the material and grounds of detention and also informed that he had a right to
represent against his preventive detention. Perusal of detention order depicts its
execution. It further reveals that the copy of detention warrant, grounds of detention,
notice of detention, copy of dossier etc. were received by the petitioner-detenue
which were read over and explained to detenue in Urdu/Kashmiri languages, which
detenue understood fully in token of which the signatures of detenue had been
obtained. It also divulges that detenue was informed that he can make representation
to the government and detaining authority. The grounds of detention are definite,
proximate and free from any ambiguity. The detenue has been informed with
sufficient clarity what actually weighed with Detaining Authority while passing
detention order. Detaining Authority has narrated facts and figures that made the
authority to exercise its powers under Section 8 J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and
record subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be placed under
preventive detention in order to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial
to the security of the State.
12. Further, although grounds of detention are by and large is replica of dossier, yet
one cannot lose sight of the fact that three (03) FIRs have been lodged against the
petitioner-detenue under various sections of the NDPS Act which made basis to book
him under the Public Safety Act and also involved in other two FIRs and two
Complaints, so as to prevent him from acting in a manner similar to his past acts or
engaging in activities prejudicial to security of the State or maintenance of public
order. Further, the sponsoring authority has not only supplied the material, viz;
dossier, containing gist of the activities of the detenue, but has also supplied the
material in the shape of FIRs. All this material was before the detaining authority
when it arrived at subjective satisfaction that activities of the detenue were
prejudicial to maintenance of public order and requires preventive detention of
detenue. Further, if in any given case a single act is found to be not sufficient to
sustain the order of detention that may well be quashed, but it cannot be stated as a
principle that one single act cannot constitute the basis for detention. On the
contrary, it does. In other words, it is not necessary that there should be multiplicity
of grounds for making or sustaining an order of detention. The same views and
principles were reiterated by the Apex Court in Goutam Jain vs. Union of India, AIR
2017 SC 230. In the present case, the petitioner-detenue seems to be a hard core
criminal and has become a terror figure among the people of the area as against him
five FIRs and two Complaints came to be registered in police station, Reasi under
various sections of the NDPS Act between the period 2019 to the year 2022. Since the
actions taken against the petitioner- detenue under the ordinary law from time to
time have not been proved to be deterrent, as such the respondents had no other
option but to keep him in preventive detention.
13. Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important
than the other freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason
that the Founding Fathers enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 9
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
as to limit the power of the State to detain a person without trial, which may
otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanizing the harsh authority over
individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic power to
detain a person without trial for security of the State and/or maintenance of public
order must be strictly construed. However, where individual liberty comes into
conflict with an interest of the security of the State or public order, then the liberty of
the individual must give way to the larger interest of the nation. These observations
have been made by the Supreme Court in The Secretary to Government, Public (Law
and Order-F) and another vs. Nabila and another (2015) 12 SCC 127.
14. In the present case the petitioner has been involved in many criminal activities
and against him five (05) FIRs and two (02) Complaints viz; (i) FIR No. 41/2020, (ii)
FIR No. 60/2021, (iii) FIR No. 142/2021, (iv) FIR No. 33/2019, (v) FIR No. 78/2022,
under various Sections of the NDPS Act, IPC and Arms Act have been registered in
police stations in District Reasi (vi) Complaint Preventive measures u/s 110 Cr.P.C
and (vii) Complaint Preventive measures u/s 36 Police Act. FIR No. 41/2020 U/S
8/22 NDPS Act is registered with Police Station Reasi and recovery of 10gms of
Chitta has been affected from the petitioner and one Arun Dev Thakur, in FIR No.
60/2021 U/S 8/21/22 NDPS Act registered with Police Station Reasi and Heroin like
substance has been affected from the petitioner, in FIR No. 142/2021 U/S
8/21/22/29 NDPS Act registered with Police Station, Reasi recovery of 01 gms of
Chitta like narcotic substance has been affected from the petitioner and three other
person and during course of enquiry the petitioner stated that they have thrown some
of the materials (Chitta like narcotic substance) into the Chenab river, in FIR No.
33/2019 U/S 435/457 RPC r/w 4/25 Arms Act registered with Police Station Reasi
whereas in FIR No. 78/2022 u/s 279/304-A IPC of P/S registered with Police Station
Reasi. From the bare perusal of the FIRs and the allegations therein against the
petitioner, it is discernable, that the petitioner is a hardcore criminal, has become a
terror figure among the people of the area, the actions taken against him under
ordinary law from time to time have not been proved to be deterrent. It seems that
petitioner/detenue instead of mending his ways has continuously been indulging in
criminal activities and has not shown any respect for the law of the land, as such, the
petitioner/detenue has created a sense of alarm, scare and a feeling of insecurity in
the minds of the public of the area, has become a chronic fear amongst the people of
the area. Thus, the activities of the petitioner are of hardcore criminal and habitual of
indulging in acts of illicit traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
cases. The record so produced reveals that the petitioner/detenue has been indulging
in illegal trade in an organized manner, which is a great threat for sustaining the
conservative values of the society and the drug trafficking also possess great threat to
the society for the reason that the proceeds of the drug sale can be utilized for
financing of other criminal activities, hence, petitioner has been rightly detained by
Respondent No. 2.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 10
Talib Hussain vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 10 February, 2023
15. For the foregoing discussion, the petition sans any merit and is accordingly,
dismissed along with connected application(s), if any.
16. Registry to return the detention record against proper receipt.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Jammu 10.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90596271/ 11
