Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27
December, 2023
Author: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
Bench: Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
Sr. No. 21
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CM(M) No. 237/2023
Tarsem Singh and others
..... petitioner (s)
Through :- Mr. G.S.Thakur Advocate.
V/s
Manbir Singh and others .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Koushal Parihar Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
(27.12.2023.) 1 This is a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of Indian seeking quashment
of order dated 30.11.2023 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Jammu (the appellate
Court) in case Civil Appeal No. 120/2019 titled 'Manbir Singh and ors vs. Tarsem Singh and others
whereby the order dated 26.03.2019 passed by the learned 1st Additional Munsiff (Forest
Magistrate), Jammu (the trial Court) has been set aside. Factual Matrix 2 The respondents filed a
suit for permanent prohibitory injunction restraining the petitioners herein from
encroaching/closing of only pathway/lane measuring 6 ft. wide and approximately 120 ft long
situated at Deharan Jammu approaching towards the house of the respondents. It was submitted
that this was the only pathway leading to the house of the respondents and there was no other way
to enter upon the house of the respondents. In the said suit, the trial Court has granted ad interim
order dated 29.10.2015 by directing the parties to the suit to maintain the status quo with respect to
the suit property and not to obstruct the way of the respondents by any further construction till next
date of hearing which was subsequently vacated on 26.08.2019 and against the said order, the
respondents filed an appeal before the appellate Court which vide its order dated 30.11.2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 1
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
allowed the appeal and directed the parties to the suit to maintain status quo with regard to the suit
land. It is this order of the appellate court which has been challenged by way of this petition.
3 It seems that the petitioners herein have appeared before the trial court and filed their written
statement refuting the claim of the respondents/plaintiffs in terms of the averments contained in
the written statement filed by them before the trial court.
4. The trial Court, on consideration of the matter and after hearing the learned counsel for the
parties, vide its order dated 26.08.2019 observed that the respondents/plaintiffs have failed to make
out a strong prima facie case in their favour seeking temporary injunction. Accordingly, application
seeking interim injunction was dismissed and the order dated 29.10.2015 whereby both the parties
were directed to maintain status quo was vacated. It would be profitable to reproduce the relevant
portion of the said order herein:-
"8. For the aforesaid reasons, this Court is of the considered opinions/applicants
have failed to make out a strong prima facie case in their favour seeking temporary
injunction. Accordingly, application seeking temporary injunction is dismissed. The
order dated 29.10.2015 whereby both the parties were directed to maintain status
quo is hereby vacated. The judgments filed by the applicants in support of their claim
is not applicable in the present case. Nothing stated in the disposal of this application
shall be construed as the expression of opinion on the merits of this case. Application
is disposed of and shall form part of the main file."
5. Feeling aggrieved of the impugned order passed by the trial Court, the respondents/plaintiffs filed
an appeal before the Appellate Court challenging the order dated 26.08.2019 passed by the trial
Court by virtue of which an application under order 39 rule 1 and 2 CPC has been dismissed. The
appellate Court, after hearing the parties, passed the impugned order dated 30.11.2023 allowing the
appeal of the respondents/plaintiffs. The appellate Court observed that the trial Court has
committed grave illegality in refusing injunction to the respondents/appellants. The relevant
portion of the order is reproduced herein, thus:
"In the above backdrop it is worthwhile to mention here that the trial Court has
committed grave illegality in refusing injunction to the plaintiffs/.appellants and the
order passed by the trial Court is not sustainable in the eyes of law and accordingly
the impugned order passed by the trial Court is set aside. Accordingly appeal is
allowed and the parties to the suit are directed to maintain status quo with regard to
the suit lane measuring 6 feetsx120 feets falling under khasra No. 369 situated at
Deharan Jammu till the final decision of the main suit and the
defendants/respondents are restrained from causing any kind of interference in the
user of the said pathway by the plaintiffs/appellants."
6. Aggrieved of the impugned order passed by the appellate Court, the present petition under Article
227 of the Constitution seeking setting aside of the same has been filed inter alia on the grounds that
the impugned order is bad in law; the appellate court has committed the jurisdictional error in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 2
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
disregard of the Apex Court judgments on the point, resulting in gross miscarriage of justice to the
petitioners; the rights of the parties have been decided without protecting the lis and without giving
chance to the parties to contest their claims.
7. Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the submissions made.
8. The learned counsel for the parties during the course of arguments have reiterated the grounds
taken by them in their respective pleadings. The learned counsel for the petitioners referred to and
relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in case titled Assistant Collector of Central
Excise, Chandan Nagar vs. Dunlop India Ltd and others. On the other hand, learned counsel for the
respondents referred to and relied upon the judgment of this Court rendered in case titled Krishan
Chand vs. Smt. Lajwanti and others (OW 104 No. 6/2015, decided on 13.09.2023)
9. Since the petition is filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, therefore, first of all, this
Court has to assess the maintainability of this petition.
10. It is trite proposition of law that the Court is not to exercise its supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India only on the premise that some error has crept in the orders
passed by the courts below and one of the parties to the proceedings is to suffer. It is only when
there is miscarriage of justice which is apparent from the record that the court exercises its
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution. The court cannot reverse the findings of the court
below only also for the reason that the courts below should have interpreted the facts brought on
record in a particular manner. The discretion has to be exercised by the court sparingly and not in a
ordinary course. The Apex Court in case titled Shalini Shyam Shetty v. Rajendra Shankar Patil
reported as 2010 AIR SCW 6387, has laid down the following principles to be followed by the High
Courts in exercising jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution:
"a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is different from a petition under
Article 227. The mode of exercise of power by High Court under these two Articles is
also different.
(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be called a writ petition. The
history of the conferment of writ jurisdiction on High Courts is substantially different
from the history of conferment of the power of Superintendence on the High Courts
under Article 227 and have been discussed above.
(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of its power of
superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution, interfere with the orders of
tribunals or Courts inferior to it. Nor can it, in exercise of this power, act as a Court of
appeal over the orders of Court or tribunal subordinate to it. In cases where an
alternative statutory mode of redressal has been provided, that would also operate as
a restrain on the exercise of this power by the High Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 3
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in exercise of its power of
superintendence have been repeatedly laid down by this Court. In this regard the
High Court must be guided by the principles laid down by the Constitution Bench of
this Court in Waryam Singh (supra) and the principles in Waryam Singh (supra) have
been repeatedly followed by subsequent Constitution Benches and various other
decisions of this Court.
(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra), followed in subsequent cases, the
High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction of superintendence can interfere in order
only to keep the tribunals and Courts subordinate to it, `within the bounds of their
authority'.
(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and Courts by exercising
jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to exercise the jurisdiction
which is vested in them.
(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High Court can interfere in
exercise of its power of superintendence when there has been a patent perversity in
the orders of tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or where there has been a gross
and manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been
flouted.
(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot interfere to correct
mere errors of law or fact or just because another view than the one taken by the
tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other words, the
jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised.
(i) High Court's power of superintendence under Article 227 cannot be curtailed by
any statute. It has been declared a part of the basic structure of the Constitution by
the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of
India & others, reported in (1997) 3 SCC 261 and therefore abridgement by a
Constitutional amendment is also very doubtful.
(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather cognate provision, like
Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act, 1999 does not and cannot cut down the ambit of High Court's power under
Article
227. At the same time, it must be remembered that such statutory amendment does
not correspondingly expand the High Court's jurisdiction of superintendence under
Article 227.
(k) The power is discretionary and has to be exercised on equitable principle. In an
appropriate case, the power can be exercised suo motu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 4
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
(l) On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered power of the High Court
under Article 227, it transpires that the main object of this Article is to keep strict
administrative and judicial control by the High Court on the administration of justice
within its territory.
(m) The object of superintendence, both administrative and judicial, is to maintain
efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the entire machinery of justice in such a
way as it does not bring it into any disrepute.
The power of interference under this Article is to be kept to the minimum to ensure that the wheel of
justice does not come to a halt and the fountain of justice remains pure and unpolluted in order to
maintain public confidence in the functioning of the tribunals and Courts subordinate to High
Court.
(n) This reserve and exceptional power of judicial intervention is not to be exercised just for grant of
relief in individual cases but should be directed for promotion of public confidence in the
administration of justice in the larger public interest whereas Article 226 is meant for protection of
individual grievance. Therefore, the power under Article 227 may be unfettered but its exercise is
subject to high degree of judicial discipline pointed out above.
(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will be counter-productive and will divest this
extraordinary power of its strength and vitality."
11. The Supreme Court has also in case titled Radhey Shyam and anr. v. Chhabi Nath and others
reported as (2009) 9 SCC 610 & AIR 2015 SC 3269 taken the similar view. The relevant extract of
the judgment reads thus:
"Under Article 227, orders of both civil and criminal courts can be examined only in
very exceptional cases when manifest miscarriage of justice has been occasioned.
Such power, however, is not to be exercised to correct a mistake of fact and of law".
12. The plain reading of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court would make it clear
that the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution is subject to high degree of judicial discipline
and is not to be taken recourse to for setting right the mere irregularities. The power, however, is not
ipso facto curtailed to be exercised when it is so warranted. The 'border line', therefore, for the
purposes of exercising jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution, has been drawn and the
jurisdiction, as such, is warranted to be exercised to keep the Tribunals and courts subordinate to it
within the bounds of their authority; to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and Courts by
exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to exercise the jurisdiction
which is vested in them; when there is patent perversity in the orders of Tribunals and Courts
subordinate to it or where there has been a gross and manifest failure of justice or the basic
principles of natural justice have been flouted; and is not to be exercised to correct mere errors of
law or just because another view than the one taken by the Tribunals or Courts subordinate to it,
was a possible view.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 5
Tarsem Singh And Others vs Manbir Singh And Others on 27 December, 2023
13. It is very axiomatic that this court can exercise its power of superintendence vested with it under
Article 227 of the Constitution only when the order challenged in the said petition falls within any of
the aforesaid categories. The perusal of the orders impugned would make it clear that the trial court
as also the appellate court have certainly exercised the jurisdiction that is vested with it and have not
also declined to exercise the jurisdiction vested with it. The courts do not also appear to have
traversed beyond the bounds of its authority, nor do the impugned orders appear to be perverse so
as to cause a manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been flouted.
Having said that, the petition in hand against the impugned orders is not maintainable.
14. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the order impugned has been
passed without protecting the lis does not carry any weight, in that, the appellate Court has very
categorically recorded in its order dated 30.11.2023 that "Nothing herein said shall affect the merits
of the main case which shall be decided on its own merits". The suit is yet to be decided and the
appellate Court has only passed an order to the effect that the parties are directed to maintain status
quo with regard to the suit lane which, in fact, protects the lis, therefore, the order impugned does
not appear to be perverse as claimed to invoke the jurisdiction of this court under Article 227 of the
Constitution. The judgment rendered in case titled Dunlop India Ltd. (supra) relied upon by the
learned counsel for the petitioners, is not applicable to the facts of the instant case. The instant case
is, however, squarely covered by the judgment rendered in Krishan Chand's case (supra) relied upon
by the respondents wherein it has been held that this Court while exercising supervisory power
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India cannot act as an appellate court or tribunal, nor it can
review or re-appreciate the material upon which the inferior Courts have passed the orders. It has
been further held that even an error of law or an error of fact cannot be corrected by this Court in
exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction. I am, therefore, fortified by the view taken by this Court in
the aforesaid case.
15. The instant petition being not maintainable is dismissed. It goes without saying that this court
has not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case. The trial court shall decide the matter
without getting influenced, in any way, by any of the observations made by this court in this order.
(MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI) JUDGE Jammu 27.12.2023 Sanjeev Whether order is
reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16631830/ 6
