Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May, 2023
Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May,
2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
CRM(M) No.484/2022
Tarun Meenia ....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Ms. Deepali Arora, Advocate
Versus
Union Territory of J&K and another .........Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. P.D.Singh, Dy. AG for R-1
Mr. P.S.Parmar, Advocate for R-2
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
19.05.2023
1) In this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the petitioner seeks
quashing of FIR No.0036/2022 registered at Police Station, R.S.Pura, Jammu for the commission of
offences punishable under Section 385 and 418 IPC on the basis of a complaint moved by
respondent No.2 alleging that she was subjected to fear of injury in order to commit extortion and
was cheated to cause wrongful loss.
2) Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that in the year 2020 the petitioner rented out a shop to
respondent No.2 who is a veterinarian for her private practice at Gagore, Vijaypur and the petitioner
was also dealing in the business of animal feed and other equipments. The petitioner and
respondent No.2 developed friendly relationship with each other and they started liking each other
and developed intimate relationship. The petitioner usually used to sarcastically tell respondent
No.2 that he has clicked incriminatory intimate photographs of her and under this suspicion,
respondent No.2 solemnized marriage with petitioner at Arya Samaj Mandir, Kailash Ashram,
Chinore on 16.04.2022.
3) It is pleaded that marriage between petitioner and respondent No.2 has never been
consummated. As per the petitioner, marriage of respondent No.2 with him was against the consent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89716568/ 1
Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May, 2023
of respondent No.2's family, who compelled her to lodge impugned FIR against the petitioner
levelling false and frivolous allegations of extortion and blackmailing against the petitioner.
Respondent No.2 is also stated to have filed a petition under the provisions of Section 12(1) of Hindu
Marriage Act, 1956 for declaring the marriage between respondent No.2 and the petitioner as null
and void, which is pending in Family Court, Jammu.
4) This Court while issuing notice to the respondent on 14.06.2022 allowed the investigation in the
FIR to go ahead, however, presentation of challan was stayed without permission of this Court. It is
stated that the parties i.e. petitioner and respondent No.2 have entered into a compromise, wherein,
inter alia, it has been resolved and agreed by respondent No.2 that after lodging FIR against the
petitioner, under the impression he has her intimate photographs, she has amicably settled her
grievance with the petitioner and is not interested in pursuing the FIR lodged by her against the
petitioner. A copy of the compromise deed dated 23rd May, 2022 has also been placed on record.
5) On 25th April, 2023, the parties directed to record their statements before the Registrar Judicial,
in compliance whereof, petitioner as well as respondent No.2 recorded their statements before the
Registrar Judicial on 25th April, 2023. In her statement, respondent-complainant, has stated that
she has amicably resolved all disputes and issues with petitioner-Tarun Meenia and they have also
agreed to dissolve their marriage by mutual consent. It has also been stated by respondent No.2 in
her statement that she does not want to pursue the impugned FIR filed by her against the petitioner.
6) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
7) So far as the facts alleged in petition pertaining to the compromise arrived at between the parties
in terms of compromise deed dated 04.05.2022, are concerned, the same are not disputed.
However, according to the parties, both the offences under Section 385 and 418 IPC IPC are non-
compoundable. In the backdrop of this position, the question arises as to whether this Court has
power to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences alleged to have been
committed are non-compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh. v. State
of Punjab & another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while considering this aspect, has observed as
under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89716568/ 2
Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May, 2023
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
8) Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between c/w the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of
the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89716568/ 3
Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May, 2023
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases. (VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and
serious offences and therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against
the individual alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because there is a
mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It would be
open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the
sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving
the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the
nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally
be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine as to
whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak.
In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas
in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the
offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship. (VII) While deciding whether to exercise its
power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role. Those cases
where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the
matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason that at this stage the
investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where the
charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy stage, the High
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89716568/ 4
Tarun Meenia vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 19 May, 2023
Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie assessment of
the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is
almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,
normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as
in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to come a
conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those
cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties would not be a c/w CRM(M)
No.614/2021 ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has already been
convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found guilty of
such a crime."
9) From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour and where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court is well within
its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings if it is known that because of the compromise
arrived at between the parties, there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In
fact, in such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme
injustice if despite settlement having been arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are
allowed to continue.
10) Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute, i.e., petitioner
and respondent No.2 have entered into a compromise, whereby the respondent No.2 as
complainant/victim has decided not to pursue prosecution in the impugned FIR against the
petitioner. Therefore, once the rival parties have arrived at a settlement as regards the basis of the
matrimonial dispute, allowing the prosecutions to continue merely because the offences alleged
against the accused are non- compoundable in nature, would amount to great injustice to both the
parties and, in fact, it will amount to frittering away the fruits of compromise that has been arrived
at between the parties. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioner, in these
circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process of law.
11) In view of the aforesaid discussion, this petition is allowed.
Accordingly, FIR No.0036/2022 registered at Police Station, R.S.Pura for offences punishable under
Section 385 and 418 IPC as well as further proceedings taken thereon are quashed.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge Jammu 19.05.2023 Vinod, PS Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89716568/ 5
