Taufiq vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Taufiq vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:319
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 34393 of 2023
Applicant :- Taufiq
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Atul Kumar Kushwaha,Marjeet Mishra,Shamsher Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Kalpdev Mishra, holding brief of Sri Atul Kumar Kushwaha, learned counsel for the
applicant and Sri Anit Kumar Shukla, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 380 of 2022, under Sections 376, 384, 506 I.P.C. and
Section 67A of I.T. Act , Police Station Kotwali Shamli, District Shamli, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42836201/ 1
Taufiq vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
4. The applicant is stated to be involved in the profession of exorcism and as such in duress had
committed rape with the informant and had even taken ransom of Rs.4.5 lacs and the said demand
persisted subsequently also.
5. The applicant is stated to have video recorded the said act and even had taken certain indecent
photographs and made it viral on social media, as such the FIR was instituted on 13.08.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
6. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
7. The FIR is delayed and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
8. The video has been recorded from the mobile of the victim herself which has been given to the
police by her son.
9. There is no evidence whatsoever of the applicant having sent the said video to any person lest on
social media.
10. The said prosecution story stands falsified.
11. Only statement of PW-1 has been recorded and she has reiterated the allegations made in the
FIR.
12. The Fundamental Rights of the applicant enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
stands violated.
13. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
14. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
14.09.2022. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE :
15. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42836201/ 2
Taufiq vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
16. In the judgement passed by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India vs. K.A. Najeeb, AIR
2021 SC 712, it has been held as follows:-
"We are conscious of the fact that the charges levelled against the respondent are
grave and a serious threat to societal harmony. Had it been a case at the threshold,
we would have outrightly turned down the respondent's prayer. However, keeping in
mind the length of the period spent by him in custody and the unlikelihood of the
trial being completed anytime soon, the High Court appears to have been left with no
other option except to grant bail."
17. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
18. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
19. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
20. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial
of bail to the applicant.
21. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
22. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
23. Let the applicant-Taufiq involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42836201/ 3
Taufiq vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
24. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
25. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/42836201/ 4
