The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd
on 21 September, 2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam
TCA.No.26 of 2018 In the High Court of Judicature at Madras Dated : 21.9.2020 Coram :
The Honourable Mr.Justice T.S.SIVAGNANAM and The Honourable Mrs.Justice
V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN Tax Case Appeal No.26 of 2018 The Commissioner of
Income Tax, Chennai ...Appellant Vs M/s.Celebrity Fashion Ltd., Chennai-45.
...Respondent APPEAL under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 against the
order dated 26.5.2017 made in ITA.No.2516/Mds/2016 on the file of the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal, Chennai 'B' Bench for the assessment year 2011-12.
For Appellant: Mr.T.Ravikumar, SSC
For Respondent: Mr.A.S.Sriraman
Judgment was delivered by T.S.Sivagnanam,J This appeal, filed by the Revenue
under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for brevity, the Act), is directed
against the http://www.judis.nic.in order dated 26.5.2017 made in
ITA.No.2516/Mds/2016 on the file of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai 'B'
Bench (for short, the Tribunal) for the assessment year 2011-12.
2. The Revenue filed the above appeal by raising the following substantial questions of law :
“i. Whether the Tribunal was right in holding that the provisions of Section 14A read
with Rule 8D will have no applicability if there was no exempt income received when
the Statute did not provide for such exemption to be granted ?
ii. Whether the Tribunal ought to have applied the decision of the Bombay High
Court in the case of Godrej and Boyce Manufacturing Co. Ltd. [reported in 328 ITR
81] wherein it was held that Section 14A is constitutionally valid and that Rule 8D
was applicable from the assessment year 2008-09 onwards ? And iii. Whether the
Tribunal is right in holding that the loss incurred on account of cancellation of
forward contracts is not speculative losses falling within the provisions of Section
43(5) of the Income Tax Act ?”
3. The assessee company filed their return on 29.9.2011 http://www.judis.nic.in admitting -NIL-
income and it was processed under Section 143(1) of the Act on 07.1.2012 resulting in determining a
refund of Rs.54,04,290/-. Subsequently, the assessee's case was selected for scrutiny and a notice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
under Section 142(1) of the Act was issued on 10.9.2012 along with a questionnaire. The assessee
furnished details and the assessment was completed under Section 143(3) of the Act by order dated
25.3.2014.
4. Two issues fall for consideration in this appeal. The first one is the disallowance made by the
Assessing Officer under Section 14A of the Act and the second one is the disallowance of foreign
exchange fluctuation loss.
5. In respect of the first issue, the Assessing Officer found that the assessee had invested in SBI
Magnum Insta Cash Fund to the tune of Rs.7.25 Crores and secured loans, which were outstanding
as on 31.3.2011. The Assessing Officer also found that the assessee incurred finance cost, out of
which, a sum of Rs.12,93,10,000/- was towards interest on term loan and working capital facilities,
that the assessee company made investments in mutual funds, out of which, there was a possibility
of earning dividend income. Accordingly, a notice was issued to show cause as to why the
disallowance should not be made under Section 14A of the Act.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6. The assessee sent a reply stating that they had not incurred any expenditure for making such
investment and that in the absence of any expenditure incurred, the question of disallowance did
not arise.
7. However, the Assessing Officer rejected the stand taken by the assessee.
8. With regard to the second issue namely disallowance on exchange fluctuation loss, the Assessing
Officer found that the debit made in the ledger account was on account of a transaction pertaining to
forward contract such as interest charges and bank charges on negotiation and forward contract
cancellation charges and therefore proceeded to treat the same as a speculative transaction under
Section 43(5) of the Act.
9. The assessee submitted their objections to the same by contending that the loss for foreign
exchange derivative was a business loss and not business expenditure and was allowable under
Section 28 of the Act, that the crystallized losses on account of foreign exchange derivative contracts
were not speculative in nature within the meaning of Section 43(5) of the Act, that Explanation to
Section 37(1) was not applicable in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case
of Dr.T.A.Quereshi Vs. CIT [reported in (2006) 287 ITR 547] and that the said Explanation was
applicable http://www.judis.nic.in only to business expenditure and for business loss.
10. It was further contended by the assessee that in terms of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of CIT Vs. Woodward Governor India Pvt. Ltd. [reported in (2009) 312 ITR 254],
the notional losses in foreign currency were allowable. However, in the assessee's case, losses were
real and tangible losses not assumed or a creation of accounting principle. The assessee also
contended that for the assessment year 2009-10, in the assessee's own case, the Tribunal held in
favour of the assessee following the decision of the Calcutta High Court in the case of CIT Vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
Soorajmull Nagarmull [reported in (1981) 129 ITR 169].
11. The Assessing Officer did not agree with the said submissions, rather she distinguished the
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Woodward Governor India Pvt. Ltd., and stated
that the said decision was in respect of trade loss on account of import and export and not on
account of loss on forward contract cancellation. Placing reliance on the decision of the Bangalore
Tribunal in the case of ACIT Vs. K.Mohan & Co. (Exports) Pvt. Ltd., the Assessing Officer held that
cancellation of forward contract was speculation business and not business profits for the purpose of
computation of deduction under Section 10B of the Act. With regard to http://www.judis.nic.in the
decision in the assessee's own case for the assessment year 2009- 10, it was pointed out that the
Department preferred an appeal against that decision.
12. Being aggrieved by the said order passed by the Assessing Officer dated 25.3.2014, the assessee
preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)-1, Chennai [for brevity, the
CIT(A)], who allowed the appeal by order dated 16.6.2016. With regard to the first issue namely the
disallowance under Section 14A of the Act, the CIT(A) accepted the stand taken by the assessee that
the investments were in growth funds and not dividend funds and therefore, did not constitute tax
free income. In this regard, the CIT(A) referred to the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of
Cheminvest Ltd. Vs. CIT [reported in (2015) 378 ITR 33] as well as the decision of the Chennai
Tribunal in the case of ACIT Vs. M.Baskaran [ITA.No.1717/Mds/2013 dated 31.7.2014] and
accordingly set aside the finding rendered by the Assessing Officer.
13. So far as the issue pertaining to disallowance of exchange fluctuation loss was concerned, the
CIT(A) took note of the order passed in the assessee's own case for the assessment year 2009-10
dated 27.2.2013, which was affirmed by the Tribunal in ITA.No.1250/ Mds/2013 vide order dated
27.8.2013. Ultimately, the CIT(A) allowed http://www.judis.nic.in the appeal filed by the assessee.
14. Challenging the findings on both the grounds, the Revenue preferred an appeal before the
Tribunal.
15. So far as the first issue is concerned, the Tribunal took note of the decision of this Court in the
case of Redington India Ltd. Vs. CIT [reported in (2017) 77 Taxmann.com 257] and dismissed the
appeal filed by the Revenue. On the second issue, the Tribunal referred to the order passed by it in
the assessee's own case and held that the transaction done by the assessee was not a speculative
transaction to be brought under Section 43(5) of the Act. Aggrieved by such decision, the Revenue is
before us by way of this appeal.
16. We have elaborately heard Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing Counsel appearing for the
appellant – Revenue and Mr.A.S. Sriraman, learned counsel appearing for the respondent –
assessee.
17. On the first issue, we find that the Tribunal rightly understood the scope of the transaction done
by the assessee. The consistent case of the assessee was that they invested a sum of Rs.7.25 crores in
SBI Magnum Insta Cash Fund, that the amount was invested on 30.3.2011, that they had not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
incurred any expenditure in making such investment and that at the year end, the assessee did not
earn tax free income from such investments. In terms of Section 14A http://www.judis.nic.in of the
Act, the only expenditure, which was proved to be incurred in relation to earning of tax free income,
could be disallowed and such provision could not be extended to disallow the expenditure, which
was assumed to have been incurred for earning tax free income.
18. Therefore, to apply the provisions of Section 14A of the Act, the Assessing Officer should have
recorded a finding as to how Sub- Section (1) of Section 14A of the Act would stand attracted. In the
absence of any such finding, the disallowance made was not justifiable. In fact, the Assessing Officer
straightaway proceeded to the second limb of Section 14(2) of the Act, which is impermissible. The
Tribunal rightly took note of the decision in the case of Redington India Ltd., wherein it was held
that the provisions of Section 14A of the Act read with Rule 8D of the Income Tax Rules, 1962
cannot be made applicable in vacuum i.e in the absence of exempt income. Therefore, we find that
the Tribunal was right in deciding the issue against the Revenue and in favour of the assessee.
19. In respect of the second issue regarding disallowance of exchange fluctuation loss, the Tribunal,
in the assessee's own case, examined the facts and that order was reproduced in paragraph 5.2 of the
impugned order.
http://www.judis.nic.in
20. Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing Counsel has placed reliance on the decision of the
Bombay High Court in the case of CIT Vs. Bharat R.Ruia (HUF) [reported in (2011) 337 ITR 0452].
The learned Senior Standing Counsel has drawn our attention to paragraph 19 of the said judgment
wherein the Court referred to the nature of derivative transaction, which had been brought out in
the decision of this Court in the case of Rajshree Sugars & Chemicals Ltd. Rep.by its Director and
Chief Operating Officer R.Varadaraj Vs. Axis Bank Ltd. [reported in (2008) 8 MLJ 261]. This
decision was pressed into service to explain as to what are all the four categories of derivatives
namely forward contracts, future contracts, swaps and options.
21. It is true that the said decision explains the nature of contracts. However, we find that on facts,
the assessee therein entered into future contracts for purchase of shares of certain companies on a
specified future date and at a specified price, which was to be settled in cash without actual delivery
of the shares. In the instant case, the assessee is not a person in business of finance nor involved in
the purchase of any commodity. Therefore, the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of
Bharat R.Ruia (HUF) is distinguishable.
http://www.judis.nic.in
22. The learned Senior Standing Counsel appearing for the respondent – Revenue has referred to
the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Snowtex Investment Ltd. Vs. PCIT
[reported in (2019) 414 ITR 0227].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
23. The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Snowtex Investment Ltd., also pertains
to the principal business activity of the assessee therein namely trading in shares and securities.
Hence, this decision also will not render any assistance to the Revenue.
24. We had an occasion to consider a similar question in the case of CIT, Corporate Circle-3,
Chennai Vs. Visual Graphics Computing Services India Pvt. Ltd. [TCA.No.414 of 2018 dated
19.8.2020]. In the said appeal, question of law No.5, which was framed for consideration, was as to
whether the Tribunal was right in holding that the provisions of Section 14A of the Act read with
Rule 8D of the said Rules will have no applicability if there is no exempt income earned or received
during the previous year though the disallowance is linked to expenditure incurred on investment
fetching exempt income. The said case was decided in favour of the assessee and against the
Revenue and in doing so, we have followed the decision of the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court
in the case of CIT Vs. Chettinad http://www.judis.nic.in Logistics Pvt. Ltd. [reported in (2017) 80
Taxmann.com 221]. This decision would come to the aid and assistance of the assessee.
25. It is contended on behalf of the Revenue that an appeal had been preferred against the order
passed by the Tribunal in the assessee's own case for the earlier assessment year, which was referred
to and relied upon by the Tribunal in the impugned order.
26. However, in our considered view, there is nothing on record to indicate that the appeal had been
filed and the matter had been pending. Be that as it may, we have considered the reasons assigned
by the Tribunal in the assessee's own case for the earlier assessment year wherein the Tribunal
rightly took note of the earliest decision of the Calcutta High Court on the said point in the case of
Soorajmull Nagarmull and pointed out that under Section 43(5) of the Act, 'speculative transaction'
has been defined to mean a transaction, in which, a contract for the purchase or sale of commodity
is settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of such commodity. However, as stated,
the assessee herein was not a dealer in foreign exchange, but was an exporter of cotton. Therefore,
the Tribunal rightly took note of the transaction done by the assessee though, in order to hedge
against the losses, the assessee booked foreign exchange in the forward market with the bank.
However, the export http://www.judis.nic.in contracts entered into by the assessee for the export of
cotton in some cases failed and therefore, the assessee was held to be entitled to claim deduction in
respect of the said amount as business loss.
27. Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing Counsel for the Revenue has sought to distinguish the
decision of this Court in the case of Redington India Ltd.
28. In fact, an identical argument was raised for consideration before the Hon'ble Division Bench of
this Court in the case of Chettinad Logistics Pvt. Ltd., and such a contention was rejected by
rendering the following findings :
“13. Mr.Senthil Kumar, seeks to distinguish the judgment in Redington (India) Ltd. case (supra)
based on the fact that Rule 8D had not kicked-in by AY 2007-08, which was the AY being considered
in the said case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
14. According to us, this was not the argument, put forth, before the Division Bench. As a matter of
fact, the Revenue relied heavily on Rule 8D.
14.1 Mr.Ravikumar, who appeared for the Revenue, in that matter and who is present in this Court,
informs us that he had in fact argued that the Rule was clarifactory in nature and would apply
retrospectively, and http://www.judis.nic.in that, the Division Bench, therefore, discussed the
impact of Rule 8D of the Rules.
15. However, it is, our view, as indicated above, independent of the reasoning given in Redington
(India) Ltd. case (supra) that Rule 8D cannot be read in a manner, which takes it beyond the scope
and content of the main provision, which is, Section 14 A of the Act.
15.1 Therefore, as adverted to above, Rule 8D, cannot come to the rescue of the Revenue.
15.2 In any event, the Tribunal, via, the impugned judgment has remitted the matter to the
Assessing Officer.
15.3 Therefore, for the foregoing
reasons, we are of the view, that no
interference is called for qua the impugned judgment.” As against the decision of this Court in the
case of Chettinad Logistics Pvt. Ltd., the Revenue preferred appeals before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court and the special leave petitions were dismissed on the ground of delay as well as merits in the
decision reported in (2018) 95 Taxmann.com 250.
29. It will be beneficial to refer to the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT Vs.
Badridas Gauridu Pvt. Ltd. http://www.judis.nic.in [reported in (2003) 261 ITR 256]. In that case,
the assessee was not a dealer in foreign exchange, but was an exporter of cotton as in the case before
us. The assessee therein booked foreign exchange contracts, which were held to be only incidental to
the assessee's regular course of business. While testing the correctness of the order of the Tribunal,
which held that the transaction was not a speculative transaction, it was observed as follows :
“3. The assessee was not a dealer in foreign exchange. The assessee was a cotton
exporter. The assessee was an export house. Therefore, foreign exchange contracts
were booked only as incidental to the assessee's regular course of business. The
Tribunal has recorded a categorical finding to this effect in its order. The Assessing
Officer has not considered these facts. Under section 43(5) of the Income-tax Act,
"speculative transaction"
has been defined to mean a transaction in which a contract for the purchase or sale of
a commodity is settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of such
commodity. However, as stated above, the assessee was not a dealer in foreign
exchange. The assessee was an exporter of cotton. In order to hedge against losses,
the assessee had booked http://www.judis.nic.in foreign exchange in the forward
market with the bank. However, the export contracts entered into by the assessee for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Celebrity Fashion Ltd on 21 September, 2020
export of cotton in some cases failed. In the circumstances, the assessee was entitled
to claim deduction in respect of Rs. 13.50 lakhs as a business loss. This matter is
squarely covered by the judgment of the Calcutta High Court with which we agree, in
the case of CIT Vs. Sooraj Mull Nagarmull [1981] 129 ITR 1691].”
30. In the light of the above discussions, the substantial questions of law raised are required to be
answered in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
31. Accordingly, the above tax case appeal is dismissed and the substantial questions of law raised
are answered against the Revenue and in favour of the assessee. No costs.
21.9.2020 RS http://www.judis.nic.in T.S.SIVAGNANAM,J AND V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN,J RS
To The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai 'B' Bench.
21.9.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/183562713/ 7
