The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images
Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
Bench: Alok Aradhe, H T Narendra Prasad
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 2ND DAY OF NOVEMBER 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ALOK ARADHE
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.T.NARENDRA PRASAD
I.T.A. NO.77 OF 2015
BETWEEN:
1. THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX
C.R. BUILDING, QUEENS ROAD
BANGALORE.
2. THE ADDL. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX
RANGE-11, RASHTROTHANA BHAVAN
NRUPATHUNGA ROAD
BANGALORE.
... APPELLANTS
(BY SRI. K.V. ARAVIND, ADV.,)
AND:
M/S. GOKALDAS IMAGES PVT. LTD.,
7 & 12, INDUSTRIAL SUBURB
TUMKUR ROAD, YESHWANTHPURA
BANGALORE-560022
PAN: AAACG 6637Q.
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI. ASHOK A. KULKARNI, ADV.)
---
THIS ITA IS FILED UNDER SECTION 260-A OF I.T. ACT,
1961 ARISING OUT OF ORDER DATED 26.09.2014 PASSED IN ITA
NO.693/BANG/2013 FOR THE ASSESSMENT YEAR 2008-09,
PRAYING TO:
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
(I) FORMULATE THE SUBSTANTIAL QUESTIONS OF LAW
STATED ABOVE.
(II) ALLOW THE APPEAL AND SET ASIDE THE ORDERS
PASSED BY THE ITAT, BANGALORE IN ITA NO.693/BANG/2013
DATED 26-09-2014 CONFIRMING THE ORDER OF THE APPELLATE
COMMISSIONER AND CONFIRM THE ORDER PASSED BY THE
ADDL. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, RANGE-11, BANGALORE.
THIS ITA COMING ON FOR HEARING, THIS DAY,
ALOK ARADHE J., DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
This appeal under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act for
short) has been preferred by the revenue. The subject matter of the appeal pertains to the
Assessment year 2008-09. The appeal was admitted by a bench of this Court vide order dated
04.08.2015 on the following substantial question of law:
(i) Whether on the facts and in circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in holding that
the amount of Rs.62,84,681/- advanced by the assessee to M/s. Hinduja Realtors Pvt. Ltd, which is
a sister concern of the assessee, for payment of Municipal Taxes, without charging any interest on
the same is to be treated as business expenditure, without appreciating that the assessee does not
have the liability of payment of Municipal Taxes and the interest should have been charged on the
money advanced as held by the assessing authority?
(ii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in holding
that the amount of Rs.7,00,00,000 advanced by the assessee to M/s. Hinduja Investments Pvt. Ltd,
which is a sister concern of the assessee, towards acquisition/identifying and liaison of a textile
Aparel Park, without appreciating that the loan given was to help the sister concern which is
separate legal entity and assessee had not benefit from it and as such assessee had diverted the
borrowed fund to this extent?
(iii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in
holding that the disallowance made under section 14A should not be added to the Book Profits of the
assessee under section 115JB despite the explicit provisions of Clause (i) of Explanation (1) to
section 115JB?
(iv) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in
deletion of portion of common expenses allocated even when assessing authority has rightly
observed the expenses incurred are to be apportioned among all the units in the ratio of their
respective turnovers?
(v) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal erred in giving relief to
assessee in respect of set of EOU profits against non EOU losses and brought forward depreciation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
by following the decision of this Hon'ble Court in the case of M/s. Yokogawa without appreciating
that the fact that deduction has to be allowed from the total income of the assessee and as per
section 2(45) of the I.T. Act the total income should be computed from various sources after set off
of losses from one source against income from other sources under the same head of income in
terms of section 709(1) and the order of the Hon'ble Court has been challenged before Apex Court by
Revenue?
2. The factual background, in which the aforesaid questions of law arise for our consideration need
mention. The assessee is a company engaged in manufacture and export of readymade garments.
The assessee filed the return of income for the Assessment Year 2008-09 on 27.09.2009. The
Assessing Officer by an order dated 08.12.2011 inter alia held that the assessee advanced certain
monies to its sister concern without charging interest on the same. It was further held that aforesaid
monies have been advanced out of borrowed funds and interest should have been charged on the
same. Accordingly interest to the tune of Rs.6,10,75,200/- was charged. The Assessing Officer also
made an addition in respect of claim under Section 115JB of the Act and deleted portion of common
expenses which were allocated. The set off of profits of export oriented units against non export
oriented unit's losses and brought forward unabsorbed depreciation was also not allowed.
3. The assessee thereupon filed an appeal before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) who by
an order dated 25.02.2013 inter alia held that advance of Rs.53.77 Crores given to M/s Hinduja
Relators Pvt. Ltd. is only out of commercial expediency and can be considered as advance for
business purpose. It was further held that there was neither any commercial expediency nor any
business transaction with M/s Hinduja Investments Pvt. Ltd. For giving an interest free advance of
Rs.7 Crores. It was further held that expenses incurred towards legal and professional fees, rates and
taxes, insurance, managerial remuneration and miscellaneous expenses can be allocated in respect
of claim of set off of profits earned by export oriented units against the losses of non export oriented
units. It was held that there is no exemption granted to a non dividend company in this regard and
therefore, the assessee is liable to tax on book profit in accordance with the provisions of Section
115JB of the Act. The Assessing Officer was directed to quantify if there are any losses to be carried
forward after giving effect to the order passed by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals).
Accordingly, the appeal was partly allowed.
4. The revenue as well as the assessee approached the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter
referred to as 'the tribunal' for short) by filing the appeals against the order passed by the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). The assessee also filed a cross objection against the order
passed by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). Both the appeals as well as the cross
objections was decided by the tribunal by a common order dated 26.09.2014 and partly allowed the
appeals preferred by the revenue as well as the assessee and dismissed the cross objection preferred
by the assessee. In the aforesaid factual background, this appeal has been filed.
5. Learned counsel for the revenue submitted that the advance made by the assessee to the
subsidiary company was not for business purpose and no element of commercial expediency was
involved. Therefore, the same was not allowable as deduction. It is urged that advance of Rs.7 Crores
made by the assessee to the subsidiary company is neither for business purpose nor any commercial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
expediency was involved and even if the advance was made for commercial expediency, the advance
being made for setting up of business, the same constitutes capital expenditure and could not have
been treated as revenue expenditure. It is pointed out that there is neither any material nor any
submission made on behalf of the assessee that advance of Rs.7 Crores was made during the earlier
Assessment Year. It is contended that the tribunal ought to have appreciated that addition to the
book profit has been made in terms of Clause (f) to Explanation to Section 115JB of the Act. It is also
contended that the tribunal without any basis has allowed the allocation of expenses between export
oriented units and non export oriented units and it ought to have been appreciated that the
Assessing Officer has rightly allocated expenses on turnover basis. It is also submitted that assessee
had not maintained separate books of accounts. It ought to have been appreciated by the tribunal
that adjustment and set off is governed by Section 70 of the Act and the issue was covered in favour
of the revenue in view of the judgment of this court. In support of aforesaid submissions, reliance
has been placed on decisions of Supreme Court in 'S.A.BUILDERS LTD. VS. COMMISSIONER OF
INCOME-TAX (APPEALS), CHANDIGARH', (2007) 158 TAXMAN 74 (SC) 'COMMISSIONER OF
INCOME-TAX VS. YOKOGAWA INDIA LTD', (2017) 77 TAXMANN.COM 41 (SC) and M/S KARLE
INTERNATIONAL PRVIATE LTD. VS. THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX',
I.T.A.NO.377/2017 DECIDED ON 07.09.2020.
6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the assessee submitted that amount of Rs.7 Crores was
alone advanced by the assessee to M/s Hinduja Investments Pvt. Ltd. For acquisition / identification
and liaison towards exploring possibility of expanding in textile apparel park. Therefore, the amount
was advanced as a matter of commercial and business expediency and therefore, the first substantial
question of law in fact does not arise for consideration as the same is a finding of fact. It is also
submitted that disallowance computed under Section 14A of the Act pertains to computation of
income under normal provisions of the Act and the same cannot be read into Section 115JB of the
Act pertaining computation of book profits for levy of Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT). It is also
pointed out that there is no express provision in clause (f) of Explanation 1 to Section 115JB of the
Act. It is also urged that common expenses incurred by the assessee exclusively pertain to non
export unit and do not require allocation across all units. It is further submitted that no substantial
questions of law arises for consideration in this appeal. In support of aforesaid submissions, reliance
has been placed on decisions in S.A.BUILDERS LTD. supra and 'COMMISSIONER OF
INCOME-TAX VS. SRIDEVI ENTERPRISES, 192 ITR
165.
7. We have considered the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the record. The assessee paid a sum of Rs.29.17 Crores on account of business transactions in
relation to exports to USA. Before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), the assessee had
furnished the complete details, which were forwarded to the Assessing Officer who did not make any
comments in his remand report. It is pertinent to mention here that the aforesaid amount pertains
to export transactions to avail export benefits and the assessee had an understanding with Hinduja
Relators Pvt. Ltd. in this regard. Similarly, an amount of Rs.24.6 Crores was advanced to Hinduja
Relators Pvt. Ltd. For improvement of a new building which was being constructed for the assessee
under the lease agreement. The Assessing Officer did not comment anything in this regard in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
remand report. The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), therefore, held that the aforesaid
amount was advanced by the assessee for business purpose as well as commercial expediency. The
aforesaid finding of fact has been affirmed by the tribunal. The aforesaid concurrent findings of fact
neither suffer from any infirmity nor can be termed as perverse. Therefore, the first substantial
question of law is answered against the revenue and in favour of the assessee.
8. The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) held that an advance of Rs.7 Crores was given to
Hinduja Investments Pvt. Ltd. for acquiring the land for textile Special Economic Zone (SEZ).
However, the assessee neither acquired the land nor set up any SEZ. Therefore, the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeals) held that there was neither any commercial expediency nor any business
transaction for giving an interest free advance of Rs.7 Crores. However, the tribunal has reversed the
aforesaid finding on the ground that the aforesaid sum is opening balance on 01.04.2007 and
revenue having accepted the loan advanced for the purpose of business in past assessment could not
seek to decline the claim as not related to business. However, the tribunal itself has recorded a
finding that the assessee has not led any evidence in this regard. The relevant extract of the order
passed by the tribunal reads as under:
As far as the aforesaid sum is concerned, it was claimed by the assessee that the sum in question was
given to HIPL for the purpose of acquiring and identifying land for setting up textile apparel park.
As we have already seen, the assessee has not let in any evidence in this regard. It is however seen
from page 8 of the paper book that the aforesaid sum is the opening balance as on 01.04.2007.
9. Thus, from perusal of the aforesaid extracted portion of the order of the tribunal, it is evident that
the assessee has not let in any evidence to establish the fact that the amount was either advanced for
business purpose or for commercial expediency and it was not the case of the assessee itself that the
amount was advanced in previous year. The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has recorded a
finding that the assessee has neither acquired the land nor has set up any SEZ. Therefore, in the fact
situation of the case, we deem it appropriate to remit the matter for re consideration to the tribunal
afresh. Accordingly, the second substantial question of law is answered.
10. The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has held that as per Section 115JB of the Act, the
assessee being a company is liable to tax on book profits in accordance with the aforesaid provision
and there is no exemption granted to the non dividend company in this regard. However, the
tribunal by placing reliance on decision of the Supreme Court in APOLLO TYRES, 255 ITR 273 (SC)
has held that Assessing Officer while determining book profits under Section 115JB of the Act
cannot tamper with the profits as per profit and loss account prepared in accordance with the
Companies Act except in the manner provided in Explanation 1 to Section 115JB of the Act. Thus, it
has been held that the additions made by the Assessing Officer while determining the book profits
under Section 115JB of the Act cannot be sustained. Any disallowance computed under Section 14A
of the Act pertain to computation of income under normal provisions of the Act and cannot be read
into the provisions of Section 115JB of the Act pertaining to computation of book profits by levy of
Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT) and there is no express provision in clause (f) of Explanation 1 to
Section 115JB of the Act to that extent. For the aforementioned reasons, the third substantial
question of law is answered against the revenue and in favour of the assessee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Gokaldas Images Pvt.Ltd on 2 November, 2020
11. The Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has held that an amount of Rs.4,71,29,795/- is
related to the employees employed in non export oriented units and the assessee had separately
debited salaries and wages in respect of export oriented units in the communication which was
forwarded to the Assessing Officer. However, the Assessing Officer has not mentioned anything
contrary in his remand report, therefore, the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has permitted
the allocation of the expenses incurred by the assessee viz., legal and professional fees, rates and
taxes, insurance, managerial remuneration and miscellaneous expenses. The Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal has held that the expenses related exclusively to non export oriented units and has
affirmed the finding recorded by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). For the
aforementioned reasons, the fourth substantial question of law is also answered against the revenue
and in favour of the assessee.
12. Admittedly, the decision rendered by this court in case of YOKOGAWA has been upheld by the
Supreme Court from perusal of para 29 of the order passed by the tribunal, it is evident that the
revenue has not disputed that the ratio laid down in YOKOGAWA supra is applicable to the facts of
the present case. It is pertinent to mention that the decision of this court in M/S KARLE
INTERNATIONAL PVT. LTD. Supra is not applicable to facts of the case as in the aforesaid case, the
assessee had not claimed any deduction under Section 10B of the Act. For the aforementioned
reasons, the fifth substantial question of law is also answered against the revenue and in favour of
the assessee.
In view of preceding analysis, the order passed by the tribunal insofar as it pertains to finding
recorded by it that an amount of Rs.7 Crores advanced by the assessee to M/s Hinduja Investments
Pvt. Ltd., for business purposes and commercial expediency is hereby quashed and the matter is
remitted to the tribunal to decide the aforesaid issue afresh in accordance with law. In the result, the
appeal is disposed of.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE ss
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137906585/ 6
