The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust
on 8 December, 2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam, V.Bhavani Subbaroyan
T.C.A.No.242 of 2018
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 08.12.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.SIVAGNANAM
and
THE HONOURABLE MRS.JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN
Judgment Reserved On Judgment Pronounced On
10.11.2020 08.12.2020
T.C.A.No.242 of 2018
The Commissioner of Income tax,
Chennai. .. Appellant
-vs-
Shriram Ownership Trust,
No.4, Shriram House,
1st Floor, Burkit Road,
T.Nagar, Chennai-600 017.
PAN No.AAGTS2243H .. Respondent
Appeal under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 against the
order dated 05.07.2017 made in I.T.A.No.407/Mds/2017 on the file of the
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 'C' Bench, Chennai for the assessment year
2014-15.
1/72
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) T.C.A.No.242 of 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
For Appellant : Ms.R.Hemalatha,
Senior Standing Counsel
For Respondent : Mr.R.Sivaraman
*******
JUDGMENT
T.S.Sivagnanam, J.
This tax case appeal filed by the Revenue under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) is directed against the order dated 05.07.2017 made in
I.T.A.No.407/Mds/2017 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 'C' Bench, Chennai (for
brevity “the Tribunal”) for the assessment year 2014-15.
2.The following substantial questions of law have been framed for consideration of this Court:-
“1.Whether the Tribunal was correct in holding that the investment which yielded no
exempt income was to be excluded while computing deduction u/s.14A when
http://www.judis.nic.in the Act as well as Rules framed do not provide for any such
exception, and further such investment shall always remain in tax free territory?
2.Whether the Tribunal was right in deleting the additions made u/s.56(2)(vii) when
the assessee in its representative capacity is to be assessed as individual, since it
represents the individual only and further various courts have held that Private
Discretionary Trust is to be assessed as an individual?
3.Whether the Tribunal was justified in excluding the assessee from the purview of
taxation u/s.56(2)(vii) after concluding that the individual must be a natural living
person when such a condition cannot be enforced on a representative assessee and
has to be perceived in the context of beneficiaries?”
3.The respondent/assessee is a private discretionary Trust which filed its return of income for the
assessment year under consideration, AY 2014-15 electronically on 28.09.2014, disclosing a total
income of Rs.107,72,76,893/-. The return was processed under Section 143(1) of the Act.
Subsequently, the http://www.judis.nic.in case was selected for scrutiny and notice under Section
143(2) of the Act dated 01.06.2016, was served on the assessee along with a questionnaire. Among
other things, the principal issue was with regard to the amount of Rs.25 Crores credited to the
balance sheet under the nomenclature “addition to corpus”. On this issue, the Joint Commissioner
of Income Tax, Non Corporate Range-2, Chennai (JCIT), passed an order dated 24.08.2016, under
Section 144A of the Act directing the Assessing Officer to treat the receipt of Rs.25 Crores as
“income from other sources” and tax the same accordingly. Pursuant to such direction issued by the
JCIT, the assessee was given an opportunity, who placed their written submission dated 09.09.2016,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
contending that the assessee is a discretionary Trust and the direction issued by the JCIT invoking
Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act is erroneous, as the said provision applies only to individuals and HUFs.
The Assessing Officer noted that the submissions, which were made by the assessee, were in fact the
same submissions made before the JCIT, who heard the assessee before issuing the direction dated
24.08.2016 under Section 144A of the Act and accordingly, rejected the contention and treated the
sum of Rs.25 Crores credited directly http://www.judis.nic.in to the balance sheet as 'income from
other source' and the assessee was taxed on the same. Apart from that, there was also a disallowance
made under Section 14A of the Act. Aggrieved by the same, the assessee preferred appeal to the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)-2, Chennai (CIT(A)) contending that Section 56(2)(vii) of
the Act applies only to individuals and HUFs and the Assessing Officer ought to have taken note of
the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in CIT vs. Smt.Sodra Devi [(1957) 32 ITR 615 (SC)];
Section 56(2)(vii) applies only to what is actually received by the individuals and HUFs. That the
Assessing Officer erroneously applied Section 2(24)(iva) to bring to tax voluntary corpus donations
of sums of money received by the assessee Trust ignoring the settled interpretation of the expression
value of any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible into money or not. The assessee also raised
several grounds contesting the disallowance under Section 14A of the Act.
4.From the grounds raised by the assessee before the CIT(A), as extracted in the order passed by the
CIT(A), it is seen that the assessee did not http://www.judis.nic.in specifically question the power of
the JCIT to issue directions under Section 144A of the Act, but contended that the Assessing Officer
could not have proceeded to implement the direction of the JCIT without considering their
objections. The CIT(A) by order dated 06.02.2017, partly allowed the appeal, but however, the issue
with regard to taxability of the sum of Rs.25 Crores was decided against the assessee. The CIT(A)
first took up for consideration as to the procedure adopted by the JCIT before issuing the directions
under Section 144A of the Act and found that the JCIT had afforded sufficient opportunity to the
assessee and followed the procedure under Section 144A. The CIT(A) found that the objections,
which were raised by the assessee before the Assessing Officer in their written submissions dated
09.09.2018, were in fact the same submissions which the assessee had raised before the JCIT, when
they were granted an opportunity to place their objections to the proposal to issue direction under
Section 144A and after noting the factual position, held that there is no procedural infirmity in the
assessment order dated 27.09.2016 passed under Section 143(3) read with Section 144A of the Act
and accordingly, rejected the said contention raised by the assessee. http://www.judis.nic.in
5.Next, the CIT(A) took up for consideration with regard to the taxability of the sum of Rs.25 Crores
which was credited to the balance sheet under the head “addition to corpus”. The CIT(A) pointed out
that during the financial year 2013-14, relevant to the assessment year 2014-15, the assessee
received a sum of Rs.25 Crores from six companies of Shriram Group. The CIT(A) pointed out that
none of the six firms has claimed the contribution as expenditure deductible from the income
chargeable to tax. The question, which was framed for consideration was whether “voluntary
contributions received by the assessee are in the nature of income chargeable to tax”.
6.The assessee contended that they are an Association of Person (AoP), that is, a person within the
meaning of Explanation to Section 2(31) of the Act. The assessee further contended that this is so
because they had filed their return in Form No.ITR-5 specifically relating to Trust and therefore, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
assessee cannot be treated as an individual. Further, the assessee contended that reading of Section
56(2)(vii) as well as proviso thereunder would clearly http://www.judis.nic.in indicate that the
individuals referred to therein are living persons. To support such contention, reliance was placed
on the decision in the case of Smt.Sodra Devi. The CIT(A) did not agree with the assessee by
observing that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in CIT vs. Indira Balkrishna [(1960) 39 ITR 546], has
held that the word “association” means 'to join in any purpose' or 'to join in an action' and therefore,
the term AoP as found in Section 2(31), would mean an association in which two or more persons
come together for a common purpose or a common action. It further held that the settler has created
the Trust and nominated trustees to maintain and operate the Trust for the benefit of certain
identified beneficiaries who are individuals. It further held that the beneficiaries have not come
together for a common purpose and they do not have any role in the operation and maintenance of
the Trust.
7.The assessee contended that after the insertion of the explanation below Section 2(31) by Finance
Act, 2002, with effect from 01.04.2002, reliance cannot be placed on the decision in Indira
Balkrishna. This plea was also rejected by the CIT(A) holding that the insertion of the explanation
http://www.judis.nic.in was to cover the vacuum and bring charitable and religious Trust into the
ambit of taxation in an event of those institutions losing the benefit or exemption under Section 10,
11 or 12 of the Act, and accordingly, held that the decision in Indira Balkrishna continues to hold
good.
8.With regard to the form of return, viz., ITR-5, which was heavily relied on by the assessee to state
that they should be treated as an AoP, the CIT(A) rejected the same holding that the assessee, being
a private discretionary Trust, had taken advantage of the press release issued by the Central Board
of Direct Taxes (CBDT) dated 31.07.2012 permitting private discretionary Trust to have the status of
'individual' only and therefore, rejected the contention of the assessee that they fall within the
meaning of explanation inserted below Section 2(31) with effect from 01.04.2002.
9.With regard to the contention of the assessee that the voluntary contribution received from six
concerns of the Shriram Group towards corpus of the assessee Trust does not constitute income in
the hands of the assessee http://www.judis.nic.in three decisions were relied on by the assessee. The
CIT(A) in paragraphs 4.4.2 to 4.4.4 distinguished those decisions by assigning certain reasons and
pointed out that the core issue would be whether the assessee, a private discretionary Trust, which
received a corpus donation in its status as a representative assessee, representing the individual
beneficiaries, is an individual for the purpose of the Act and such income is taxable or otherwise. It
was pointed out that in none of the decisions, the status of the assessee was adjudicated and all the
case laws are silent on the status of the assessee, which is governed by the provisions of Section
161(1) of the Act.
10.The assessee contended that the corpus donation is not a benefit or perquisite to become income
under Section 2(24)(iva) read with Section 56(1) and relied on the decision in the case of CIT vs.
G.Venkatraman [(1978) 111 ITR 444 (Madras)]. The CIT(A) pointed out that in the said decision, it
was held that the word “obtained” occurring under the 1922 Act corresponds to deemed dividend
and held that appropriating of benefit is taken by the Director from the company and not 'obtained'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
from the company. In this http://www.judis.nic.in regard, reference was made to the decision in the
case of CIT vs. Adaikappa Chettiar [(1973) 91 ITR 90 (Madras)] to distinguish the meaning between
the words “obtained” and “taken”. Therefore, the assessee argued that unless a benefit or perquisite
in money or money's worth is obtained, the same cannot be treated as income.
11.The CIT(A) agreed with the contention of the assessee by taking note of the decision in the case of
G.Venkatraman and held that corpus donation is not income as defined under Section 2(24)(iva) of
the Act, however proceeded to hold that the said receipt will fall within the ambit of Section
2(24)(xv) read with Section 56(2)(vii) inserted with effect from 01.10.2009. Thus, the CIT(A) zeroed
in on the core issue with regard to the status of the assessee. The CIT(A) held that the Trust has been
created by a settler declared by a duly executed instrument in writing, which empowered the
trustees to receive the property under Trust and maintain it for the benefit of the beneficiaries
identified by the Trust and therefore, held that the assessee is a representative assessee as per
Section 160 of the Act, since it http://www.judis.nic.in receives income on behalf of and for the
benefit of the beneficiaries; the assessee is only a representative of the beneficiaries who are in
substance and form, the real owners.
12.Referring to Section 161(1), it was held that the assessee being a representative assessee, has to be
taxed in the like manner and to the same extent as it would be in respect of the beneficiaries and the
status of the assessee is to be determined with reference to the status of the beneficiaries and the
beneficiaries being individuals, the assessee's status is also that of an individual. The CIT(A)
approved the finding of the JCIT that the status of the Trust is to be determined from the status of
the beneficiaries by placing reliance on the decision in the case of CIT vs. SEA Head Office Monthly
Paid Employees Welfare Trust [(2004) 141 Taxman 364 (Delhi)]. Further, the CIT(A) affirmed the
finding of the JCIT refusing to treat the assessee as an AoP under Section 2(31) by referring to the
decision in CIT vs. Marsons Beneficiary Trust [(1990) 52 Taxman 454 (Bombay)]. Accordingly, the
CIT(A) held that the assessee, a private discretionary Trust, is in the status of
http://www.judis.nic.in an individual, since all its beneficiaries are individuals and they cannot be
treated as an AoP under Section 2(31) of the Act.
13.The assessee contended that the term “individual” occurring in Section 56(2)(vii) has to be
interpreted with reference to the context in which it is used in the said provision. In other words, it
was contended that in the proviso, there is a reference to relatives of individual, occasions like
marriage etc., and therefore, the term “individual” occurring in Section 56(2)(vii) shall mean only
living persons. This issue was discussed by the CIT(A) firstly by noting Section 5(1) of the Act, which
deals with “scope of total income” to include all income from whatever source derived, which is
received or is deemed to be received in India. It was held that the assessee in the status of a
representative assessee, has received income on behalf of individuals and the reference to relatives,
occasion of marriage of individual, etc., in the said provision does not apply to a representative
assessee. Noting the factual position, the CIT(A) pointed out that the income received by the
assessee is on behalf of the individuals and therefore, the argument that the assessee
http://www.judis.nic.in being not a living person would fall outside the scope of Section 56(2)(vii)
was to be rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
14.With regard to the plea that there was no income to fall within the mischief of Section 2(24)(iva),
the CIT(A) held that the assessee having been held to be an individual as per the provisions of
Section 2(24)(xv) read with Section 56(2)(vii), the contribution received without any reciprocation
has necessarily to be treated as income of the Trust under the head “income from other sources”.
15.The assessee referred to the insertion of clause (x) to Section 56(2) with effect from 01.04.2017
and contended that the persons classified under the status of individual or HUF and placing a
restriction on the gift received was only prospective and the donations received by the assessee was
during the financial year 2013-14 and therefore, cannot be brought to tax. This contention was
rejected holding that it has been substantiated that the assessee is a representative assessee and not
an AoP and therefore, would get http://www.judis.nic.in categorised as an individual and the
provisions of Section 56(2)(vii) is applicable and accordingly, the order of the Assessing Officer
bringing to tax the said amount of Rs.25 Crores was confirmed.
16.With regard to the disallowance under Section 14A, the CIT(A) held that the Assessing Officer
was justified in making the disallowance under Section 14A read with Rule 8D(2)(iii). Though the
finding was against the assessee, in our opinion, in its entirety, in the penultimate paragraph of the
order dated 06.02.2017, the CIT(A) states that the appeal is partly allowed presumably for the
reason that the CIT(A) agreed with the assessee that the corpus donation is not an income as defined
under Section 2(24)(iva), but brought the assessee within the ambit of Section 2(24)(xv) read with
Section 56(2)(vii). Thus, a careful reading of the order passed by the CIT(A) will clearly show that
the decision was fully against the assessee. The assessee carried the matter by way of appeal to the
Tribunal.
http://www.judis.nic.in
17.Before the Tribunal, the assessee firstly focused upon the status of the assessee, which being a
Trust and, the grounds, which were raised before the CIT(A) which we have referred above, were
raised before the Tribunal, viz., filing of the return in the prescribed form etc. Another submission
was made by the assessee stating that the JCIT had no jurisdiction to invoke his power under
Section 144A when there was no assessment pending. This submission was based on the fact that
the scrutiny which was ordered was only a limited scrutiny, but not a complete scrutiny and a
limited scrutiny is not comparable to a regular scrutiny, as it is only for a limited purpose and in this
regard, relied upon the CBDT Circular dated 14.07.2016 in Circular No.5 of 2016. Further, it was
contended that the decision for taking up complete scrutiny was made only on 06.09.2016 and by
then, the JCIT had issued directions dated 24.08.2016. Further, it was contended that the JCIT
could have issued only a guideline to the Assessing Officer, who is required to independently apply
his mind and therefore, contended that the assessment order was erroneous.
http://www.judis.nic.in
18.With regard to the merits of the matter, it was argued that the assessee cannot be treated as an
individual and voluntary contributions to the corpus of the Trust could not be considered as income,
a private discretionary Trust could not be equated to an individual, the contributions received was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
only gratuitous payment and cannot be considered as income under Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act.
19.The Revenue contended that the order passed by the JCIT under Section 144A was after affording
due opportunity to the assessee to raise all contentions both on facts and on law, which were
considered by the JCIT by passing a detailed order. Further, it was submitted that when the JCIT
invoked the power under Section 144A of the Act, the assessment was already taken up for scrutiny
by issuing notice under Section 143(2) on 01.06.2016 and it is no matter whether it is limited
scrutiny or complete scrutiny when admittedly, the assessment was pending. Further, regard to the
merits of addition, the Department contended that there is no dispute to the fact that the
http://www.judis.nic.in assessee received the amount as a capital inflow. It was argued that the
addition was not made considering the sum as value of a benefit or perquisite under Section
2(24)(iva) or it was considered as an income under Section 2(24)(iia), but the same was considered
as income falling under Section 2(24)(xv) read with Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act. Further, with
regard to the form of return, it was contended that the status shown by the assessee in its form of
return is irrelevant and it cannot whittle down the provisions of the Act.
20.Reliance was placed on the decisions in the case of CIT vs. Venu Suresh Sheela Trust [(1998) 233
ITR 99 (Madras)], CIT vs. Arihant Trust [(1995) 214 ITR 306 (Madras)] and CIT vs.
T.S.K.Enterprises [(2005) 274 ITR 41 (Madras)] to support their contention that the assessee has to
be treated as an individual and not an AoP. With regard to the insertion of clause
(x) to Section 56(2) by Finance Act, 2017, the Department argued that it has no relevance because
the insertion of the said clause was to bring within the fold of taxation, money received by firms and
companies without http://www.judis.nic.in consideration. The Tribunal rejected the contention
raised by the assessee with regard to the correctness of the order and direction issued by the JCIT
under Section 144A of the Act and the effect of such direction on the Assessing Officer and held
them to be within the frame work of Section 144A. With regard to the merits of the matter, the
Tribunal held that the amount of Rs.25 Crores will not fall within Section 2(24)(iia), since the
assessee was not a Trust created for a religious or charitable purpose and accordingly, approved the
finding of the CIT(A) that it cannot be an amount received as a benefit or perquisite under Section
2(24)(iva).
21.The Tribunal next moved on to consider the correctness of the finding of the CIT(A), who
confirmed the addition by applying Section 2(24)(xv) read with Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act. While
considering the merits, the contentions advanced by the assessee based upon the form of return was
rejected and held against them to the effect that the manner in which the assessee describes itself in
the return of income may not be determinative of its status under the Income Tax Act, as it is a
matter of law http://www.judis.nic.in and not of choice. Therefore, the Tribunal rejected the
contentions raised by the assessee with regard to the correctness of the direction issued by JCIT
under Section 144A; rejected the contentions of the assessee with regard to the binding effect of such
direction on the Assessing Officer; approved the finding of the CIT(A) that the contribution received
will not fall within “income” as defined under Section 2(24)(iia); and the assessee cannot rely upon
the status mentioned by them in their return of income for determining as to who they are. To be
noted as against all these findings, the assessee is not on appeal before us.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 7
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
22.The Tribunal while considering the status of the assessee qua the applicability of Section
56(2)(vii) of the Act, referred to the decision in CIT vs. Kamalini Khatau [(1994) 209 ITR 101] and
held that a private discretionary Trust cannot be treated as an individual for all purposes of the Act
especially when, the term “individual” is not defined under the Act. The Tribunal noted the decision
in CIT vs. Shri Krishna Bandar Trust [(1993) 201 ITR 0989 (Cal.)] wherein it was held that a group
of individuals may as http://www.judis.nic.in well come in for treatment in the status of an
individual, if the context so required. The Tribunal pointed out that in the said decision, the Court
had referred to the decision in Indira Balkrishna and Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport
Corporation vs. ITO [(1964) 52 ITR 524 (SC)]. The Tribunal held that a contextual meaning has to
be given to the term “individual” and merely because a private discretionary Trust has been treated
as an individual for the purpose of taxation under Section 80L or Section 194A or Section 54F would
not be a reason to treat it so under Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act. The Tribunal observed that it is alive
of the decision in Venu Suresh Sheela Trust and Arihant Trust, however, held that the said decisions
cannot be applied to the assessee's case, as in those decisions, the interpretation was relating to
provisions which granted relief to the assessee and not charging provisions. In other words, it held
that Section 56(2) of the Act is a charging provision unlike Section 80L or Section 54F which are
provisions which give relief to the assessee and required to be liberally interpreted. The Tribunal
referred to the definition “relative” and observed that the term “individual” implies only a natural
person for the purposes of http://www.judis.nic.in Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act. The decisions,
which were referred to by the Department, were held to be rendered in a different context dealing
with other provisions of the Act, which in the opinion of the Tribunal, are provisions which give
relief to the assessee.
23.The Tribunal referred to the decision of its Delhi Bench in Mridu Hari Dalmia Parivar Trust vs.
AO [(2016) 68 taxmann.com 376 (Delhi- Trib.)] and held that though the decision concerned an
assessment under Section 56(2)(vi), it being a precursor to Section 56(2vii), the decision will apply
to the assessee's case. The Tribunal also took note of the insertion of clause (x) in Section 56(2) of
the Act with effect from 01.04.2017 and, the Explanatory note to Finance Bill, 2017 indicates that
provisions as it stood prior to the introduction of clause (x) covered only individuals and HUFs and
the legislature wanted to include in its fold other entries also, which were receiving gratuitous
payments and such provisions were applicable only from 01.04.2017. With the above findings, the
Tribunal held the the amount of Rs.25 Crores received by the assessee cannot be considered as
“income from http://www.judis.nic.in other source” under Section 56(2)(vii) read with Section
2(24)(xv) of the Act and accordingly, deleted the addition.
24.Mrs.R.Hemalatha, learned Senior Standing Counsel while reiterating the stand taken by the
Department before the CIT(A) and the Tribunal, submitted that the status of the Trust is to be
determined by the status of the beneficiary by virtue of the deeming provision by Section 161 of the
Act. The assessee Trust is a representative assessee, representing the beneficiaries, who are
individuals and therefore, the status of the assessee is an individual. The assessee's case will clearly
fall within the scope of Section 56(2)(vii)(a) of the Act.
25.Referring to Section 161(1) of the Act, it is submitted that the trustees are the representative of
the beneficiaries and he represents the beneficiaries who are in substance, the real owners and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 8
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
income is to be taxed in the like manner and to the same extent, as it would be in respect of
beneficiaries. Referring to the decision in Marsons Beneficiary Trust, it is http://www.judis.nic.in
submitted that even when trustees of a private Trust are engaged in business, they cannot be
assessed as an AoP.
26.It is further submitted that after the e-filing of return of income was introduced, certain hardship
was faced by the assessee which necessitated CBDT to issue a press release dated 31.07.2012
facilitating manual filing of return of income of private Trusts, since the existing e-filing software
did not accept return of income of a private discretionary Trust in the status of an individual.
Reliance was placed on the decision in Venu Suresh Sheela Trust, Arihant Trust, T.S.K.Enterprises
and Niti Trust vs. CIT [(1996) 221 ITR 435 (Guj.)] to support the contention that the status of such a
private discretionary Trust would be that of an individual. Reference was also made to the budget
speech of the Hon'ble Finance Minister introducing Financing (No.2) Act, 2004. Reference was
made to the factual details with regard to the purpose for which the assessee Trust was created, the
persons, who are individual as beneficiaries, method of determining the beneficiaries etc., and it is
submitted that in Annexure-V of the Deed of Trust dated 11.09.2006, http://www.judis.nic.in
thirteen persons have been identified, who formed part of the beneficiaries list in the owner's group,
23 persons being beneficiaries under Senior Leader Group and each one of them occupied senior
position in the companies comprised in the Shriram Group. Further, the learned Senior Standing
Counsel referred to the contributors of Rs.25 Crores by six concerns, viz.,
(i) Shriram Business Finance – AAAFS2592K – Rs.2 Crores;
(ii) Shriram Credit Syndicate – AAAFS1437K – Rs.5 Crores;
(iii) Shri SR E-Commerce Finance – AAXFS7828M – Rs.5 Crores;
(iv) Shriram Two Wheeler Finance – AAWFS9761N – Rs.3 Crores;
(v) Shriram Domestic Finance – AAAFS2600Q – Rs.8 Crores; and
(vi) Shriram Professional Finance – AAAFS1440A – Rs.2 Crores and, submitted that all of them are
located in the same address in Chennai and the gratis given to the assessee Trust in which the
beneficiaries are people occupying high position in Shriram Group, is obviously an amount received
on behalf of the beneficiaries.
27.It is further contended that the assessee is a representative assessee as defined under Section
160(1)(iv) of the Act and the benefit or perquisite is http://www.judis.nic.in derived by the assessee
Trust on behalf of its beneficiaries and therefore, Section 56(1) of the Act will come into play and
income of every kind which is not included from the total income under the Act are to be charged to
income tax under the head “income from other sources”.
28.With regard to the finding of the Tribunal that individual should mean a living person, it is
submitted that the gifts are actually received by the individuals and the assessee Trust has acted as a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 9
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
conduit and the Act does not provide for such tax evasion. Further, relying upon the proviso under
Section 56(2)(vii) it was argued that the proviso is merely used to act as an optional addendum to
the enactment providing an exception.
29.With regard to the insertion of clause (x) to Section 56(2), it is submitted that the argument that
the said provision was inserted with prospective effect cannot come to the rescue of the assessee,
since the Revenue has been subjected to establish that the assessee is a representative assessee and
not an AoP and would get categorised as an individual assessee http://www.judis.nic.in and the
provision of Section 56(2)(vii) is required to be enforced on the assessee. It is further submitted that
the Department is fully right in invoking the proviso to Sections 4 and 5 of the Act to bring the
income to tax. Further, it is submitted that the assessee cannot raise any contentions with regard to
the finding of the Tribunal over which the assessee has not filed an appeal and in this regard,
referred to Section 260A of the Act, Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Order 42 Rule 11
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
30.With regard to the attempt of the assessee to canvass certain issues before this Court stating that
they are substantial questions of law, to be decided in this appeal, Mr.T.Ravi Kumar, learned Senior
Standing Counsel by referring to the following decisions, submitted that such a prayer cannot be
entertained:-
(i) Helios AMD Metheson Information Technology Ltd. vs. ACTI [(2011) 332 ITR
4303 (Madras)];
(ii) Indian Additives Ltd. vs. DCIT [(2012) 67 DTR 0389];
(iii) CIT vs. Indo Gulp Fertilizers Ltd., [(2013) 355 ITR 0437];
http://www.judis.nic.in
(iv) Phool Pata vs. Vishwanath Singh [(2005) 197 CTR 0598 (SC); and
(v) CIT vs. Mastek Ltd. [(2013) 358 ITR 0252 (SC)].
31.To substantiate the argument that the assessee has to be categorised as an individual, reliance
was placed on the decision in Kerala Financial Corporation vs. Wealth-Tax Officer [(1971) 82 ITR
477 (FB) Kerala]; Assam Financial Corporation vs. Commissioner of Wealth-Tax [(1974) 94 ITR
404]; Banarsi Dass & Ors. vs. Wealth Tax Officer, Spl. Circle, Meerut & Ors. [(1965) 56 ITR 224];
Commissioner of Welath Tax vs. Hyderabad Race Club [(1978) 115 ITR 453]; Royal Calcutta Turf
Club vs. Wealth Tax Officer [(1984) 184 ITR 790] and Coimbatore Club vs. Wealth-Tax Officer
[(1985) 153 ITR 172]. Reliance was also placed on the decisions in the case of Ramanlal Kamdar vs.
CIT [(1977) 108 ITR 73] and P.R.Narahari Rao vs. CIT [(2008) 299 ITR 400].
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 10
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
32.Mr.R.Sivaraman, learned counsel appearing for the respondent assessee submitted that the Trust
was established on 11.09.2006 for distribution of retirement benefit to the owners and senior
leaders chosen from Shriram entities when they attain sixty years of age. It is submitted that the
entire income of the Trust is not straight away paid, but a committee determines the Net Worth
Available for Apportionment (NWAA) and a percentage of it alone be distributed at the end of
duration of the Trust in which 1/3rd of the corpus and accumulated income remaining shall be given
for charitable purposes and 2/3rd shall be distributed among the beneficiaries. It is submitted that
the return of income filed by the assessee was in the status of Trust. The Trust received
voluntary/gratuitous payment from six entities to the tune of Rs.25 Crores as contribution to corpus
fund and it was directly credited to the capital account of the Trust. This corpus amount did not
form part of income distributed to the beneficiaries. So, the contributions were not income received
or receivable on behalf of the beneficiaries. The return filed by the assessee for the assessment year
under consideration was in form ITR- http://www.judis.nic.in
5. It was filed in the status of a Trust, the assessment was made by treating the assessee as a Trust.
33.It is submitted that the JCIT did not have jurisdiction to issue directions on an issue which is not
subject matter of pending assessment, as the scrutiny was only a limited scrutiny. In this regard, the
CBDT circular dated 14.07.2016 was referred to. Further, it is submitted that the assessee Trust filed
its return as per Rule 12 of the Income Tax Rules (for brevity “the Rules”) prescribed by the CBDT in
the status of Trust and this was accepted and an intimation under Section 143(1) was issued and
subsequently, notice under Section 142(1) was issued describing the assessee's status as a Trust. The
assessment was made in the status of Trust and not in the status of representative assessee under
Section 161(1) of the Act. Therefore, the Assessing Officer could not have applied the provisions
dealing with individuals and HUFs. Further, the Revenue cannot place reliance on Section 161 of the
Act, as the provision will apply only when the income is specifically receivable on behalf of or for the
benefit of any one person who http://www.judis.nic.in are known or whose shares are determinate.
In the assessee's case, the beneficiaries are indeterminate and the individual shares in the income
are also indeterminate. Furthermore, the voluntary contributions received by the Trust were taken
into corpus and did not form part of any income distributed to the beneficiaries. Therefore, the
contributions were not income receivable on behalf of the beneficiaries and therefore, Section 164 of
the Act alone can be applied.
34.With regard to the interpretation of the term “individual” occurring in Section 56(2), it is
submitted that it refers to a natural human being only, as there is a reference to “relatives of the
individual” and “occasions like marriage of individual” which shall prove that the term “individual”
in Section 56(2)(vii) means living human being. In this regard, reference was made to the decision
in Smt.Sodra Devi and Mridu Hari Dalmia Parivar Trust. Further, it is submitted that Section
56(2)(v) or 56(2)(vi) or 56(2)(vii)(a) would be attracted only when individuals or HUFs receive any
sum of money. The emphasis is on the receipt by the individual himself and http://www.judis.nic.in
not by some one else on their behalf. The word “receive” in the context of the above mentioned
means receipt of a sum of money over which the recipient gets absolute control like rights of
enjoyment etc. In the assessee's case, the beneficiaries under the scheme of the Trust did not have
rights to receive the income periodically. It vests only on their retirement. Further, it is submitted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 11
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
that Section 56(2)(vii)(a) which is a charging section is differently worded from Section 5(1)(a).
Under Section 5(1)(a) income of a person includes all income which is received or deemed to be
received by or on behalf of such person whereas Section 56(2)(vii)(a) states that the individual
receives a sum of money, it does not include sums received by some one else on his behalf and
therefore, this provision is individual/HUF centric, as it imposes the artificial liability.
35.With regard to the decisions relied on by the Revenue, viz., in Venu Suresh Sheela Trust, Arihant
Trust, T.S.K.Enterprises, SEA Head Office, Niti Trust, and Marsons Beneficiary Trust, it is
submitted that those decisions were all rendered in different context and cannot be applied to the
http://www.judis.nic.in assessee's case. All the aforementioned decisions have referred to and relied
upon the decision in Indira Balkrishna wherein the Court added a word of caution about the test for
determining an association of person and this word of caution should be borne in mind while
considering the facts of the case.
36.Further, it is submitted that the amendment to Section 2(31) by insertion of explanation by
Finance Act, 2002 with effect from 01.04.2002 has to be read bearing in mind the words of caution
as spelt out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Indira Balkrishna and all those decisions were
rendered prior to the amendment by Finance Act 2002. Furthermore, on facts in all those decisions,
either the beneficiaries are known or the individual shares are known and therefore, Section 161 was
invoked and in some of those cases, the assessee themselves have filed return in the status of
“individual” unlike the case on hand, where Section 161 cannot be invoked. It is further submitted
that the decisions in Banarsi Dass, Kerala Financial Corporation, Assam Financial Corporation,
Hyderabad Race Club, Royal http://www.judis.nic.in Calcutta Turf Club and Coimbatore Club relied
on by the Revenue support the case of the assessee, wherein it was held that individual should be
interpreted in the context in which it is used and all the judgments relate to assessment years prior
to the amendment in Section 2(31) by Finance Act, 2002.
37.Further, the learned counsel sought to sustain the finding of the Tribunal qua the insertion of
clause (x) in Section 56(2) of the Act. Thus, it is submitted that the assessee has to be treated as an
AoP and not an individual, in the light of the legislative change by way of its insertion of explanation
below Section 2(31) inserted with effect from 01.04.2002 as also the fact that the return of income
was filed in accordance with Rule 12A of the Rules in the prescribed form ITR-5 which form is
applicable to private discretionary Trusts. Further, it is submitted that even assuming the assessee
has to be treated as an individual, the provisions of Section 56(2)(vii)(a) cannot be applied, as the
term “individual” in that Section has the words denoting 'relatives' mentioning about occasions like
marriage etc., and this needs to be http://www.judis.nic.in interpreted following the ratio in the case
of Smt.Sodra Devi to mean that individual should denote a living person and not a Trust.
38.Heard Ms.R.Hemalatha, learned Senior Standing Counsel appearing for the appellant/Revenue
and Mr.R.Sivaraman, learned counsel appearing for the respondent/assessee.
39.The first substantial question of law raised by the revenue in this appeal is whether the Tribunal
was right in holding that the investment which yielded no exempt income was to be excluded while
computing deduction under Section 14A when the Act as well as the Rules do not provide for any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 12
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
such exception. An identical question was raised by the revenue in the assessee's own case in
T.C.A.No.241 of 2018 for the assessment year 2013-
14. When the said tax case appeal was heard, we noted that the substantial question of law has to be
answered in favour of the assessee in the light of the decision of the Hon'ble Division Bench in the
case of M/s.Marg Limited vs. CIT, Chennai [T.C.A.Nos.41 to 43 and 220 of 2017 dated 30.09.2020].
http://www.judis.nic.in However, the appeal filed by the revenue was dismissed on 08.07.2020
owing to low tax effect. The revenue cannot dispute the fact that the above substantial question of
law was decided in favour of the assessee. In the case of M/s.Marg Limited, in which the decision of
the High Court of Karnataka in Pragathi Krishna Gramin Bank vs. JCIT [(2018) 95 Taxman.com
41(Kar.)] was followed. Further, the Delhi Bench of ITAT in the case of ACIT, Circle 17(1), New Delhi
vs. Vireet Investment (P) Ltd. [(2017) 82 Taxman.com 415 (Delhi-Trib.)(SB)] also decided the said
issue in favour of the assessee. Thus, following the above referred decision, substantial question of
law No.1 is answered in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
40.Substantial question of law Nos.2 and 3 are interconnected, namely, a decision on the status of
the assessee whether it has to be assessed as an individual or as an association of persons and
whether the assessee if has to be treated as an individual would stand excluded from the purview of
Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act on the ground that it is not a natural living person.
http://www.judis.nic.in Before we take up for consideration these two questions, we are required to
consider the submission made by Mr.R.Sivaraman with regard to the jurisdiction of the JCIT to
issue directions under Section 144A of the Act. It is his submission that the JCIT does not have
jurisdiction to issue notice to deal with the issue which is not the subject matter of a pending
assessment. Such contention is raised on the ground that the scrutiny assessment was a limited
scrutiny and all issues in the assessment originally completed were not open to scrutiny.
41.Ms.R.Hemalatha, learned senior standing counsel would vehemently oppose the argument of
Mr.R.Sivaraman on the ground that the present appeal is an appeal filed by the revenue under
Section 260A of the Act and if at all additional questions have to be framed and decided, it is the
discretion of the Court in terms of sub-Section (4) of Section 260A of the Act. In any event, the
assessee having not filed a separate appeal on the decision of the Tribunal rejecting the contention
regarding the jurisdiction of the JCIT is prevented and precluded from arguing the said point and
requesting the Court to frame a http://www.judis.nic.in substantial question of law on the said issue
and decide the same. In this regard, the learned counsel has drawn the attention of this Court to
Section 260A of the Act, Section 100 CPC and Order 42 Rule 11 CPC. Therefore, it is submitted that
even assuming there is another substantial question of law which is required to be considered by the
Court though not admitted earlier, in an appeal by the revenue it is only the revenue which can
make such a prayer before the Court and not the assessee who has not filed a separate appeal.
42.Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned senior standing counsel supported the submissions of Ms.R.Hemalatha
and has relied upon certain decisions.
43.Mr.R.Sivaraman, learned counsel placed reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of CIT vs. V.Damodaran [(1979) 2 Taxman 397(SC)]. In the said case, the revenue
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 13
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
applied for the reference to the High Court of Kerala and and at its instance, the Tribunal referred a
substantial question of law for consideration in a case arising under the 1992
http://www.judis.nic.in Act. The assessee also requested the inclusion of another question which
was also referred to the High Court. The High Court answered the first question in the affirmative
and the second question in the negative. Both being answered in favour of the assessee, appeal was
filed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court by the Revenue. One other issue was whether the Tribunal
was competent to refer the second question and it was contended by the revenue that the said
question should not have been referred by the Tribunal to the High Court at the instance of the
assessee because no reference application was made by the assessee and the only reference was the
application filed by the CIT. The Hon'ble Supreme Court after discussing about the power under
Section 256(1), Section 254 held that in every case it is only the party applying for a reference who is
entitled to specify the question of law which should be referred and nowhere in the statute there is a
right in the non-applicant (one who has not applied for reference) to ask for a reference of question
of law on the application made by the applicant. It was further pointed out that two category of cases
can be envisaged. One consist of cases where the order of the Tribunal under Section 254 of the Act
has http://www.judis.nic.in decided the appeal partly against one party and partly against other.
This may be so whether the appeal consists of a single subject matter or there are more than one
independent claims in the appeal. It was pointed out that in the former set of cases, one party may
be aggrieved by the grant of relief even though partially, while the other party may be aggrieved by
the refusal to grant total relief. It was pointed out that in the latter, relief may be granted or refused
with reference to individual items in dispute and accordingly, one party or the other will be
aggrieved and in either case, the party who is aggrieved and who desires a reference to High Court
must file a reference application for the purpose and it is not open to him to make reference
application filed by the other party on the basis of his claim that a question of law sought by him
should be referred. It was further pointed out that in the second category of cases are where order
made by the Tribunal under Section 254 of the Act operates entirely in favour of one party although
in the course of making the order, the Tribunal may have negatived some points of law raised by the
party. Not being aggrieved by the result of the appeal, it would be open to the party to file a
reference application but on a reference http://www.judis.nic.in application filed by the aggrieved
party, it is open to the non-applicant in the event the Tribunal agreed to refer the case to the High
Court to ask for a reference of those questions of law also which arise on its submissions negatives in
the appeal by the Appellate Tribunal. This was to recognize a right in the winning party to support
the order of the Tribunal also on grounds raised before the Tribunal but negatived by it.
44.The Hon'ble Supreme Court noted the decision in the case of CIT vs. S.K.Srinivasan [(1970) 75
ITR 93(Mad)] and CIT vs. Ramdas Pharmacy [(1970) 77 ITR 276(Mad)], wherein it was held that
there is absolute bar against a non-applicant seeking a reference of question of law on a reference
application made by the other party. The Court also noted the decision in H.H.Maharana Bhagwat
Singhji of Udaipur vs. CIT [(1964) 51 ITR 112(Raj.)], CWT vs. Mrs.Arundhati Balkrishna [(1968) 70
ITR 203 (Guj)] which was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in CWT vs. Arundhati Balkrishna
[(1970) 77 ITR 505] which took a contrary view than the decisions of this Court quoted above.
Further noting the observations in CIT http://www.judis.nic.in vs. Bantiah Bank Limited in ITR
Reference No.20/2015 dated 10.10.2015, wherein it was pointed out that a winning party may be
deprived of the right to raise questions of law which would properly arise as further questions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 14
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
because they would be intimately involved in a decision on the questions referred on the instance of
the applicant, but it failed to classify such a case separately from a case where a non-applicant seeks
to raise independent and unassociated questions of law. Ultimately, the Court held that the Tribunal
was not competent to refer the second question. To be noted that the decision arose out of a
reference case unlike the case on hand which is an appeal filed by the revenue under Section 260A of
the Act.
45.The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Phool Pata, held that perusal of Section 100 CPC
shows nothing in sub-section (5) takes away or abridges the power of the High Court to hear for
reasons to be recorded on any other substantial questions of law not formulated earlier, if it satisfies
that the case involves such question. Therefore, even in such circumstances it is only at the instance
of the appellant such power can be exercised by the High http://www.judis.nic.in Court. In Mastek
Ltd., it was held that the power of the High Court to frame substantial question of law at the time of
hearing of the appeal other than the questions on which the appeal has been admitted remains
under Section 260A(4) and this power is subject however to two conditions, namely, (i) the Court
must be satisfied that the appeal involves such questions; and (ii) the Court has to record reasons
thereof. Similar view was taken in Helios AMD Metheson Information Technology Ltd., holding that
there is every power vested in the High Court to deal with the substantial questions of law not
formulated at the time when the appeal was entertained, subject however to the satisfaction of the
Court that such a question was involved in the case and for reasons to be recorded for that purpose.
46.Ms.R.Hemalatha, learned senior standing counsel relied on the decision in the case of
P.R.Naraharai Rao, wherein it was held that the assessee having not objected to the order passed by
the Tribunal by filing a separate appeal, he cannot be stated to be an aggrieved person against the
said finding to seek for the Court to frame an additional substantial question of
http://www.judis.nic.in law in an appeal filed by the aggrieved party, namely, the revenue under
Section 260A of the Act. For the same proposition, reliance was placed on the decision of the
Hon'ble Division Bench in the case of Ramanlal Kamdar, wherein it was held that only if the
assessee was aggrieved by the order of the Income Tax Officer, he had the right to file an appeal
before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and once the assessee could not have had any
grievance in view of the statement made by the partner [in the said case], the appeal to the Appellate
Assistant Commissioner was incompetent and equally the appeal to the Tribunal was incompetent
and consequently, the reference to the High Court was also incompetent.
47.Thus, taking note of the legal principle which can be culled out from the above decisions, there is
a vast difference in cases where a reference is made to the High Court by the Tribunal on an
application and an appeal under Section 260A of the Act by an aggrieved person. The assessee
having not filed an appeal as against the findings rendered by the Tribunal on the issue of
jurisdiction and procedural aspects followed by the Assessing Officer, he http://www.judis.nic.in
cannot stated to be an aggrieved person over such finding in the absence of an appeal at their
instance under sub-section (2) of Section 260A of the Act. Unless and until the aggrieved person is
before the Court by way of an appeal, the question of calling upon the Court to frame an additional
substantial question of law by invoking its power under sub-section (4) of Section 260A of the Act
does not arise. Therefore, we hold that the assessee is precluded from raising any contention with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 15
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
regard to the jurisdiction of the JCIT to issue direction under Section 144A of the Act nor anything
about the procedure followed by the Assessing Officer pursuant to such direction. The underlying
principle being that the revenue cannot be worse of in their appeal at the instance of the assessee
who has not filed an appeal over such finding of the Tribunal.
48.Having steered clear of the above issue, we are required to decide the status of the assessee,
whether it is an “individual”. If it is an “individual”, the statute qualifies that the “individual” should
be a living person. The undisputed facts are the assessee is a private discretionary Trust
http://www.judis.nic.in and has received donation from six of its group Companies amounting to
Rs.25 Crores which was credited to the Balance Sheet of the assessee under the head 'Addition to
Corpus' and not routed through the Profit and Loss Account. The authorities, more particularly, the
JCIT had perused the Deed of Trust dated 11.09.2006 and Supplemental Deed dated 16.03.2009,
from which, it is clear that the assessee is a private discretionary Trust. If that is so, Section
2(24)(iia) will not be applicable. Noting the facts, the JCIT issued notice under Section 144A, dated
14.07.2016 stating that the assessee is a representative assessee acting on behalf of the beneficiaries
who are individuals and hence governed by the provisions of Section 160(1)(iv) of the Act. Further,
by referring to Section 161(1) of the Act, it was stated that being a representative assessee, the
liability is cast upon the assessee, in the like manner and same instance as it would be applicable to
the beneficiaries of the Trust. It was further stated that when the assessee has to be treated as an
individual, the corpus donation received by the assessee Trust requires to be brought to Tax under
Section 56(2)(vii) of the Act. The assessee responded to the notice by appearing in person on
22.07.2016 along with their http://www.judis.nic.in written submissions. The JCIT rejected the
contention of the assessee and treated the assessee as an “individual” and brought the said amount
to tax.
49.In Indira Balkrishna, the Hon'ble Supreme Court pointed out that an association of persons
would mean persons joining in an action and therefore, the term 'AoP' used in Section 2(31)(v) of
the Act would mean an association in which two or more person join with a common purpose or for
a common action. In the assessee's case neither the trustees nor the beneficiaries have come
together with common purpose of earning income. The beneficiaries are the owners and top level
executives of the Shriram Group of concerns. The investment of Rs.25 Crores has come from six of
the concerns of the Shriram Group. The trustees exercised their powers as spelt out in the Deed of
Trust as well as the Supplement Deed. The argument that the beneficiaries are not identifiable
because the entire amount which is earned by the Trust by way of various income is not handed over
to the beneficiaries as there is a Committee which is constituted which will determine the net worth
available for apportionment and only 2/3rd will be http://www.judis.nic.in distributed among the
beneficiaries and 1/3rd of the corpus and accumulated income will be used for charitable purpose.
The contention of the assessee that the beneficiaries are unknown and there are several persons,
therefore they are treated to be an association of persons, is an argument which is stated to be
rejected. An argument was made stating that explanation to Section 2(31) was inserted stating that
for the purposes of Clause 31, an association of persons or a body of individuals or a local authority
or an artificial juridical person shall be deemed to be a person, whether or not such person or body
or authority or juridical person was formed or established or incorporated with the object of
deriving income, profits or gains and this amendment which came into effect from 01.04.2002 is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 16
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
referred to and submitted that the decision in Indira Balkrishna cannot be referred to. However, the
legal principle laid down in the said decision cannot be taken away and the interpretation given by
the assessee is not sustainable.
50.On this issue, the JCIT while issuing directions under section 144A of the Act rightly took note of
the explanatory notes to the Finance Act, 2002, http://www.judis.nic.in wherein it has been stated
that as per the provision contained in clause 31 of Section 2 of the Act as it then existed, the
expression 'person' includes an individual, a Hindu undivided family, a company, a firm, an
association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, a local authority and
every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the above definitions. It was further stated
that although the definition of person is inclusive and starts with the clarifying words “unless the
context otherwise requires”, in some cases, a claim has been made that certain bodies do not fall
within any of the definitions of person provided in Clause 31 of Section 2 of the Act due to the sole
reason that they are not supposed to have any income or profits and gains. To clarify the correct
legal position, an explanation in clause 31 of section 2 has been inserted through Finance Act, 2002
so as to provide that an association of persons or a body of individuals or a local authority or an
artificial juridical person shall be deemed to be a person, whether or not, such person or body or
authority or juridical person, was formed or established or incorporated with the object of deriving
income, profits or gains. Therefore, the contention of the assessee that consequent
http://www.judis.nic.in upon the insertion of explanation to Section 2(31), a representative assessee
representing individuals is to be treated as an AoP is an argument which cannot be accepted.
Furthermore, in the case of the assessee, the settler has created a trust and appointed trustees. To
administer the trust for the benefit of certain identified beneficiaries who are top level executives of
the Shriram Group of Companies and who are admittedly individuals. Those individuals have not
come together with a common purpose and they do not have any role in the operation or
administration of the Trust. Therefore, the assessee cannot be treated as an AoP. To take a decision
in the matter, the facts are very essential. A trustee appointed under a trust created under a Deed of
Trust has to be treated as a representative assessee in terms of section 160 of the Act provided he
receives or he is entitled to receive any money on behalf of or benefit of any person. Such trustee is
deemed to be an assessee for the purposes of the Act. This position becomes clear if one carefully
examines section 161(1) of the Act which states that every representative assessee, as regards the
income in respect of which he is a representative assessee, shall be subject to the same duties,
responsibilities and liabilities as if the income http://www.judis.nic.in were income received by or
accruing to or in favour of him beneficially, and shall be liable to assessment in his own name in
respect of that income; but any such assessment shall be deemed to be made upon him in his
representative capacity only, and the tax shall, subject to the other provisions contained in Chapter
XV of the Act, be levied upon and recovered from him in like manner and to the same extent as it
would be leviable upon and recoverable from the person represented by him. The assessee in the
instant case or the trustees are only the representatives of the beneficiaries and the income is
required to be taxed in the like manner and to the same extent as it would be in respect of
beneficiaries. The argument that the beneficiaries are not known cannot be accepted because the
Deed of Trust as well as the Supplemental Deed would show that the beneficiaries are top level
executives of the Shriram Group of Companies who will be extended financial benefit on attaining
the age of 60 years and the set of persons who would be benefited have also been mentioned in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 17
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
annexures. It is to be further noted that the names of those persons, who are yet to attain 60 years,
are well within the knowledge of the assessee and more particularly, to the six group
http://www.judis.nic.in concerns, which extended the gratis and, all those beneficiaries are
individuals and therefore, the assessee in the instant case, having received the perquisite on behalf
of its beneficiaries, should be treated as a representative of those beneficiaries and therefore, has to
be assessed as an “individual”.
51.The assessee harps upon the form of return filed in ITR-5. According to the learned counsel for
the assessee, this is a statutory form as prescribed under Rule 12 and the assessee was assessed as a
Trust. As rightly pointed out by the CIT(A) as well as the Tribunal, the status shown by the assessee
in the return of income is irrelevant as the Rules only prescribes forms and this cannot in any
manner control the operations of the provisions of the Act.
52.In Venu Suresh Sheela Trust's case, the assessee was a private and discretionary trust. In view of
the fact that the shares of the beneficiaries were not ascertainable the assessee claim deduction
under Section 80L in respect of interest on securities, dividends, etc. The Income Tax Officer was
http://www.judis.nic.in of the view that the assessee's status would be an association of persons
because there was more than one beneficiary whose shares in the Trust was not definite and since
the assessee was admitted not an AoP envisaged under Section 80L(1)(c) and was not an individual
or a Hindu Undivided Family, the assessee was held to be not eligible for any relief. However, on
appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner accepted the assessee's plea which was upheld by the
Tribunal and the High Court.
53.In Arihant Trust's case, it was held that even an artificial juridical person can be treated as an
individual under Section 194A as there is nothing to restrict the applicability of the word 'individual'
only to a natural person or a human being and it applies to artificial juridical persons also.
54.In Marsons Beneficiary Trust's case, it was held that in view of the clear provisions of section
161(1) there could be no doubt that the trustees have to be assessed in the manner provided in
section 161(1), in respect of any income of the trust, looking to the interpretation put by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court on the term 'association of persons' also, there could be no http://www.judis.nic.in
doubt that the beneficiaries who were named in the trust as recipients of the income of the trust,
could not be considered as an AoP. The decision in Marson Beneficiary Trust was relied on in the
case of T.S.K.Enterprises, wherein the assessee was assessed as an “individual” as well as the
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in T.C.A.Nos.661 and 662 of 1994 dated 15.12.1998.
55.Mr.R.Sivaraman, learned counsel for the respondent would argue that the above referred
decisions are not applicable to the assessee's case and all the decisions were rendered taking note of
the judgment in the case of Indira Balkrishna, wherein the Court has added a word of caution about
the test for determining an association of persons and held that there is no formula of universal
application of as to what facts, how many of them and of what nature are necessary to come to a
conclusion that there is an association of persons within the meaning of section 3 and it must
depend upon particular facts and circumstances of each case as to whether the conclusion can be or
not.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 18
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
56.The argument is that the amendment to section 2(31) by insertion of the explanation with effect
from 01.04.2002 needs to be read bearing in mind the words of caution sounded by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Indira Balkrishna. Further it is argued that the decisions relied on by
the revenue are of all assessments pertaining to the period before 01.04.2002 and the Courts had no
occasion to consider the scope, effect and reach of the explanation inserted in Section 2(31) with
effect from 01.04.2002.
57.With regard to the form of return which was adopted by the assessee on which much reliance has
been placed to show that the assessee has filed their return and they were assessed as a trust, we
note that this was on account of a relaxation given by the Department from compulsory e-filing of
return of income for the assessment year 2012-13 for representative assessees of non- residents and
in the case of private discretionary trust. In the press release issued by the CBDT, it has been stated
that the private discretionary trust having total income exceeding Rs.10 lakhs have facing problems
in filing their return of income electronically in cases where they are filing their return
http://www.judis.nic.in of income in the status of an individual. This is because the status of private
discretionary trust has been held in law as that of an “individual” and the existing e-filing software
does not accept the return of a private discretionary trust in the status of an individual. Accordingly,
the Board decided that it will not be mandatory for private discretionary trust, if its total income
exceeds Rs.10 lakhs to electronically furnish the return of income. Therefore, by taking advantage of
the situation, the assessee cannot harp upon the form of return and the Tribunal was right in
rejecting such an argument made by the assessee, against which, the assessee is not on appeal before
us.
58.In Shri Krishna Bandar Trust, the Court was considering the amendment made by Finance Act,
1980, wherein it was pointed out that in a case of discretionary trust, neither the trustees nor the
beneficiaries can be considered as having come together with the common purpose of earning
income. The beneficiaries have not set up the trust. The trustees derive their authority under the
terms of the trust deed. Neither the trustees nor the beneficiaries come together for a common
purpose. They are merely in http://www.judis.nic.in receipt of income. The mere fact that the
beneficiaries or the trustees, being representative assessees, are more than one, cannot lead to the
conclusion that they constitute an association of persons. The trustees of a discretionary trust have
to be assessed in the status of an individual.
59.In C.R.Nagappa vs. CIT [(1969) 73 ITR 626 SC], it was held that the considerations which should
apply while interpreting section 41 of 1992 Act should equally apply to section 161(2) of the Act and
it was pointed out that sub-section (2) of Section 161 merely enacts that when income is assessed in
the hands of representative assessee in his own name, the assessment shall be deemed to be made
upon him in the representative capacity only and tax shall be levied and recovered in the manner
provided in sub-section (1).
60.The CIT(A) took note of the factual position and pointed out that the assessee is created by a
settlor, declared by a duly executed instrument in writing which empowers trustees to receive the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 19
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
property under trust and http://www.judis.nic.in maintain it for the benefit of beneficiaries
identified by the trust and therefore, it became factually clear that the assessee is a representative
assessee as per section 160 of the Act as it receives income on behalf of and for the benefit of the
beneficiaries and the assessee is only a representative of the beneficiaries, who are in substance and
form the real owners.
61.In Kerala Financial Corporation, a case arising under the Wealth Tax Act, it was held that the
term 'individual' in Section 3 of the Wealth Tax Act must include a corporation similar to the
petitioner therein constituted under a Central, Provincial or State Law. This decision was followed in
the case of Assam Financial Corporation.
62.Mr.R.Sivaraman, learned counsel submits that even assuming for the sake of arguments, the
assessee is to be treated as an “individual”, it cannot be an artificial person but must be a living
person. To support such contention, reliance was placed on the decision in Smt.Sodra Devi.
http://www.judis.nic.in
63.The decision in Smt.Sodra Devi was considered in the case of Banarsi Dass, wherein it was held
as follows:
“16.Before we part with these appeals, we may refer to an earlier decision of the court
in which the word “individual” fell to be considered. In CIT vs. Sodra Devi,;
Damayanti Sahni vs. CIT the question which arose for the decision of this Court had
relation to the construction of Section 16(3) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922. That
sub-section provides that in computing the total income of any individual for the
purpose of assessment, there shall be included the items specified in clauses (a) and
(b). What is the denotation of the word “individual” was one of the points which had
to be considered in that case. According to the majority decision, though the word
“individual”is narrower than the word “assessee”, it does not mean only a human
being, but is wide enough to include a group of persons forming a unit. “It has been
held”, observed Bhagwati,J. who spoke for the majority, “that the word 'individual'
includes a corporation created by a statute, e.g. a university or a bar council, or the
trustees http://www.judis.nic.in of a baronetcy trust incorporated by a Baronetcy
Act. It would also include a minor or a person of unsound mind”. We are referring to
this case only for the purpose of showing that the word “individual” was interpreted
by this Court as including a group of persons forming a unit.” (emphasis supplied)
64.In Jogendra Nath Naskar vs. CIT [(1969) 74 ITR 33 (SC)], the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
observed that there could be no reason why the word “individual” in Section 3 of the 1922 Act
should be restricted to human beings alone and not extended to juristic entities.
65.In N.V.Shanmugam & Co. vs. CIT [(1971) 81 ITR 310 (SC)], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
form of persons should not make them an association of persons. In the said case, the issue was
whether, profit should be assessed in the hands of the receivers in the status of “AoP”. It was held
that the three receivers were only representative assessee and the fact that they were three in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 20
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
number did not make them association of receivers. After referring to the decision in Indira
Balkrishna, it was observed that AoP http://www.judis.nic.in means an association in which two or
more persons joined in for a common purpose.
66.In the case on hand, it is accepted by the assessee that it is a discretionary Trust. They have not
joined in for a common purpose. They became trustees having been appointed under a Deed of
Trust/Supplementary Deed. Therefore, the assessee cannot contend that they have joined together
in common for purpose of carrying on an activity.
67.In WTO vs. C.K.Mammed Kayi [(1981) 129 ITR 307 (SC)], the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
the expression “individual” in Section 3 of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, includes “Mapilla
Marumakkathayam Tarwads” and they would fall within the ambit of the taxing provisions. In the
said decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to the decision in Smt. Sodra Devi.
http://www.judis.nic.in
68.Thus, the term “individual” used in the Act does not mean only a human being but wide enough
to include a group of persons constituting a unit for the purposes of the Act. It was pointed out that
the reference to wife, daughter and child of an individual in Section 4 of the Wealth Tax Act would
not lead to the construction of the expression “individual” in Section 3 of the said Act as referable
only to a single human being.
69.In Suhashini Karuri vs. WTO [(1962) 46 ITR 53 (Cal.)], it was held that joint trustees must be
taken to be a single unit in law and not as an “AoP”. This view was approved by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Trustees of Goverdhandas Govind Ram Family Charity Trust vs. CIT [(1973) 88
ITR 47 (SC)].
70.In CIT vs. Salem District Urban Bank Ltd., [(1940) 8 ITR 269(Mad)], the question which fell for
consideration was whether a Cooperative Central Bank registered under the Indian Cooperative
Societies Act, 1912 whose shareholders consisted of individuals and cooperative
http://www.judis.nic.in societies, was an “individual” for the purpose of Section 3 of the 1922 Act,
while holding that to give the word “individual” the meaning of a person only would be to disregard
the scheme of the Act and also to rob the word of an accepted meaning.
71.In Jogendra Nath Naskar, it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that a deity, though a juristic
person, is not a human being and even in such a case, the expression “individual” occurring in the
1922 Act had to be applied to it.
72.In Coimbatore Club, it was held that the expression “individual” occurring in Section 3 of the Act
would take in a plurality of individuals, which in turn, would include a body or group of individuals
forming a single collective unit knit together by ties of common aims and joint interest and not any
profit motive, but owning property.
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 21
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
73.Thus, bearing in mind the law laid down in the above referred decisions and also taking note of
the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Indira Balkrishna, that there can be no universal
application as to how to come to a conclusion as to status of an assessee, we, on a careful analysis of
the facts of the case and noting the recitals in the Deed of Trust and Supplementary Deed, schedules
thereof, have no hesitation in our mind to hold that the assessee was rightly assessed as an
“individual” by the Assessing Officer as affirmed by the CIT(A), which was erroneously reversed by
the Tribunal.
74.The argument of the learned counsel for the assessee that the word 'individual' occurring in
Section 56(2)(vii) should be only a natural living person, for which purpose, strong reliance was
placed on the third proviso which provides that clause(vii) of section 56(2) shall not apply to any
sum of money or property received (a) from any relative or (b) on occasion of the marriage of the
individual or (c) under a will or by way of inheritance. As rightly submitted by Ms.R.Hemalatha,
learned senior standing counsel, the http://www.judis.nic.in proviso in a statute creates an
exception in respect of certain category from the statutory requirement and lays down a condition
for a particular situation and it is used to act as an optional addendum to the enacting provision.
The reference to clauses (a), (b) and (c) in the proviso under Section 56(2)(vii) would not apply to a
representative assessee and no amount has been received from any relative of the individual
beneficiary or on account of marriage of the individual beneficiary and the income received on
behalf of the representative assessee. Therefore, the contention of the assessee that the assessee
being not a living person cannot be brought under Section 56(2)(vii). In this regard, it is relevant to
take note of the scope of the total income as defined under Section 5(1) of the Act.
75.Another argument made on behalf of the assessee is with regard to the insertion of clause (x) in
sub-section (2) of Section 56 with effect from 01.04.2017 to cover all persons. In our considered
view this plea of prospective application of clause (x) in Section 56(2) would not come to the aid and
assistance of the assessee because the assessee has been held to be a http://www.judis.nic.in
representative assessee and not an association of persons. The finding of the CIT(A) on this issue is
perfectly justified in law.
76.The Tribunal in the impugned order took note of the decision in Venu Suresh Sheela Trust,
Arihant Trust and other decisions which were referred to by the revenue before us. The Tribunal
would state that those decisions were rendered by interpreting provisions of the Act which give relief
to the assessee and not charging provisions. In our considered view, this is not the way to read a
judgment or to cull out the legal principles which have been laid down in the decision. The manner
in which the Tribunal has distinguished the decisions relied on by the revenue is incorrect.
77.The learned counsel for the assessee while referring to the decision in Indira Balkrishna, argued
that there is no formula of universal application while determining the status of the trustee and it is
the submission that this word of caution given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court should borne in mind
while considering the effect of the insertion of the explanation to section http://www.judis.nic.in
2(31) of the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 22
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
78.We have given our findings as to the effect of the insertion of explanation to Section 2(31) and
held against the assessee. It is no doubt true that no decision can be rendered dehors the facts.
Therefore, we shall examine the facts which were noted by the authorities. As per the Deed of Trust
and the Supplemental Deed, the trust is created to benefit the members of owner group and the
senior leader group of Shriram Group who are identified as beneficiaries as per the scheme laid out
in the Trust Deed. The method of determining the beneficiaries of the owner group and the senior
leader group is also provided in the Deed of Trust. In Annexure B of the Deed of Trust dated
11.09.2006, 13 persons have been identified and their names are in the list of beneficiaries who are
in the owner's group. Annexure C of the Deed of Trust mentions names of 23 persons who are
beneficiaries under the senior leader group and all of them occupy senior positions comprised in
Shriram Group. The sum of Rs.25 Crores which was contributed to the assessee are from Shriram
Business Finance, Shriram http://www.judis.nic.in Credit Syndicate, Shri SR E-Commerce Finance,
Shriram Two Wheeler Finance, Shriram Domestic Finance and Shriram Professional Finance. The
authorities noted that all the six concerns who have contributed the total amount of Rs.25 Crores are
located in the same address in Chennai and form part of the Shriram Group. The donation which
was given to the Trust are for the benefit of the persons occupying high positions in the Shriram
Group and it will clearly go to show that the assessee has received the same on behalf of the
beneficiaries who have been identified. If that is so, then the assessee is a representative assessee as
defined under Section 160(1)(iv) of the Act and the benefit is derived by the assessee on behalf of the
beneficiaries and to be taxed as an “individual”.
79.The authority on examining the factual position found that the assessee has adopted a ingenious
method for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of the Act by accepting the gift on behalf of
the individuals thereby acting as a conduit. Unfortunately, the Tribunal did not examine this aspect
of the matter but proceeded on a different footing which we decline to http://www.judis.nic.in
approve. The Tribunal placed reliance on the decision of the Delhi Tribunal in Mridu Hari Dalmia
Parivar Trust. We find that the said decision could not have been applied to the facts of the instant
case, more particularly, when the Assessing Officer in the said case held that the assessee is an AoP.
Furthermore, the finding rendered by the Tribunal with regard to the effect of insertion of clause (x)
in Section 56(2) with effect from 01.04.2007 could not have been rendered in isolation without
reference to the factual details where the beneficiaries were identified and therefore, the Tribunal
erred in reversing the finding of the CIT(A) that the assessee has to be assessed as an “individual”.
Therefore, we hold that the assessee Trust is a representative assessee as it represents the
beneficiaries who are identified individuals and therefore to be assessed as an “individual” only.
Consequently, the contribution of Rs.25 Crores is to be assessed as income under Section 56(1)
under the head 'income from other sources'.
80.It is submitted on behalf of the assessee that it is not in dispute that http://www.judis.nic.in in
terms of Section 160(1)(iv), a trustee is a representative assessee for a beneficiary. However, the
revenue cannot place reliance on Section 161 of the Act as the said provision will apply only when
the income is specifically receivable on behalf of or for the benefit of any one person who are known
or whose shares are determined. It is further submitted that in the assessee's case the beneficiaries
are indeterminate and the individual shares of the income are also indeterminate and the voluntary
contributions were received by the assessee Trust into their corpus and did not form part of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 23
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shriram Ownership Trust on 8 December, 2020
income distributed to the beneficiaries. This argument must necessarily fail for the reasons given by
us earlier as we have held that the assessee is required to be assessed as an “individual”, the
beneficiaries have been identified and are identifiable and Section 161 would apply because the
income is specifically receivable on behalf of or for the benefit of any one person who are known and
whose shares are determinate. The factual positions as brought by the JCIT and the CIT clearly show
that the methodology adopted by the assessee was to circumvent the provisions of the Act.
http://www.judis.nic.in
81.For all the above reasons, we do not agree with reasons given by the Tribunal holding that the
sum of Rs.25 Crores received by the assessee could not have been considered as income from other
sources under section 56(2)(vii) read with Section 2(24)(xv) and accordingly, the same is set aside
and the order passed by the CIT(A) is restored.
82.In the result, the tax case appeal is partly allowed, substantial question of law No.1 is answered in
favour of the assessee and substantial question of law Nos.2 and 3 are answered in favour of the
Revenue. No costs.
(T.S.S., J.) (V.B.S., J.)
08.12.2020
cse/abr
To
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 'C' Bench, Chennai. http://www.judis.nic.in T.S.Sivagnanam, J.
and V.Bhavani Subbaroyan, J.
abr/cse 08.12.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72014007/ 24
