The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate
Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 1066
Bench: Aravind Kumar, Suraj Govindaraj
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 5TH DAY OF MAY, 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ARAVIND KUMAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SURAJ GOVINDARAJ
ITA NO.84/2010
BETWEEN:
1. THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
C.R. BUILDING, QUEENS ROAD
BANGALORE.
2. THE DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF
INCOME TAX
CENTRAL CIRCLE-1 (1)
C.R. BUILDING, QUEENS ROAD
BANGALORE.
...APPELLANTS
(BY SRI. K V ARAVIND, ADVOCATE)
AND:
M/S PRESTIGE ESTATE PROJECTS PVT. LTD.,
NO.1, FALCON HOUSE,
MAIN GUARD CROSS
ROAD, BANGALORE - 560 001.
...RESPONDENT
(BY SRI. ASHOK A KULKARNI, ADVOCATE)
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
THIS APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 260A OF
INCOME TAX ACT, 1961 PRAYING TO FORMULATE THE
SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION OF LAW STATED THEREIN AND
ALLOW THE APPEAL AND SET ASIDE THE ORDERS
PASSED BY THE ITAT BANGALORE IN ITA
NO.218/BANG/2009, DATED:11.09.2009 CONFIRMING
THE ORDER OF THE APPELLATE COMMISSIONER THE
ORDER OF THE APPELLATE COMMISSIONER AND
CONFIRM THE ORDER PASSED BY THE DEPUTY
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, CENTRAL CIRCLE-1(1),
BANGALORE, IN THE INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY.
THIS APPEAL HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT OF JUDGMENT THIS
DAY, ARAVIND KUMAR J., DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
The above appeal came to be admitted on 01.12.2010 to consider the following substantial question
of law:
"(1) Whether the Tribunal was correct in holding that the order of the Assessing
Officer and the Appellate Commissioner holding that the Completed Contract
Method of accounting followed by the assessee did not reflect the correct profits and
percentage method of accounting as prescribed by accounting standard AS-
7 issued by ICAI after amendment to Section 145 of the Act, was erroneous?
Matter was taken up for final hearing on 04.12.2019 and during the course of arguments, we noticed
that following two additional substantial questions of law would also arise for consideration:
(2) Whether tribunal was correct in holding rental income received from Forum Mall
should be considered as "Income from business" and not "Income from house
property", though agreement between landlord and tenant contemplating
relationship of landlord and tenant and as such it would partake character of rental
income.
(3) Whether tribunal was correct in arriving at a conclusion that rental received is
liable to be brought to tax under the head "income from other sources" and not
"income of house property".
2. Asseessee is a private limited company carrying on the business of real estate. Return of income
for the assessment year 2005-06 came to be filed on 29.10.2005 declaring total income of
Rs.28,11,70,620/-. Return was processed under Section 142(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('Act' for
short) on 19.06.2006 and rectified under Section 154 of the Act on 13.09.2006. During the course of
assessment proceedings, Assessing Officer noticed that assessee has adopted 'Completed Contract
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
Method' of accounting for all its real estate projects. On the ground that as per the provisions of
accounting standard AS - 7, assessee was required to mandatorily follow 'Percentage Completion
Method' and as such, a sum of Rs.7,33,13,640/- was added to the income. Assessing Officer has also
recorded a finding that rental income received from Forum Mall and rental income received from fit
outs were 'income from business' and 'income from other sources' and not as income from house
property. Accordingly, assessment order came to be passed on 31.12.2007 (Annexure-A).
3. Being aggrieved by the same, assessee preferred an appeal before Commissioner of Income Tax
(Appeals)-VI, Bangalore in ITA No.397/DCIT Central Circle.1(1)/BLR/CIT(A)-VI/2007-08 and
appellate authority, by order dated 07.01.2009 dismissed said appeal filed by the assessee. Hence,
assessee filed an appeal before Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Bangalore Bench 'B' in ITA
No.218/Bang/09. Tribunal, by order dated 11.09.2009 partly allowed the appeal and held that
assessing officer ought to have followed "Complete Contract Method' as claimed by the assessee and
rental income received from Forum Mall should be brought to tax under the head "profits and gains
from business"
and income from fit outs should be brought to tax under the head 'income from other
sources'. Hence, revenue is in appeal.
4. We have heard the arguments of Sri K.V.Arvind, learned Standing Counsel appearing for
appellant-revenue and Sri Ashok Kulkarni, learned Advocate appearing for respondent-assessee.
Perused the records.
5. It is the contention of Sri K.V.Aravind, learned Advocate appearing for appellant that Tribunal
erred in arriving at a conclusion that Complete Contract Method of accounting was to be followed by
the assessee, giving a complete go-by to the fact that Percentage Method of accounting as prescribed
by accounting standard AS-7 which is the accounting procedure prescribed by Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India (ICAI) in the light of amendment brought to Section 145 of the Act.
He would further contend that Tribunal committed an error in holding that rental income received
from Forum Mall should be treated as 'income from business' and not as 'income from house
property' though agreement between landlord and tenant establish said relationship and the fact
that rent was being paid every month. He would also contend that rentals received from fit outs
namely, bare super structure of building was liable to be brought to tax under the head 'income from
other sources' and not under the head 'income from house property'. Hence, he prays for allowing
the appeal by answering substantial questions of law in favour of the revenue.
6. Per contra, Sri Ashok A. Kulkarni, learned Advocate appearing for assessee would support the
order passed by Tribunal and contends that finding recorded by Tribunal are questions of facts and
even otherwise, substantial questions formulated by this Court be answered in favour of the
assessee.
He would draw the attention of the Court to reply given by the Expert Committee on the queries
raised by companies which resulted in the said committee opining that such enterprises undertake
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
construction activities on their own account as a venture of commercial nature and as such, revised
AS-7 was not required to be followed for the assessment year under reference. Hence, he prays for
answering substantial questions of law in favour of the assessee and against revenue by dismissing
the appeal.
RE: SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION OF LAW NO.1.
7. The assessee is engaged in the business of Builders and Developers. For the assessment year
2005-2006, the assessee had adopted Completed Contract Method for all its real estate projects.
The revenue did not accept the same on the ground that provisions of Accounting Standard AS-7
issued by Institute of Chartered Accountants of India was to be followed and thereby Percentage
Completion Method was held to be the recognized procedure to be adopted. Hence, the assessing
officer added back to the total income of the assessee a sum of Rs.7,33,13,640/- by adopting
'Percentage Completion Method' of accounting.
8. The appellate authority held that assessee is to be treated as a contractor because it enters into an
agreement to construct the Mall in stages with others fund only. Hence, it came to be held that
assessee cannot adopt Percentage Completion Method of accounting to arrive at its taxable income.
9. Section 145 of the Act would indicate as to how income is to be computed in accordance with
either Cash or Mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the assessee. Sub-section (2)
of Section 145 empowers the Central Government to notify the Accounting Standards to be followed
by any class of assessee or in respect of any class of income . In exercise of the said power conferred,
Central Government has issued a notification No.S.O. 69 (E), dated 25.01.1996 whereunder the
Accounting Standard-I relating to disclosure of accounting policies have been notified.
10. In the instant case, assessee entered into a Development Agreement with M/s.Karnataka
Realtors Private Limited, under which agreement the assessee was to develop the property and after
development of the property, the owner and the developer were entitled to a specified percentage of
super built area and both were free to sell the super built area allotted to their respective shares
before construction of the built up area fallen to the share of the assessee, it (assessee) entered into
agreement with the proposed buyer to construct the portion as per their specification. In other
words, construction is undertaken by the assessee on behalf of the proposed buyer. However, for the
purposes of stamp duty payable on the sale of undivided share of land sold to the buyer, only value
of the land is taken and assessee had followed consistently this method of accounting to declare the
profit namely, on project completion method as per the provisions of the Companies Act namely,
Section 211(3A) the Profit and Loss Account and balance sheet of the company has to comply with
the Accounting Standard. As per proviso to Section 211(3C), Standards of accounting specified by
the ICAI are deemed to be Accounting Standard until the Accounting Standards are prescribed by
the Central Government. In other words, the companies are required to adopt and follow the
Accounting Standards as prescribed by ICAI. In the event of such prescribed Accounting Standards
are not being followed, then, such companies are required to disclose in its Profit and Loss Account
and Balance sheet the reasons as prescribed under Section 211(3B) of the Companies Act. To put it
differently, the Companies Act also provided for deviation from the Accounting Standards also.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
There is no dispute to the fact that AS-7 effective from 01.04.2003 is applicable to all construction
contractors. The objective of AS-7 reads:
"The objective of this Standard is to prescribe the accounting treatment of revenue
and costs associated with construction contracts. Because of the nature of the activity
undertaken in construction contracts, the date at which the contract activity is
entered into and the date when the activity is completed usually fall into different
accounting periods. Therefore, the primary issue in accounting for construction
contracts is the allocation of contract revenue and contract costs to the accounting
periods in which construction work is performed. This Standard uses the recognition
criteria established in the Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of
Financial Statements to determine when contract revenue and contract costs should
be recognized as revenue and expenses in the statement of profit and loss. It also
provides practical guidance on the application of these criteria."
Thus, assessee - company which is required to follow Standard as prescribed by ICAI will have to
necessarily take into account the reply furnished by the Institute for the Expert Committee, which
reads as under:
(i) the seller of the goods has transferred to the buyer the property in the goods for a
specific price or on significant risks and rewards of ownership has been transferred to
the buyer and the seller retains no effective control of the goods transferred to a
degree usually associated with ownership;
(ii) no significant uncertainty exists regarding amount of consideration that has been
derived from the sale of the goods.
In the instant case, it has been noticed by the appellate Tribunal that assessee was in the activity of
projects and was not a construction contractor. Thus, the revised AS-7 would be applicable to an
enterprise undertaking construction activities on their own account as a venture of commercial
nature. Whereas, the assessee undertakes construction activities for those persons to whom it
intends to sell super built area along with undivided share of land in a project which it is developing
as a developer.
11. There cannot be any dispute to the fact that every assessee being entitled to arrange its affairs
and follow the method of accounting, which the Department has earlier accepted. Under similar
circumstances as obtained from the facts on hand, Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX vs BILAHARI INVESTMENT PRIVATE LIMITED reported in
(2008)299 ITR 1 (SC) has held:
"Recognition/identification of income under the 1961 Act is attainable by several
methods of accounting. It may be noted that the same result could be attained by any
one of the accounting methods. The completed contract method is one such method.
Similarly, the percentage of completion method is another such method.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
Under the completed contract method, the revenue is not recognized until the
contract is complete. Under the said method, costs are accumulated during the
course of the contract. The profit and loss is established in the last accounting period
and transferred to the profit and loss account. The said method determines results
only when the contract is completed. This method leads to objective assessment of
the results of the contract.
On the other hand, the percentage of completion method tries to attain periodic
recognition of income in order to reflect current performance. The amount of revenue
recognized under this method is determined by reference to the stage of completion
of the contract."
12. In the instant case, the Tribunal has rightly held that in case of revised AS-7 is to be applied, then
the opening inventories is also to be valued as per revised AS-7. In fact, the revenue had accepted
the method of accounting adopted by the assessee for the previous years and in the light of guidance
note provided that AS-7 is applicable to real estate developers, assessee itself has changed the
method of accounting and for the subsequent years, it has changed from Project Completion Method
to Percentage Completion Method in the subsequent year and as such, there is revenue neutral in
the assessment year in question. Hence, for the reasons aforestated, we answer the substantial
question of law No.1 in the affirmative i.e., in favour of the assessee and against the revenue. RE:
SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION OF LAW Nos.(2) and (3):
13. As said issue involved is no longer res integra in view of law laid down by this Court in the matter
of COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-III VS. VELANKANI INFORMATION SYSTEMS (P) LTD.,
reported in (2014) 265 CTR 250 (Karnataka), whereunder it has been held if assessee is in the
business of taking land, putting up commercial building thereon, letting out such building with all
furniture as his profession or his business then notwithstanding the fact that he has constructed
building and he has also provided other facilities and even if there are two separate rental deeds, it
does not fall within the income from house property and as such, question Nos.2 and 3 are answered
against revenue and in favour of the assessee.
For the reasons aforestated, we proceed to pass the following:
JUDGMENT
(i) Appeal is hereby dismissed.
(ii) The order dated 11.09.2009 passed by
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
Bangalore Bench 'B' in ITA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Prestige Estate Projects Pvt Ltd on 5 May, 2020
No.218/Bang/09 for the assessment year 2005-06 is hereby affirmed.
(iii) Costs made easy.
SD/-
JUDGE SD/-
JUDGE RU/DR/sp
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57072955/ 7
