The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind
Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam, V.Bhavani Subbaroyan
T.C.A.No.345 of 2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 16.10.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.SIVAGNANAM
and
THE HONOURABLE MRS.JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN
T.C.A.No.345 of 2020
The Commissioner of Income Tax
Chennai .. Appellant
Versus
M/s.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt Ltd
(Formerly known as M/s.Surajbari Windfarm
Development Pvt Ltd) South Wing, 4th floor,
Kakani Towers, No.15, Khader Nawaz Khan Road
Nungambakkam, Chennai – 600 006
PAN: AAKCS8353F .. Respondent
Prayer:- Tax Case Appeal filed under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act,
1961, against the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai 'A'
Bench, dated 16.06.2017 made in I.T.A.No.3344/Mds/2016 relating to the
Assessment Year 2013-14.
For Appellant : M/s.R.Hemalatha
Senior Standing counsel
1/16
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) T.C.A.No.345 of 2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
JUDGMENT
[Order of the Court was made by T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J.] This appeal has been filed by the Revenue
under Section 260 A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('the Act' for brevity), challenging the order dated
16.06.2017 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai, 'A' Bench ('the Tribunal' for
brevity) in I.T.A.No.3344/Mds/2016 for the Assessment Year 2013-14. The Revenue has raised the
following Substantial Questions of Law for consideration:
“1. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right
in directing the AO to allow depreciation by adding the premium on forward contract
to the cost of the asset, especially when the assets had not been acquired from any
country outside India which is a pre requisite as per the provisions of Section 43A?
2. Whether the premium paid on forward contract is to be allowed even in cases
where it is not even remotely connected with the cost of any assets, since no assets
was brought into existence leading an enduring benefit to the Assessee?
3. Whether the benefit provided in Section 43A of the http://www.judis.nic.in I.T.Act
which relates to the additions made to the cost of assets on account of Exchange
fluctuation could be extended to a case where no assets was purchased outside the
country and there was no addition to the block of the assets which require allowance
of depreciation to be granted?”
2. We have heard M/s.R.Hemalatha, learned Senior Standing counsel for the
appellant / Revenue.
3. Before We make a decision in respect of the Substantial Questions of Law raised
for consideration, it is to be pointed out that the respondent / assessee had
challenged the very same order passed by the Tribunal in T.C.A.No.171 of 2019. The
said appeal was filed, raising the Substantial Questions of Law as to whether the
Tribunal was right in law in disallowing the amount of Rs.36,33,333/- paid towards
the premium for hedging foreign exchange fluctuations on loans taken for the
purpose of appellant's business is a capital loss by treating it as capital expenditure
under Section 43A of the Act when an asset was purchased in India. The said
question was answered against the assessee by our judgment dated
http://www.judis.nic.in 05.10.2020. The operative portion of the judgment reads as
follows:
“11. Though, on a cursory reading of the said judgment, it appears that it is a case
arising under Section 43A of the Act as pointed out by the learned counsel appearing
for the appellant, on a closer reading and more particularly the finding rendered in
paragraph 8, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, before analyzing Section 43A of the Act,
prefaced its judgment in the following manner :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
“8. Before analysing the Section quoted above, by way of preface, we need to state
that exchange differences are required to be capitalized if the liabilities are incurred
for acquiring the fixed asset, like plant and machinery. It is the purpose for which the
loan is raised that is of prime significance. Whether the purpose of the loan is to
finance the fixed asset or working capital is the question which one needs to answer
and in order to ascertain that purpose, the facts and circumstances of the case,
including the relevant loan agreement and the correspondence between the parties
concerned are required to be looked into. In the present case, it appears that the
relevant contract and correspondence has not been produced by the assessee. We are
proceeding on the basis that the purpose of the loan taken by the assessee from ICICI
was to finance the purchase of plant and machinery. ”
12. The findings/observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said
judgment would squarely cover the case of the assessee. In fact, the nature of
transaction in the said http://www.judis.nic.in judgment was identical to that of the
transaction done by the assessee herein. Therefore, we have to necessarily hold that
the exchange difference is required to be capitalized because liability has been
incurred by the assessee for the purpose of acquiring fixed asset namely plant and
machinery.
13. The decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Elecon Engineeing Co.
Ltd., was followed in the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of CIT Vs.
Indian Rayon & Industries Ltd. [reported in (2011) 336 ITR 0479]. The decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Punjab State Industrial Development
Corporation Ltd. Vs. CIT [reported in (1997) 225 ITR 0792] would also support the
stand taken by the Revenue by treating the expenditure as capital expenditure.
14. In the decision of this Court in the case of Tube Investments of India Vs. JCIT
[reported in (2014) 45 Taxmann.com 78], to which, one of us (TSSJ) was a party, the
question was as to whether the Tribunal was right in confirming the disallowance of
interest and additional expenditure incurred on account of exchange fluctuation. It
was held that if any part of the loan was not used for purchase of a capital asset, the
corresponding loss had to be treated as a capital expenditure.
The relevant portions are as follows :
“15. The facts of the case have been set out in extenso in http://www.judis.nic.in the
preceding paragraphs. At the time when the appeal was heard by the first Appellate
Authority, the assessee appears to have taken a different stand than the stand taken
at the time of filing the appeal by stating that the money generated out of GDR issue
had funded the capital expenditure and that the foreign exchange loan had been used
only for Revenue purpose. The first Appellate Authority while concurring with the
view taken by the Assessing Officer pointed out that the value of capital goods
imported during the accounted year 1995-96 was Rs.3,41,42,000/- and during the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
current year was Rs.3,59,73,000/- and the Assessing Officer was justified in
capitalizing the exchange fluctuation in respect of the imported machinery totaling
Rs.7,01,15,000/- by invoking Section 43A of the Act by placing reliance on the
decision of this Court in the case of ELGI Rubber Products Ltd.(supra). In note 12 of
the printed balance sheet, it has been stated that (a) capital work in progress includes
exchange fluctuation of Rs.736.01 lakhs and interest Rs.35.50 lakhs respectively;
(b) the increase in rupee liability on account of outstanding foreign currency loan
utilized in respect of acquisition of plant and machinery based on the exchange rate
applicable on the date of balance sheet is Rs.537.58 lakhs (included in capital work in
progress). As this relates to borrowed funds, the same has been considered in
computing the provision for tax. By referring to note 12 of the printed balance sheet,
the first Appellate Authority accepted the view of the Assessing Officer with regard to
the applicability of Section 43A of the Act. The contention raised by the assessee that
no capital goods were imported http://www.judis.nic.in against the RBI approved
loan and loan had been paid not from export proceeds was rejected, as being contrary
to note 12 of the balance sheet. The Tribunal pointed out that under Schedule 14 of
the balance sheet, the assessee has spelt out its accounting policy regarding foreign
exchange difference on account of foreign currency transaction, which states that
"exchange difference arising from foreign currency transaction are dealt with in profit
and loss account or capitalized where they relate to fixed asset. Plant and machinery
acquired through foreign currency loans are capitalized at the rate prevalent at the
time of purchase". In view of the said admission in the balance sheet, the Tribunal
affirmed the view taken by the Assessing Officer that the claim of the assessee
regarding exchange fluctuation was never held to be Revenue, as the claim was not
supported by any material brought on record and therefore to be treated as capital.
By referring to the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Tata Locomotive
and Engg. Co Ltd. (supra) the Tribunal pointed out that if capital asset is purchased,
capitalizing as capital work in progress, the nature of the same is to be treated as
capital and if no assets are purchased as regards the principal devaluation of gains
and loss due to devaluation, the allowance of loss on devaluation, if any, arising on
the loans obtained for purchase of assets will certainly be in capital account and
covered by Section 43A of the Act. It was further pointed out that if any part of the
loan is not used for the purpose of purchase of assets, the corresponding loss has to
be allowed as capital and not Revenue as the gains are not treated as Revenue income
following the http://www.judis.nic.in principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court
in Tata Locomotive and Engg. Co Ltd. (Supra).
16. The frequent issue, which arises for consideration is regarding the computation of business
income, whether as particular expenditure is revenue or capital. In the long line of decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Court certain principles have been formulated, nevertheless each
case has to be decided on the facts and circumstances as to whether a particular expenditure is
allowable as a permissible deduction. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K.T.M.T.M. Abdul
Kayoom v. CIT [1962] 44 ITR 689, held that none of the tests is either exhaustive or universal, each
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
case depends on its own facts, and a close similarity between one case and another is not enough,
because even a single significant detail may alter the entire aspect. It was pointed out that in
deciding such cases, one should avoid the temptation to decide cases by matching the colour of one
case against the colour of an another. To decide, therefore, on which side of the line a case falls, its
broad resemblance to another case is not at all decisive. It was held that what is decisive is the
nature of the business, the nature of the expenditure, the nature of the right acquired, and their
relationship, inter se, and this is the only key to resolve the issue in the light of the general
principles, which are followed in such cases. In the case of CIT v. Ashok Leyland Ltd. [1969] 72 ITR
137 (Mad), which was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in CIT v. Ashok Leyland Ltd. [1972]
86 ITR 549, it was pointed out that the clear-cut dichotomy cannot be laid down in the absence of
http://www.judis.nic.in a statutory definition of "capital" and "revenue expenditure". It was held
that the word "capital" connotes permanency and capital expenditure is, therefore, closely akin to
the concept of securing something tangible or intangible property, corporeal or incorporeal rights,
so that they could be of a lasting or enduring benefit to the enterprise in issue. Revenue expenditure,
on the other hand, is operational in its perspective and solely intended for the furtherance of the
enterprise and this distinction, though candid is susceptible to modification under peculiar and
distinct circumstances.
Therefore, it was held that the facts of each case, the attendant circumstances revolving round the
expenditure, the aim, object and purpose of the same, their impact on the assessee, particularly in
matters relating to the future of the assessee's trade and business, whether it could be sustained on
ordinary canons of commercial expediency simpliciter, whether it is a step-in-aid of future
expansion or prolongation of life of an existing business, whether it is to secure an enduring benefit,
whether the expenditure constitutes conceivable nucleus to form the foundation for posterior profit
earning, whether the expenditure could be viewed as an integral part of the conduct of the business
and potential future and these were all held to be the main incidents, which have a bearing on the
decision whether, in a given case, the expenditure is capital or chargeable to revenue. Thus, it was
held that an objective application of a judicial mind to the facts of each case is necessary.
.........
http://www.judis.nic.in
18. In the decision reported in Woodward Governor India (P.) Ltd. (supra) the Supreme Court
considered the allowability of expenditure arising out of fluctuation in rate of exchange. Referring to
Accounting Standards-11, the Supreme Court pointed out that paragraph 9 of AS-11 recognises
exchange differences as income or expenses in the period in which they arise. Paragraphs 10 and 11
deal with exchange differences arising on repayment of liabilities incurred for the purpose of
acquiring fixed assets, which topic falls under section 43A of the 1961 Act. Referring to Section 43A
(1) opening with the non-obstante clause, the Supreme Court pointed out that Section 43A(1)
applies where, as a result of change in rate of exchange, there is an increase or reduction in the
liability of the assessee in terms of Indian Rupee to pay the price or any asset payable in foreign
exchange or to repay the money in foreign currency taken specifically for the purpose of acquiring
an asset. Section 43A, as it stood originally, would have application in a case where an asset is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
acquired and the liability existed before the change in the exchange rate takes place. Adjustments in
the cost are thus made depending on the fluctuation in the currency rate. Thus the cost of the
equipment assumes significance in the matter of working out the depreciation allowance. Referring
to the amendment to Section 43A by the Finance Act of 2002, the Supreme Court pointed out that
Under the unamended section 43A, adjustment to the actual cost took place on the happening of
change in the rate of exchange and the Section did not require as a condition that there should be
actual payment of the http://www.judis.nic.in increased/decreased liability as a consequence of the
exchange variation, whereas, under the amended section 43A, the adjustment in the actual cost is
made on actual payment. Thus the Section applies where as a result of change in the exchange rate
there is a reduction or increase in the liability, that the adjustment of increase or decrease in the
liability relating to acquisition of asset on account of the exchange rate fluctuation is reflected as
part of the actual cost of the asset acquired in foreign currency and the depreciation is to be allowed
accordingly.
19. Learned Standing Counsel appearing for the Revenue placed reliance on this decision only to
re-emphasize the fact that as far as the assessee was concerned, it had no doubt purchased
machinery in foreign exchange to the extent of Rs.7.01 crores in all during the Accounting Year
1995-96 and 1996- 97. To the extent of exchange fluctuation, the actual cost of the purchase of
machinery thus would include the exchange fluctuation. This would be so for the purpose of finding
out the actual cost for the purpose of depreciation. As far as the balance of amount which had been
borrowed is concerned, there is no denial of the fact that under the Reserve Bank of India Scheme,
the approval was issued sanctioning the loan for the purpose of capital expenditure and
modernization and expansion. There is no denial of fact that the amount drawn from the loan
should be utilized for the purpose approved and strictly subject to the terms and conditions
stipulated by the Reserve Bank of India vide their letter dated 21st September, 1994. It is also not
denied by the assessee that http://www.judis.nic.in the loan and interest thereon have to be
repaid/paid only from out of the net foreign exchange earnings of the borrower entity and not from
any other source and/or the group earnings, as per the schedule of repayment/ payment indicated in
the application. The assessee also does not deny the fact that the repayment of the loan which
includes interest should be made through the authorized dealer only. Thus, when the object and the
purpose of loan clearly points out to the purpose of the loan given as for capital expenditure on
modernization and expansion, the fact that the exchange fluctuation had been added on to the cost
under Section 43-A(1), however, does not, lead to the inference that as far as the balance amount is
concerned, the interest payment difference on exchange fluctuation would fall under Revenue
head.”
15. In the light of the above, the substantial question of law framed for consideration has to be
necessarily answered against the appellant – assessee.
16. In the result, the above tax case appeal is dismissed and the substantial question of law framed is
answered against the assessee. No costs.”
4. In this appeal, the Revenue has challenged the portion of the http://www.judis.nic.in impugned
order passed by the Tribunal, whereby, the Tribunal, while holding that the premium paid by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
assessee was in the course of setting up of a project. Therefore, the loss, if any, is on the capital field
and cannot be Revenue loss and considered the alternate submission of the assessee with regard to
the prayer for depreciation of the enhanced value, in Paragraph 8 of the impugned order, the
Tribunal allowed the plea of depreciation by assigning the following reasons.
''8. The assessee now claims alternatively that if it is capital loss, it will definitely go to increase the
cost of the project, hence, the assessee shall be given depreciation on the enhanced value of asset.
Admittedly, the loan was borrowed for setting up of plant for generation of wind energy, therefore,
the loss suffered in foreign exchange fluctuation would definitely go to increase the cost of the
project to the extent of loss suffered by the assessee. Hence, as rightly found by the Bangalore Bench
of this Tribunal in JSW Steel Ltd., (supra), the assessee is entitled for depreciation on the enhanced
value. Accordingly, while confirming the orders of the lower authorities that the loss suffered by the
assessee is capital loss, the Assessing Officer is directed to grant depreciation to the assessee as
applicable http://www.judis.nic.in on the enhanced value of the project after commencement of its
business.''
5. The learned Senior Standing counsel for the Revenue would vehemently contend that the
Tribunal having held that the premium on forward contract was not liable as Revenue expenditure,
the same is to be added to the cost of the capital assets on which depreciation is to be allowed is not
a correct proposition, since there is no provision under the Act which allows such expenses. Further,
it is contended that the assets was purchased in India based on the loan taken in Indian Currency
only and the premium paid on forward contract is not even remotely connected with the cost of the
asset and therefore, allowing depreciation does not arise.
6. We are not agreeable with this contention raised by the Revenue on account of the fact that
though initially the loan was borrowed by the assessee from State Bank of India in Indian Currency,
subsequently, the loan was converted into a Foreign Currency loan and the assessee has paid the
premium of Rs.1.9 lakhs and mark the premium paid over a period http://www.judis.nic.in of three
years and one-third of premium to the extent of Rs.36,33,333/-.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the loan borrowed in Foreign currency is not even remotely
connected with the cost of the asset when it is an admitted position that the loan was borrowed for
acquiring a capital asset.
Therefore, the assessee cannot be put to disadvantage on both grounds. So far as the claim of the
assessee that the expenses is Revenue in nature, it was rejected by the Tribunal and We have
confirmed the said decision in T.C.A.No.171 of 2019. So far as the claim for depreciation, the
Tribunal rightly took note of the facts of the case and observed that the loss suffered in Foreign
Exchange Fluctuations would definitely increase the cost of the project to the extent of loss suffered
by the assessee. Therefore, We find that the Tribunal was right in allowing the plea of depreciation
raised by the assessee.
http://www.judis.nic.in T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 7
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S.Continuum Wind Energy (India) Pvt ... on 16 October, 2020
AND V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN, J.
Kak
7. For the above reasons, We do not find any grounds to interfere with the orders passed by the
Tribunal. Accordingly, the Tax Case Appeal is dismissed and the Substantial Questions of Law are
answered against the Revenue. No costs.
(T.S.S.,J) (V.B.S.,J)
16.10.2020
Kak
Index: Yes / No
Internet: Yes / No
Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order
To
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
'A' Bench, Chennai.
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191340146/ 8
