The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr
on 1 March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 PAT 822
Bench: Chief Justice, Anjana Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Letters Patent Appeal No.1535 of 2017
In
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.604 of 2017
===============================================
1. The Chairman, Central Selection Board (Constable
Appointment), Bihar, Patna.
2. The Secretary, Central Selection Board (Constable
Appointment), Bihar, Patna.
... ... Appellant/s
Versus
1. Ishika Raj, Daughter of Rajendra Mandal, Resident of Village-
Barihat Sabour, Police Station-Sabour, District-Bhagalpur.
......Petitioner/Respondent 1st Set.
2. The State of Bihar through Principal Secretary, Home
Department, Government of Bihar, Patna.
... ... Respondent/Respondent 2nd Set
===============================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Pushkar Narayan Shahi, Senior Advocate
: Mr. Sanjay Pandey, Advocate
: Mr. Binod Kumar Mishra, Advocate
For the Respondent no. 1: Mr. Yogesh Chandra Verma, Sr. Adv.
: Mrs. Prem Sheela Pandey, Advocate
For the State : Mr Saroj Kumar Sharma, AC to AAG-3
===============================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
and
HONOURABLE JUSTICE SMT. ANJANA
MISHRA
ORAL JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE)
Date : 01-03-2019
This appeal questions the correctness of the judgment
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 1
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
dated 3rd August, 2017 of the learned Single Judge whereby the
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
2/32
learned Single Judge has accepted the prayer of the respondent-
petitioner for holding of her Physical Evaluation Test as well as
that of other similarly situated candidates who on account of
their advanced stage of pregnancy at the time of the Physical
Endurance Test were unable to undertake the same.
2. The appellants have come up questioning the
correctness of the said judgment on the ground that right of
employment is not a fundamental right and there is no such
condition stipulated either under the advertisement or under the
Rules, whereby a female candidate who misses her chance to
appear in the Physical Endurance Test on account of her own
volition, the appellants are bound to extend or postpone the date
of such test. It is the appellants' contention that the natural right
of the respondents to beget a child is a voluntary act and not an
act of compulsion or otherwise in any way a contingency so as
to extend them a right to claim postponement. The state of
pregnancy and attaining of maternity to beget a child by choice
may be a fundamental right of an individual female but such a
fundamental right cannot compel the State to keep on hold a
process of examination where neither the selection is complete
nor a candidate has even entered employment. It is urged that
whatever judgments have been cited at the Bar on behalf of the
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
3/32
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 2
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
respondent-petitioners including the judgment in the case of Air
India Vs. Nargesh Meerza and Others, reported in (1981) 4
SCC 335 and the latest judgment in the case of Devika Biswas
Vs. Union of India and Others, reported in (2016) 10 SCC
726, all relate to situations where the right to lead a dignified
and meaningful life as enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India was discussed vis-à-vis the health
conditions of females and also the application of Articles 14 and
16 of the Constitution of India where a female was in
employment. In the case of Air India (supra) the observations
made relate to conditions of service upon having entered
employment or relating to the individual right of a female to
beget a child. These judgments do not lay down that for the
purpose of holding of competitive examinations for
appointment, a candidate has a right to seek postponement of
the examinations on account of having voluntarily acquired
pregnancy. It is, therefore, their contention that the learned
Single Judge has proceeded to determine an issue relating to a
stage of selections of appointment where the candidates do not
have any such right to claim benefits which may otherwise be
available as a maternity benefit after employment.
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
4/32
3. The respondent-petitioners have supported the
impugned judgments and Shri Yogesh Chandra Verma, learned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 3
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
senior counsel has urged that the inordinate delay which is
evident in finalizing the process of selections itself indicates that
there was absence of a time schedule with no declaration of the
dates in the advertisement and, therefore, if during these
prolonged process where delay was clearly attributable to the
appellants, the acquisition of a pregnancy is not a self invited
obstacle when the State itself has proceeded in a leisurely
manner. The acquisition of pregnancy being a natural act cannot
be termed as a disability so as to make a candidate ineligible
who has otherwise cleared the written test. It is also submitted
by Sri Verma that no prejudice would be caused to the selection
process at all as keeping in view the fact that the candidates
after delivery of a child were ready to face the Physical
Endurance Test. In the circumstances, any denial to them would
be discrediting their merit which they otherwise possess to be
recorded as Constables.
4. It is in this background that the appellants have
come up contending that there is no such fundamental right or
even a legal right available to the candidates to seek
postponement of the holding of the test and thereby prolong it
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
5/32
further. This not being a recognized right, the same would also
amount to discriminating those who may otherwise have come
up for their claim in a similar way but did not choose to raise a
challenge on account of non-availability of any such opportunity
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 4
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
in future. It is, therefore, contended that the learned Single
Judge has overstretched the application of fundamental rights so
as to encompass even a process of a competitive examination
and any interference with the same clearly jeopardizes the entire
selection process. It is, therefore, submitted that the impugned
judgments be set aside and the petitions filed by the respondent-
petitioners be dismissed.
5. The learned Single Judge found that the resistance
put forth by the State through the counter affidavit in denying an
extended opportunity amounted to denying the respondent-
petitioner her right to be considered in public employment that
was unjust given fact that there was a thirteen month gap
between the advertisement dated 31st July, 2015 and the written
examinations which were held on 18th September, 2016. This
long waiting period during which the respondent-petitioner
became pregnant was therefore itself a circumstance taken into
account by the learned Single Judge that a delayed action of the
appellants, without there being any such disclosure of the date
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
6/32
of the holding of the physical test, was itself sufficient to
indicate that the respondent-petitioner could be accommodated
by postponing her Physical Evaluation Test and for this heavy
reliance was placed on a judgment of a Division Bench of the
Kerla High Court in the case of Kerala Public Service
Commission vs. K. Jayasree reported in 2014 (1) KHC 358
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 5
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
that was followed in another judgment of the same High Court
in the case of Kerala Public Service Commission vs. Sini
reported in 2014 (2) Kerala Law Times. The learned Single
Judge also relied on a Division Bench judgment of the Delhi
High Court in the case of Inspector (Mahila) Ravina vs.
Union of India and Ors. (Writ Petition (C) No. 4525 of 2014)
which in turn relied on the judgment of the Apex Court in the
case of Suchitra Srivastava vs. Chandigarh Administration
reported in AIR 2010 SC 235.
6. The learned Single Judge in order to arrive at that
conclusion also took aid of the fundamental rights guaranteed
under Articles 14, 15 and 21 of the Constitution of India to hold
that the State cannot be prevented from making any special
provision for women and children.
7. Apart from the aforesaid stipulations in Part-III, the
learned Single Judge also took note of the duty cast upon the
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
7/32
State under Article 38 of the Constitution of India for the
promotion and the welfare of the people and Article 42 in
particular which casts an obligation on the State to make
provisions for securing just and humane condition of work and
maternity leave as contained under the directive principles of
State Policy.
8. The argument of the State and the appellants was
rejected where they maintained such benefits of maternity would
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 6
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
be available after appointment and not prior thereto on the
ground that the action of the appellants in fixing a schedule was
absent.
9. The learned Single Judge, however, accepted the
argument being sound or logical but it was rejected because the
action of the Board was not found to be genuine in delaying the
process and then denying the opportunity to the respondent
petitioner. The learned Single Judge held that the indefinite
approach of the examining body led to the delay of thirteen
months after the advertisement and this could not have impeded
the right of a female candidate to make reproductive choices in
between an indefinite schedule. This would amount to denial of
an opportunity to get employment if the candidate is not
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
8/32
accommodated and would be insensitive forcing a female
candidate to choose between motherhood and career.
10. The appellant Selection Board resisted the claim of
the respondent-petitioner, firstly, on the ground that this being a
matter of Policy of employment which fell within the domain of
the employer, the same could not be imposed upon under the
cover of protection of fundamental rights inasmuch as a woman
may have a fundamental right to beget a child but that by itself
cannot be a guarantee of employment if she has chosen to opt
for motherhood voluntarily. The State relied on the Apex Court
judgment in the case of Union of India vs Pushpa Rani and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 7
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
Ors. and other analogous cases reported in (2008) 9 SCC 242. It
was also urged that the judgments of the Kerala High Court and
the Delhi High Court referred to hereinabove have extended the
law as understood by the Apex Court in the case of Air India vs.
Nargesh Meerza and Others, reported in (1981) 4 SCC 335
and Devika Biswas vs. Union of India and Others, reported in
(2016) 10 SCC 726 by placing the said fundamental right on a
pedestal overlooking the fact that the said judgments of the Apex
Court did not concern a situation before employment. The
learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition granting fresh
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
9/32
opportunity of Physical Endurance Test to the respondent-
petitioner and other similarly situated candidates.
11. The selection Board is in appeal and it is urged that
the writ petition was allowed without even considering the terms
and conditions as contained in the advertisement, the notice
inviting the candidates who had cleared the written examination
for undergoing the Physical Endurance Test and without
appreciating that the selections had been prolonged that were
required to be concluded expeditiously in view of the monitoring
of all such selections by the Apex Court that was reflected in the
order passed by the Supreme Court on 5 th of May, 2017 in the
case of Manish Kumar vs. Union of India and Ors. (Writ
Petition (C) No. 183 of 2013).
12. It is also the contention of the Board that the holding
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 8
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
of the selection process in a compartmentalized manner was not
practical as it involves huge expenses and such concessions for
candidates would also create a heavy burden on the Exchequer
of the State.
13. Before we proceed to deal with the arguments
advanced, the first issue that we would deliberate upon is about
the stipulations contained in the advertisement and the notice of
employment of Jail Warders which does not appear to have been
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
10/32
tested or even commented upon by the learned Single Judge.
The respondent-petitioner, namely Ishika Raj, applied for the
post of Jail Warder against the Advertisement No. 03 of 2015. A
copy of the said advertisement has been filed as Annexure-B to
the counter affidavit of the Selection Board in the writ petition.
The selection or appointment of Jail Warders in prisons
throughout the State of Bihar are governed by the Bihar Board
Cadre Rules, 2014, a copy of the same has been filed as
Annexure-A to the counter affidavit. The prescribed criteria
through direct recruitment envisages a written examination, a
race to be conducted, the criteria and standard whereof shall be
the same as prescribed for Constables in Bihar Police and the
Physical Measurement Test as provided in relation thereto.
Clause 6.2 is extracted hereinunder:-
"6.2 Procedure of Direct Recruitment-
6.2.1
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 9
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
There shall be following stages for the process of Direct Recruitment:-
(i) First Stage-A written examination shall be conducted for candidates. On the basis
of received applications by the Examination Agency.
(ii) Second Stage-The Examination Agency shall prepare a list of candidates, five
times the number Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 of reported
vacancy on the basis of written examination. In case of unavailability of sufficient
number of qualified candidates for medical test, the ration of candidates may
properly be reduced. All such candidates shall have to undergo for a race.
(iii) Third Stage- Candidates qualified in race, a physical measurement and test shall
be followed. On the basis of list of candidates found fit in physical measurement and
test, the merit wise and reservation category wise list of candidates equal to the
number of vacancies selected by the Examination Agency from the qualified
candidates shall be provided to the Appointing Authority.
(iv) Fourth Stage:- A medical test shall be conducted by a Medical Board constituted
under prescribed provisions after receiving the list of qualified candidates from the
Examination Agency. It will be mandatory for candidates to be found fit in medical
examination for appointment.
(v) If some of the candidates do not succeed in the medical test, then the
Examination Agency will be asked to recommend names of candidates from the merit
list, reservation category wise, against the number of unsuccessful candidates in the
medical test by the appointing authority; and Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of
2017 dt.01-03-2019 proper action shall be taken by the appointing authority after
getting such a list.
6.2.2 Prescribed Criteria for selection through Direct Recruitment:-
(i) Written Examination- The criteria and standard of written examination shall be
same as prescribed for Constable in Bihar Police. Besides, minimum marks for
written examination and process and provisions for preparing the merit list will be
same as applicable for recruitment of constable in Bihar Police.
(ii) Race- The criteria and standard of race examination shall be same as prescribed
for constable in Bihar Police.
(iii) Physical Measurement and test- The criteria and standard of physical
measurement and test shall be same as prescribed for constable in Bihar Police."
14. The advertisement with regard to physical abilities provides as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 10
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
Physical Abilities:-
(i) Run For Men-Time limit for 1 mile run-6 minutes (those taking more time will be
declared disqualified) Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 For
Women-Time limit for 1 kilometer run-6 minutes (those taking more time will be
declared disqualified)
(ii) High Jump For Men-Minimum 4 feet For Women-Minimum 3 feet
(iii) Long Jump For Men-Minimum 12 feet For Women- Minimum 9 feet
(iv) Shot Put For Men-16 pound, minimum 16 feet to throw For Women-12 pound,
minimum 10 feet to throw"
15. An important notice was issued by the appellant Board that was published in the Newspapers
and was also uploaded on the website on the basis whereof the test of Physical Evaluation Test on
the declaration of written examination results was announced. This notice dated 29th November,
2016 is Annexure-C to the counter affidavit. Clauses 2, 3, 5 and 6 are extracted hereinunder:-
"2- fyf[kr ijh{kk ds vk/kkj ij ;ksX; ik;s x;s vH;fFkZ;ksa dks LØhfuax ¼lR;kiu½]
"kkjhfjd eki] "kkjhfjd {kerk tk¡p&eki ijh{k.k (Physical Evaluation test {PET}) esa
Hkkx ysuk vfuok;Z gksxkA ftldk vk;kstu fnukad &09tuojh] 2017 ls iVuk esa fd;k
tk;sxkA Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 3- HkwriwoZ lSfud
rFkk fcgkj jkT; ds x`g j{kd vH;fFkZ;ksa ds fy, vkjf{kr inks ads fo:) mEehnokjksa dh
**fcgkj d{kiky laoxZ fu;ekoyh&2014** ds izko/kku ds vuqlkj nkSM+ vkfn "kkjhfjd
{kerk tk¡p ugha gksxh fdUrq vH;fFkZ;ksa dh LØhfuax tk¡p] Å¡pkbZ ,oa lhuk dh eki
rFkk izek.k&i=ksa dh tk¡p dh tk;sxhA 5- p;fur vH;fFkZ;ksa dh LØhfuax@"kkjhfjd
eki@"kkjhfjd {kerk tk¡p&eki gsrq fu/kkZfjr le; ,oa LFkku dh lwpuk izos"k&i= rFkk
i'kZn dh osclkbZV ij miyC/k djk;h tk;sxhA 6- LØhfuax@"kkjhfjd eki@ "kkjhfjd {kerk
tk¡p &eki ijh{k.k esa fu/kkZfjr frfFk dks izR;sd vH;FkhZ dk lfEefyr gksuk vfuok;Z gS]
vU;Fkk os v;ksX; ekus tk;saxs vkSj mUgsa nwljk volj ugha fn;k tk;sxkA"
16. A perusal of the aforesaid entire information including the terms and conditions of Physical
Evaluation Test was therefore well-known to the respondent-petitioner as well as to all other
candidates which categorically provides that failure to undergo the PET that is compulsory on the
appointed date, would disqualify a candidate and no further opportunity would be given.
17. At this juncture, it would be relevant to point out the claim of the respondent-petitioner where
she states, with the help of two documents, that her expected date of delivery was between March
and April, 2017. It is therefore evident that the respondent-petitioner had approximately become
pregnant long Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 before the written test was
held on 18 th September, 2016, the results whereof were declared within two months and the
Physical Evaluation Test was notified immediately thereafter. There is no prayer in the writ petition
for quashing any terms and conditions of the advertisement, the Rules applicable for selection or the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 11
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
notice dated 29.11.2016. The only prayer made in the writ petition was to extend the period of four
months till April, 2017 to enable the respondent-petitioner to deliver her child and then appear in
the Physical Evaluation Test.
18. It is also to be noted that along with the counter affidavit the appellant had brought on record a
chart of fourteen such similar candidates having requested for extension of time till March 2017,
April, 2017 or for a period of six months or for any other date to be fixed separately for them. This
chart Annexure-D is being reproduced for ready reference:-
"dsUnzh; p;u i'kZn ¼flikgh HkrhZ½ foKkiu la[;k&03@2015 ds varxZr dkjk d{kiky in
ij fu;qfDr gsrq fyf[kr ijh{kk ds lQy vH;fFkZ;ksa dh "kkjhfjd tk¡p&eki ijh{k.k
¼fnukad&09-01-2017 ls 19-01-2017½ ds volj ij fuEu efgyk xHkZorh vH;fFkZ;ksa
}kjk viuh "kjhfjd tk¡p&eki ijh{k.k dh frfFk dks muds uke ds lkeus vafdr le;kuqlkj
c<+kus dk vuqjks/k fd;k x;k gS %& Ø0la0 vH;FkhZ jkSy ua0 Lke; c<+kus dh vof/k
dk uke 1- bZfldk 4123170138 dqN ekg c<+kus ds fy, jkt vuqjks/k Patna High Court
L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 2- Lrqfr 4111240044 ekpZ 2017] rd c<+kus ds
dqekjh fy, vuqjks/kA 3- fiz;adk 4115160240 ckn esa dksbZ frfFk fu/kZfjr dqekjh djus
ds laca/k esa 4- uhrq 4113090233 Twku 2017 rd c<+kus ds fy, dqekjh vuqjks/kA 5-
:Urh 4113370186 vyx ls frfFk fu/kkZfjr djus dqekj ds fy, vuqjk/kA 6- laxhrk
4120050014 ckn esa dksbZ frfFk fu/kkZfjr dqekjh djus ds laca/k esaA 7- fdj.k
4115080702 Ckkn esa dksbZ frfFk fu/kkZfjr dqekjh djus ds laca/k esaA 8- Pkkanuh
4119060428 Ckkn esa dksbZ frfFk fu/kkZfjr dqekjh djus ds laca/k esaA 9- Ykfyrk
4112100258 Ckkn esa dksbZ frfFk fu/kkZfjr dqekjh djus ds laca/k esaA 10- ukt
4123090210 ekpZ 2017 rd c<+kus ds ijohu fy, vuqjks/kA 11- jk/kk 4125060584 N%
ekg ds ckn esa dksbZ frfFk dqekjh fu/kZfjr djus ds laca/k esaA 12- dud 4111230109
N% ekg ds ckn esa dksbZ frfFk dqekjh fu/kZfjr djus ds laca/k esaA 13 xk;=h
4120030089 viSzy 2017 rd c<+kus ds dqekjh fy, vuqjks/kA 14 vueksyk 4113110448
N% ekg ds ckn esa dksbZ frfFk dqekjh fu/kZfjr djus ds laca/k esaA fo"ks'k dk;Z
inkf/kdkjh] dsUnzh; p;u i'kZn ¼flikgh HkrhZ½ fcgkj] iVukA"
19. It is therefore evident from the facts in the present case that the respondent-petitioner had
acquired pregnancy long before the written test itself. This was of course her own choice but the said
choice is now sought to be pleaded as a fundamental right to seek extension of time in the holding of
the examinations which has been granted by the learned Single Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of
2017 dt.01-03-2019 Judge on the ground that the written examinations were held after thirteen
months of the advertisement.
20. We do not find any consideration by the learned Single Judge of the terms and conditions as
indicated in the advertisement, the 2014 Rules and more particularly the terms and conditions in
the notice dated 29.11.2016 which was not even challenged.
21. The recital in clause 5 and 6 of the notice dated 29.11.2016 makes it explicitly clear that every
candidate has to undergo the Physical Evaluation Test on the date fixed which is compulsory, or else
they would be treated to be disqualified and more importantly they will not be given a second
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 12
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
opportunity. The purpose for which a Physical Endurance Test has to be carried on is to test the
physical ability and for which all candidates who have succeeded in the written examinations are
supposed to undergo the same without fail. They, if acquire an incapacity voluntarily by entering the
stage of pregnancy as in the present case, the question is, can it be pleaded that a further extension
of time, as desired by them and as per their convenience, is a right accrued unto them which if not
granted would violate their fundamental rights? Such terms and conditions of Physical Evaluation
Test were not discussed in the Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 light of above
either by the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court or the Delhi High Court where the voluntary
act of acquiring motherhood was held as a fundamental right in respect of delayed examinations for
gaining employment.
22. We have considered the submissions raised and we find that the entire judgment of the learned
Single Judge proceeds on a two fold premise, firstly, that there was no fixed time schedule for
holding of the test in the advertisement and that the selection process spread over for a fairly long
time. Secondly, any denial of an opportunity to participate even after having cleared the written
examinations would be depriving the respondent-petitioners of an opportunity of employment and
they cannot be discriminated on the ground of sex as that would violate Article 15 of the
Constitution of India. Aid has further been taken of Article 14 read with Article 21 of the
Constitution of India to conclude that any such denial of opportunity amounts to infringing the right
of a female to have a dignified life and also amounts to a denial of women empowerment,
particularly in respect of those who have already proved their merit. The limited postponement of
the Physical Endurance Test does not in any way prejudice the process of selection more in the
background that the respondent-petitioners were duly qualified, Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of
2017 dt.01-03-2019 eligible and were within the merit of the selected candidates. It is in these
peculiar facts when holding of the examinations were spread over for a fairly long time that the
learned Single Judge found that the rights of the respondent-petitioners were being impinged for no
fault on their part.
23. We are unable to subscribe to the said view with respect, inasmuch as, the right to claim
employment on the strength of such facts where an individual is incapacitated by virtue of health
conditions cannot be said to have a fundamental right to claim employment. The act of acquisition
of pregnancy is a voluntary act and the right to beget a child is not being infringed by the State in
any manner. It is open to any of the writ-petitioners to have a child by choice but if the same brings
about any disability or incapacity in facing the Physical Endurance Test, the same has not been
imposed by the State and, therefore, the same does not get converted into such a right or a
fundamental right so as to be enforced against the State. The State has nowhere infringed or
impinged the right of a female to have a child. On the other hand, it is the respondent-petitioners
who want a concession in order to enable them to have a family and protect their family rights at the
cost of postponing a competitive examination. This is not a case where any of the Patna High Court
L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 respondent-petitioners have acquired a vested right after
employment. The benefit of any law relating to maternity during service cannot be applied in the
matters of holding examinations that have to be completed as expeditiously as possible. Learned
counsel for the appellants are right in their submission that the process of examinations had to be
concluded in view of the directions issued by the Supreme Court where no further postponement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 13
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
was permissible. Nonetheless, there is no law that may compel the State to postpone an examination
or Physical Endurance Test as involved in the present case on the basis of any such right that may be
traceable to Part-III of the Constitution of India. There is no element of arbitrariness or illegality in
the stand taken by the appellants which in the opinion of the Court is a justified stand on behalf of
the appellants as against the voluntary act of the respondent- petitioners to have voluntarily decided
to have a child of their choice. The State does not prevent them from exercise of any such choice by
refusing to postpone the dates of Physical Endurance Test.
24. A female candidate who enters into a marriage and conceives of her own choice cannot be a
matter of prediction by the appellant Board thereby breaching the fundamental right of a Patna
High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 woman. The Board cannot control or regulate this
fundamental right of a woman by providing a contingency that might come into existence by making
provisions in the advertisement. The advertisement is not under-challenge nor the terms and
conditions of the 2014 Rules are questioned. This right of convenience to appear in the
examinations as per the choice of the candidate by seeking extension of the dates of physical
evaluation on account of a self-acquired incapacity cannot form the basis of a fundamental right of a
woman to seek employment. The judgments in relation to the post-employment marriage benefits,
therefore, in our opinion cannot be stretched to the extent of matters relating to holding of
examinations or Physical Efficiency Test before employment. If the logic as applied is extended, then
female candidates in respect of any examinations whatsoever would claim extension as per her
convenience and choice or extending the dates of examinations because she by her own choice is
unable to undertake the examinations. The choice therefore to beget a child clearly involves entering
into the stage of a self-imposed incapacity where a female cannot undertake a Physical Evaluation
Test of the kind presently involved. The candidate knows consciously that she will not be able to
undertake the test, yet she has of her Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 own
choice decided to attain motherhood. A female candidate, as in the present case has not acquired
any vested right of employment even before clearing the physical examination test which is essential
and compulsory. Thus by her own choice she incapacitates herself which clearly amounts to a
disqualification as per the terms and conditions above. She does not get prohibited from again
appearing in any fresh examinations and, therefore, her right to seek an opportunity of employment
is not lost for all times to come. She by her own act having willingly, free from any influence, has
chosen to organize her own family life. Thus, she has in an intended way exercised her option to
acquire motherhood. There are a large number of candidates who have not chosen to do so. The
Kerala High Court in its judgment has treated such class of women as a separate class. This creation
of a class is an outcome of voluntary act and not an act which may be attributable to the State or the
Selection Board. The State or the Board therefore did not choose to violate the fundamental rights of
the respondent-petitioner. The action of the State in issuing the advertisement or by holding the
Physical Evaluation Test, which the learned Single Judge states to have been delayed, nowhere
declares that a female does not have a right to beget a child. It only prescribes that all candidates
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 have to pass the Physical Evaluation Test
and on their failure to appear in the same would bring about an automatic disqualification. There is
no relaxation on the ground of separate classes of women, one who are pregnant and the other who
are not. The situation would have been different if such pregnancy was acquired after employment
and it is only then that maternity benefits either in the shape of leave or otherwise are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 14
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
comprehended.
25. To our mind, the interpretation as given in the said judgments and followed by the learned
Single Judge in the impugned judgment does not appear to be legally sound as it not only overlooks
the reasonable restrictions that can be placed in matters of employment for expeditiously
concluding the selection process simultaneously in respect of all female candidates treating them to
be placed on an equal footing. The interpretation seeks to create an unequal class amongst the
females for extending the benefit on the ground of convenience and at the cost of impeding the
selection process. This also would violate Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution of India
inasmuch as there would be a large number of such candidates who may not have even applied or
would have left the examinations on account of such incapacity of pregnancy. Patna High Court
L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
26. We may also refer to a Division Bench Judgment of the Kerala High Court in the case of Kerala
Public Service Commission vs. K. Jayasree reported in 2014 (1) KHC 358 that has been heavily
relied on by the learned Single Judge to arrive at the conclusions in the impugned judgment. In the
aforesaid case, the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court observed that a pregnant woman cannot
be denied an opportunity to seek her means of livelihood for biological reasons of her having
entered the stage of motherhood. The Division Bench held that since the final selection list had not
been published therefore the Commission was not required to conduct a fresh endurance test. This
fact in the present case has to be viewed from the angle that the date which was fixed for physical
endurance test was sought to be advanced to enable the respondent-petitioners to become capable
for appearing in the test. The Division Bench further held that the primary concern is to have female
candidates which is a larger public interest and, therefore, a category of such candidates who have
qualified the other tests but they are unable to appear in the physical endurance test because of their
pregnancy or maternity therefrom, they form a different class.
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
27. In our opinion, this sub-classification for the purpose of giving protection would run counter to
Articles 14 and 16 within the category of females themselves. If this interpretation is accepted then a
large number of such females would have unhesitatingly applied who were also undergoing the same
stage of pregnancy provided there had been any such relaxation given either in the advertisement or
rules. All aspirants for the post were uniformly informed of the holding of Physical Endurance Test
and it is quite natural that such aspirants who were undergoing pregnancy or maternity may not
have applied because of their incapacity to face such a test, but had it been publicly known about the
extension of such relaxation, there would have been many such candidates who could have applied
and would have competed along with the respondent-petitioners. Thus, by carving out a class of
such candidates after the selections have reached the selection of Physical Endurance Test would be
denying such opportunity to those similarly placed aspirants who did not apply because of their
pregnancy or even if they had applied may not have chosen to appear in the examinations because of
such a situation. The law therefore in respect of a class within the class has to be applied uniformly
in respect of similarly situated aspirants. The Division Bench of the Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535
of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 Kerla High Court did not investigate the matter any further and assumed the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 15
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
existence of this sub-category amongst female candidates entitled to be protected without any
consideration of the competing claims of similarly situated aspirants. The learned Single Judge has
also not examined the matter from this angle even though he has ultimately extended benefits to
those who were similarly placed.
28. The flip side of the coin has not been viewed. The fate of thousands of female candidates waiting
in the queue who have not acquired any health incapacity cannot be made to suffer at the hands of
those who have voluntarily chosen to do so and are a miniscule number. Opportunity was offered to
all including the petitioners at par with others. They were given a level playing field with the same
opportunity being considered which they have denied to themselves. It is the petitioners who chose
to waive the opportunity by opting for maternity thereby altering their own priorities. A voluntary
act by them cannot be transposed as a blame on the appellants as if they had acted deliberately to
defeat the rights of respondent-petitioners.
29. The respondent-petitioners did have a right to appear in the Physical Evaluation Test and they
were offered the same opportunity. As to what is one's right has been described in Patna High Court
L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 Paragraph 15 of the Apex Court Judgment in the case of Mr. 'X'
vs. Hospital 'Z' reported in (1998) 8 SCC 296. The same is extracted herein under:-
"15 "Right" is an interest recognised and protected by moral or legal rules. It is an
interest the violation of which would be a legal wrong. Respect for such interest
would be a legal duty. That is how Salmond has defined "right". In order, therefore,
that an interest becomes the subject of a legal right, it has to have not merely legal
protection but also legal recognition. The elements of a "legal right" are that the
"right" is vested in a person and is available against a person who is under a
corresponding obligation and duty to respect that right has to act or forbear from
acting in a manner so as to prevent the violation of the right. If, therefore, there is a
legal right vested in a person, the latter can seek its protection against a person who
is bound by a corresponding duty not to violate that right."
30. The respondent-petitioners therefore had a right of an opportunity but they gave it up because of
their voluntarily acquired pregnancy. The choice therefore was exercised by them Patna High Court
L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 of their fundamental right to have a child. This right is sought
to be enforced on the ground that they are being impinged on account of denial of adjustment by
granting a separate opportunity of physical ability test.
31. We find on the other hand that the appellants have placed a reasonable restriction by giving one
opportunity to everyone to appear in the Physical Evaluation Test and failure to appear therein
would entail a disqualification. Such restriction of a single opportunity to appear in the Physical
Evaluation Test is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory and is neither against public interest or
public policy. Consequently, in our opinion, the fundamental right to beget a child is nowhere
violated when the right to appear in the Physical Evaluation Test is protected by providing an
opportunity. It is the respondent-petitioners who want an additional opportunity or concession or
holding of a separate Physical Evaluation Test for them which in our opinion is neither a legal right
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 16
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
nor a fundamental right. There is no fundamental right to have a second chance in a matter of
selection and appointment. There is therefore no conflict in the competing rights of the
respondent-petitioners so as to castigate the appellants of having violated the fundamental rights of
the respondent-petitioners.
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
32. On the other hand, it is the competing legal rights of those who have appeared at the test, on the
appointed day and time, abiding by the terms and conditions that would be infringed by
accommodating the respondent-petitioners on concession. As stated herein this would also be unfair
to those who either had not applied in absence of any such announcement for future adjustment and
second chance or had applied and chose to opt out on account of their pregnancy. The competing
rights of those who have succeeded in the PET cannot be jeopardized at the desired convenience of
the respondent-petitioners. This would be treating others unequally.
33. The appellants have not been found to have planned the elimination of the
respondent-petitioners so as to infer either malice in fact or in law. If the respondent-petitioners are
now accommodated then those who have faced the test and have been successful will have to be
eliminated. This will be unjust as against those who have competed against those who have chosen
to abstain voluntarily.
34. In our opinion, unless such a rule is declared or made known to the aspirants either through an
advertisement or otherwise the same cannot be applied selectively in respect of candidates who on
account the pendency of the final selections Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
had on their own volition chosen to exercise their right to have a child.
35. The respondent-petitioners have exercised their own option knowing fully well that they may
have to undergo a PET any time. This option to beget a child cannot be converted as a compulsion
on the appellants to hold a separate PET after the candidate delivers a child. This option cannot be
termed as a right to compel the appellants to keep on adjourning the dates of PET as per the
convenience of maternity or stage of pregnancy.
36. In the present case, it may also be placed on record that this matter of selection was being
monitored by the Apex Court and on 5th of May, 2017 the Apex Court had passed orders that is part
of the record whereby the selections had to be completed in a time bound manner.
37. These facts have not been dealt with by the learned Single Judge which clearly makes the present
case distinguishable as against the case before the Kerala High Court. The judgment of the learned
Single Judge was delivered on 03.08.2017 and it appears that the above-quoted direction of the
Apex Court escaped the notice of the Court even though the order had already been passed by the
Apex Court to conclude the selection process within a time bound frame. In the present case Patna
High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019 selections have been concluded and the Physical
Endurance Test has already been held. Accordingly to concede any further opportunity would be to
further delay the appointments of the selected candidates which would also violate the orders of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 17
The Chairman, Central Selection Board ... vs Ishika Raj And Anr on 1 March, 2019
Apex Court dated 5th of May, 2017.
38. In our opinion, the right of a female to choose a family life and have a child at the
pre-employment stage cannot be a compulsion on the employer to mould the terms and conditions
of the selection process at the convenience of candidates which is evident from the choice expressed
by such candidates as indicated in the chart reproduced hereinabove.
39. For all the aforesaid reasons, we do not find the appellant to be under any obligation in law to
extend the time for making it convenient to the respondent-petitioner to avail another opportunity
of Physical Evaluation Test. The fundamental rights of the respondent-petitioner are nowhere
violated as held by the learned Single Judge and we do not find ourselves in agreement with either
the judgments of the Kerala High Court or the Delhi High Court as relied on by the learned Single
Judge for extending any such benefit to the respondent- petitioner.
Patna High Court L.P.A No.1535 of 2017 dt.01-03-2019
40. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment dated 3rd August, 2017 is set
aside. The writ petition stands accordingly dismissed.
(Amreshwar Pratap Sahi, CJ) (Anjana Mishra, J) Vikash/-
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE NA
Uploading Date 05.03.2019
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86057094/ 18
