The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi
Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam
T.C.A.No.329 of 2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 28.09.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.SIVAGNANAM
and
THE HONOURABLE MRS.JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBARAYON
T.C.A.No.329 of 2020
The Commissioner of Income Tax,
Chennai. .. Appellant
Versus
Shri Vummudi Amarendran
New No.4, Old No.19, Valmiki Street,
T.Nagar, Chennai 600 017. .. Respondent
Prayer:- Tax Case Appeal filed under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act,
1961, against the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, ''D'' Bench,
Chennai dated 27.02.2020 in I.T.A.No.2933/Chny/2019.
For Appellant : Mr.T.Ravikumar
Senior Standing Counsel
JUDGMENT
[Order of the Court was made by T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J.] This appeal filed by the Revenue under
Section 260 A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ('the Act' for brevity) is directed against the order dated
http://www.judis.nic.in 27.02.2020 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Madras 'D'
Bench ('the Tribunal') in I.T.A.Nos.2933/Chny/2019 for the Assessment Year 2014- 15 and the
Revenue has filed this Appeal raising the following Substantial Questions of Law:
1. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in
holding that the amendment to Section 50C which was introduced with effect from
2017-18 prospectively was applicable retrospectively for the assessment year 2014-15
when the language used in the proviso does not indicate that it was inserted as a
clarification?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
2. Is not the reasoning and finding of the Tribunal bad by holding that the
prospective amendment to provisions Section 50C for the assessment year 2017-18 is
applicable retrospectively to assessment year 2014-15 without appreciating the fact
that unless explicity stated a piece of legislation is presumed not to be intended to
have retrospective operation based on the principle ''lex prospicit non respicit''
meaning that the law look forward and not backwards?
http://www.judis.nic.in
2. The facts which are necessary for answering the questions raised before us are set out hereunder.
The respondent/assessee is an individual filed its original return of income on 28.09.2014,
admitting a total income of Rs.7,40,50,990/-. The case was selected for scrutiny and Notice under
Section 143(2) of the Act dated 28.08.2015 was issued. Subsequently since there was a change in the
Officer, Notice under Section 142(1) read with Section 129 of the Act was issued. The assessee was
represented by his authorized representative before the Assessing Officer and submitted details
called for. The assessee had owned 44,462 sq.ft of land in Neelankarai Village and the property was
sold by the Sale Deed dated 02.05.2013 registered on the file of the Sub Registrar, Neelangarai. The
assessee had entered into an Agreement for Sale on 04.08.2012 agreeing to sell the property for a
total sale consideration of Rs.19 Crores and in terms of the conditions contained therein, the
assessee had received a sum of Rs.6 Crores as advance consideration and the same was effected by
Cheque payment by the purchaser. The Assessing Officer found that on the date of execution and
registration of the Sale Deed i.e., on 02.05.2013, the guideline value of the http://www.judis.nic.in
property as fixed by the State Government was Rs.27 Crores. Thus, the Assessing Officer came to the
conclusion that since the assessee had not parted with possession and had received only Rs.6 Crores
as advance which was not disclosed during the relevant financial year, held that the Agreement for
Sale cannot be regarded as a transfer for the purpose of Section 2(47)(V) of the Act. The assessee
while computing Capital Gain had taken the sale consideration for the property at Rs.19 crores. This
according to the Assessing Officer was not a full value of consideration because on the date when the
property was sold, i.e., date on which the Deed of conveyance was executed and registered, the
guideline value was much higher than the agreed sale price and therefore, the said amount should
be reckoned for all purposes as a full value of consideration and Capital Gain thereon ought to have
been computed.
3. The assessee before the Assessing Officer did not seek to bring his case under the ambit of Section
2(47)(V) of the Act. The argument was that the proviso to Section 50(C) of the Act would stand
attracted. Though it was applied with effect from 01.04.2017, it would have retrospective effect as
http://www.judis.nic.in the proviso seeks to mitigate the undue hardship faced by the assessee. The
Assessing Officer did not agree with the statement of the assessee on the ground that the proviso
applied only with effect from 01.04.2017, applicable for the assessment year 2017-18 and the same is
prospective. Further the Assessing Officer held that the conditions laid down for the proviso to be
applicable, is absent in the assessee's case. The Assessing Officer came to such conclusion on the
ground that the proviso would be applicable if at the first place Agreement has been treated as a
transfer of a capital asset which was absent in the assessee's case, on the date when the Agreement
for sale was entered into. Accordingly, the assessment was completed under Section 143(3) of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
Act vide order dated 29.12.2016 by adopting the full value of consideration at Rs.27 Crores and the
Capital Gain was recomputed and tax was demanded. The assessee filed an appeal before the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)-6, Chennai [CIT(A)]. The appeal was allowed by order dated
25.07.2019. The Revenue preferred an appeal before the Tribunal which was dismissed vide order
dated 27.02.2020, which is impugned in this appeal.
http://www.judis.nic.in
4. We have elaborately heard Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing Counsel for the Revenue.
5. It is the submission of Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing counsel that the amendment to
Section 50(C) of the Act introduced by the Finance Act 2016 is effective only from 01.04.2017,
prospectively. In this regard, the learned Senior Counsel referred to the legal maxim 'lex prospicit
non respicit' which means law look forward and not backwards. The learned Senior Counsel referred
to the Circular issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes ('CBDT') in Circular No.3/2017 dated
20.01.2017 and has drawn the attention of this Court to the paragraph no.29 which deals with the
Rationalization of Section 50C in case sale consideration is fixed under agreement executed prior to
the date of registration of immovable property. It is submitted that CBDT has clarified that the
amendment shall take effect from 01.04.2017 and would accordingly apply from assessment year
2017-18 and subsequent years. Further it is submitted that the language of the proviso is clear and it
does not indicate it is either clarificatory to be held to argue that http://www.judis.nic.in the proviso
would have retrospective effect. Reliance was placed on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax, (Central)-1, New Delhi Vs. Vatika Township Private
Limited [2014 (367) ITR 466 (SC)] and our attention was drawn to paragraph no.39 of the
judgment, in support of his contention that the Statute has to be held to be prospective from the
date fixed by the legislature.
6. Reliance was also placed on the decision of the High Court of Calcutta in the case of Bagri Impex
(P.) Ltd., Vs. Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax, Circle-9, Kolkata;2013 (31) Taxmann.com 39
(Calcutta), in support of his contention that where the date of Sale was registered in the year,
subsequent to the year in which consideration was received, applying Section 50(C) of the Act, value
assessed by stamp valuation authority in subsequent years should be taken as full value of
consideration. Reliance is also placed on the decision of the Honble Division Bench of this Court in
Ambattur Clothing Company Limited Vs. Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax [2010 (326) ITR
0245] to support the contention that the Assessing Officer was justified in treating the value adopted
by the stamp http://www.judis.nic.in valuation authority as the deemed sale consideration received
/ accruing as a result of transfer. Reliance was also placed on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in R.Saibharathi Vs. J.Jayalalitha [2004 (2) SCC 9], with regard to the effect of the guideline
value fixed by the Government. As pointed out by us, the assessee sought to take the benefit of the
proviso inserted to Section 50C of the Act. It is no doubt true and as clarified by the CBDT vide
Circular No.3 of 2017 dated 20.01.2017 that the amendment to Section 50C would start effect from
01.04.2017 and will accordingly apply from assessment year 2017-18 and subsequent assessment
years. However one important factor which needs to be noted is that amendment seeks to relieve the
assessee from undue hardship caused on account of the computation of higher rate of capital gains.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
7. Before we proceed to consider as to whether proviso inserted in Section 50C of the Act has to be
read retrospective or prospective, we need to point out that the Assessing Officer did not doubt the
bonafides of the transaction done by the assessee, since the Assessing Officer accepted the fact that
the assessee had entered into an Agreement for Sale of the property http://www.judis.nic.in in
question vide Agreement for Sale dated 04.08.2012, wherein agreed sale consideration was Rs.19
Crores and the assessee had received Rs.6 Crores by way of account payee cheque on the date of
signing the Agreement. This fact was noted by the CIT(A) and held that the Agreement cannot be
treated to be ante-dated as the assessee had received Rs.6 crores as advance on the date of
Agreement through banking channel. The only reason for the Assessing Officer to adopt higher
value is based upon the guideline value fixed by the State Government. The question would be as to
what is the effect of the guideline value fixed by the Government and the purpose behind fixing the
same. This aspect was clearly explained in the case of J.Jayalalitha. It has been pointed out that the
guideline value has relevance only in the context of Section 47A of the Indian Stamp Act (as
amended by Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1967) which provides for dealing with instruments of conveyance
which are undervalued. The guideline value is a rate fixed by the authorities under the Stamp Act for
the purpose of determining the true market value of the property disclosed in an instrument
requiring payment of stamp duty. Thus the guideline value fixed is not final but only a prima facie
rate prevailing in an area to ascertain the true or correct market value. It is open to the Registering
http://www.judis.nic.in Authority as well as the person seeking registration to prove the actual
market value of the property. The authorities cannot regard the guideline valuation as the last word
on the subject of market value but only a factor to be taken note of, if at all available in respect of an
area in which the property transferred lies . It was further pointed out that this position is made
clear in the explanation to Rule 3 of the Tamil Nadu Stamp (Prevention of Undervaluation of
Instruments) Rules, 1968; this explanation also will have to be read in conjunction with explanation
to Section 47(A) of the Indian Stamp Act (as amended by the Tamil Nadu Act 24/1967). It was
further pointed out that undue emphasis on the guideline value without referred to the setting in
which it is to be viewed will obscure the issue for consideration. Further it was held that in any
event, if for the purpose of the Stamp Act, guideline value alone is not a factor to determine the
value of the property, its worth will not be any higher in the context of assessing the true market
value of the properties in question to ascertain whether the transaction has resulted in any offense
so as to give a pecuniary advantage to one party or other.
8. Thus, the Assessing Officer could not have based his conclusion solely based on the guideline
value which has been held to be only a prima http://www.judis.nic.in facie rate prevailing in the
area to ascertain the true or correct market value and it is not the last word on the subject of market
value but only a factor to be taken note of. As pointed out earlier, the genuinity of the transaction
done by the assessee was not doubted and the receipt of advance was through banking channel by
way of a demand draft.
9. Therefore, in our considered view the Assessing Officer could not have based his finding solely
relying upon the guideline value especially when the Assessing Officer is not a person who is
computing stamp duty under the provisions of Indian Stamp Act on the Deed of conveyance. Having
observed so we need to take note of the next issue would be as to whether the proviso to Section 50C
could be read to be prospective or retrospective. Section 50C(1) proviso reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
''Provided that where the date of the agreement fixing the amount of consideration
and the date of registration for the transfer of the capita asset are not the same, the
value adopted or assessed or assessable by the stamp valuation authority on the date
of agreement may be taken for the purposes of computing full value of consideration
for such transfer.''
10. Reading of the above proviso would show that the legislature http://www.judis.nic.in took note
of the fact that there are several occasions where the Agreements are entered into between a willing
vendor and willing purchaser on an agreed sale consideration, the Agreement is reduced into writing
and in many a cases a substantive portion of the sale consideration is given to the vendor as advance
on the date of execution of the Agreement. There are other types of transaction where the vendor
executes Power of Attorney in favour of the intending purchaser empowering him to sell the
property at any time he proposes to do so. In fact this was also a subject matter of consideration,
when the legislature though to introduce the amendment to Section 50C of the Act. There may be
cases where the sale consideration will be taken as deferred payment subject to certain
contingencies. However the case on hand is very straight forward case, where there is an Agreement
for Sale, agreeing to sell the property at Rs.19 Crores and a sum of Rs.6 Crores has been received as
advance sale consideration. The proviso to Section 50C(1) of the Act deals with cases where the date
of the agreement, fixing the amount of consideration and the date of registration for the transfer of
the capital assets are not the same, the value adopted or assessed or assessable by the stamp
valuation authority on the date of agreement may be taken for the purposes of
http://www.judis.nic.in computing full value of consideration for such transfer. Thus an
amendment by insertion of proviso seeks to relieve the assessee from undue hardship.
11. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income Tax, Kolkata Vs. Calcutta Export
Company [2018 (404) ITR 654(SC)], considered the question as to whether the amendment made
by the Finance Act 2010 to Proviso of Section 40(a)(ia) of the Act is curative in nature and it has to
given retrospective operation from the date of insertion of the said proviso i.e., with effect from
Assessment Year 2005-06. It was pointed out that the purpose of the amendment made by the
Finance Act 2010 is to solve the anomalies with the instrument of Section 40(a)(ia) of the Act,
caused to the bona fide tax payer. It was further held that the amendment even if not given any
operation retrospectively, may not materially to be of consequence to the Revenue when the tax
rates are stable and uniform or in cases of big assesses having substantial turnover and equally huge
expenses and necessary cushion to absorb the effect; however a marginal and medium tax payer
who work at low gross product rate and when expenditure becomes subject matter of an order under
Section 40(a)(ia) is substantial, can suffer severe adverse http://www.judis.nic.in consequence if the
amendment made in 2010 is not given retrospective operation i.e., from the date of substitution of
the provision. Thus, the amendment made by the Finance Act 2010 being curative in nature was
held to be retrospective in operation. In the above decision, the Hon'ble Supreme Court took note of
the fact that the statutory amendment was being made to remove undue hardship to the assessee or
held to be retrospective.
12. The Honble Supreme Court in Kolkata Export Company took note of the earlier decisions on the
same issue in the case of Allied Motors Private Limited Vs. CIT [1997 (224) ITR 677 (SC)],
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
Whirlpool of India Limited Vs. CIT, New Delhi [2000 (245) ITR 3], CIT Vs. Amrid Banaspati
Company Limited [2002 (255) ITR 114] and CIT vs. Alom Enterprises [2009 (319) ITR 306] and
held that the new proviso should be given retrospective effect from the insertion on the ground that
the proviso was added to remedy unintended consequences and supply an obvious omission. The
proviso ensured reasonable interpretation and retrospective effect would serve the object behind the
enactment. Thus by taking note of the above decisions, we have no hesitation to hold that the
proviso to Section 50C(1) of http://www.judis.nic.in the Act should be taken to be retrospective
from the date when the proviso exists. The CIT(A) while allowing the assessee's appeal vide order
dated 25.07.2019, took note of the submissions made by the assessee wherein they placed reliance
on the decision of the Ahmadabad Bench of the Tribunal in the case of Dharamshi bhai Sonani Vs.
ACIT [2016 75 taxmann.com 141 (Ahmedabad- Trib)]; order of the Delhi Bench of the ITAT in the
case of Income Tax officer Vs. Modipon Limited [2015 (57) taxmann.com 360 (Delhi Tribunal)].
13. On a reading of the order passed by the CIT(A), it is interesting to note the report submitted by
the Income Tax Simplification Committee set up in 2015, headed by a Former Judge of the High
Court, Delhi.
14. Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned Senior Standing Counsel is right in a submission that this report is not
binding or cannot be taken to have a statutory force. Nevertheless Simplification Committee was
consisted of experts in the field of taxation and it would be worthwhile and interesting to note as to
why they have considered the insertion of the proviso to Section 50(C) of the Act should be held to
be retrospective; In the report there is an http://www.judis.nic.in extract of Memorandum
explaining provisions of Finance Bill 2016 which reads as follows:
''Rationalization of Section 50C in case sale consideration is fixed under agreement
executed prior to the date of registration of immovable property.
Under the existing provisions contained in Section 50C, in case of transfer of a capital
asset being land or building on both, the value adopted or assessed by the stamp
valuation authority for the purpose of payment of stamp duty shall be taken as the
full value of consideration for the purposes of computation of capital gains. The
Income Tax Simplification Committee (Easwar Committee) has in its first report,
pointed out that this provision does not provide any relief where the seller has
entered into an agreement to sell the property much before the actual date of transfer
of the immovable property and the sale consideration is fixed in such agreement,
whereas similar provision exists in section 43CA of the Act i.e. When an immovable
property is sold as a stock-in-trade. It is proposed to amend the provisions of section
50C so as to provide that where the date of the agreement fixing the amount of
consideration for the transfer of immovable property and the date of registration are
not the same, the stamp duty value on the date of the agreement may be taken
http://www.judis.nic.in for the purposes of computing the full value of consideration.
It is further proposed to provide that this provision shall apply only in a case where
the amount of consideration referred to therein, or a part thereof, has been paid by
way of an account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
clearing system through a bank account, on or before the date of the agreement for
the transfer of such immovable property. These amendments are proposed to be
made effective from the 1st day of April, 2017 and shall accordingly apply in relation
to assessment year 2017-18 and subsequent years.''
15. Taking note of the above Memorandum, it was pointed out that once a statutory amendment is
being made to remove an undue hardship to the assessee or to remove an apparent incongruity,
such an amendment has to be treated as effective from the date on which the law, containing such
an undue hardship or incongruity, was introduced. The report also referred to the decision in the
case of Alom Enterprises [2009 (319) ITR 306].
16. Reverting back to the decisions relied on by the Revenue, the decision in Bagri Impex (P.) Ltd.,
supra is distinguishable on facts as the http://www.judis.nic.in assessee therein contended that the
date of agreement should be taken as date on which the property was transferred by bringing the
same within the ambit of Section 2(47) of the Act, which is not the case before us. In Ambattur
Clothing Company Limited, the assessee contended that since the buyer wanted the Sale Deed to be
released after registration, they had paid stamp duty as per the guideline value which is higher than
the sale consideration agreed to be paid on the instruments. This explanation offered by the assessee
was found to be factually incorrect and rejected and in the background of the said facts, the Honble
Supreme Court observes that the Assessing Officer was justified in treating the value adopted by the
stamp valuation authority as the deemed sale consideration, received/ accruing as a result of
transfer.
17. On going through the facts of the case on hand, we find that no such observation was made by
the Assessing Officer. The assessee's consistent case was that the sale consideration agreed to be
paid to him by the purchaser was Rs.19 crores and Rs.6 crores was received as advance on the date
of entering into the Agreement for Sale. However, the Assessing Officer disbelieved the same and
applied the guideline value at Rs.27 crores on the http://www.judis.nic.in date when the Sale Deed
was executed and registered. Therefore, in our considered view, the decision in Ambattur Clothing
Company Limited cannot be applied with the facts and circumstances of the case on hand.
18. Mr.T.Ravikumar, learned counsel is right in a submission that the observations made by the
Tribunal qua the decision of the Honble Supreme Court in Vatika Township is incorrect. In fact we
find that the Tribunal did not assign any reasons as to why the decision in Vatika Township do not
apply to the facts of the case. In fact the decision in Vatika Town Ship should be referred for the
purpose as to when a Statute can be treated to be clarificatory and when not?. The legal principle
laid down therein ought to have been taken note of by the Tribunal. Therefore, the Tribunal may not
be fully right in stating that the judgment in Vatika Township will not be applicable to the facts as
the judgment needs to be looked into to consider the legal principle of retrospectivity, retro activity
or prospectivity. In any event, the ultimate conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal confirming the
above order passed by the CIT(A) cannot be found faulted with.
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 7
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
19. For all the above reasons, the appeal filed by the Revenue is dismissed. The Substantial
Questions of Law raised in these appeals are answered against the Revenue and in favour of the
assessee. No costs.
(T.S.S.,J) (V.B.S.,J)
28.09.2020
sk
Index: Yes / No
Internet: Yes / No
Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order
To
The Commissioner of Income Tax,
Chennai.
http://www.judis.nic.in
T.S.SIVAGNANAM. J,
AND
V.BHAVANI SUBBARAYON, J.
sk
http://www.judis.nic.in
28.09.2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 8
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri Vummudi Amarendran on 28 September, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62259283/ 9
