The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint
And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
Author: R. Mahadevan
Bench: R. Mahadevan, Mohammed Shaffiq
TCA No. 595 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 20.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE R. MAHADEVAN
and
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAMMED SHAFFIQ
T.C.A. No. 595 of 2021
The Commissioner of Income Tax
Chennai .. Appellant
Versus
M/s. Tamilnadu Newsprint and Papers Limited
No.67, Anna Salai, Guindy
Chennai – 600 032 .. Respondent
Tax Case Appeal filed under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961
against the order dated 02.03.2012 passed by the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Madras “A” Bench, in I.T.A.No. 2035/Mds/2011.
For Appellant : Ms. V.Pushpa
Junior Standing Counsel
For Respondent : Mr. Subbaraya Aiyar
JUDGMENT
(Judgment of the Court was delivered by R. MAHADEVAN, J.) This tax case appeal has been filed by
the appellant/Revenue, calling in question the correctness of the order dated 02.03.2012 passed by
the Income https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Tax Appellate Tribunal, 'A' Bench, Chennai, in
I.T.A.No. 2035/Mds/2011, relating to the assessment year 2005-06, by raising the following
substantial questions of law:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 1
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
“1. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal was right in upholding the order of CIT(A) in allowing deduction
u/s.80IA without setting of losses on notional basis?
2. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
right in confirming the order of CIT(A) by deleting the disallowance on the agency commission paid
to non- resident under Sec.40(a)(i) of the Income Tax Act?
3. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
right in not considering the amended explanation to sec.9(2) inserted by Finance Act, 2010 with
retrospective effect from 01.06.1976?
4. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
right in holding that the liability on TDS on agency commission paid to non-resident and
consequential disallowance of commission, expenditure under Section 40(a)(i) of the Income Tax
Act is proper?”
2. When the appeal is taken up for consideration, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant /
Revenue fairly submitted that the substantial question of law Nos. 2 to 4 are covered against the
Revenue as per the decision of this Court in respect of the assessee's own case relating to the
assessment https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis year 2007-2008 in T.C.A. No. 299 of 2014 dated
31.03.2021. The relevant passage of the said decision, for better understanding, is reproduced
herewith:
“3.When the appeal is taken up for hearing, Mr.M.Swaminathan, learned standing
counsel appearing for the appellant – Revenue fairly submitted that the questions of
law nos.1 to 3 are covered, against the Revenue, by a decision of the Hon'ble Division
Bench of this court reported in [2015] 57 taxmann.com 87 (Madras) [Commissioner
of Income Tax, Chennai vs. Fluidtherm Technology (P) Ltd ], wherein the Hon'ble
Division Bench held as follows:
“...
7. This Court, in the case of CIT v. Faizan Shoes (P.) Ltd. [2014] 367 ITR155 / 226
Taxman 115/ 48 taxmann.com 48 (Mad.), had an occasion to consider a similar issue
and after exhaustive analysis of the different provisions of the Income Tax Act and
also taking into consideration the law laid down by the Supreme Court with regard to
the said provisions, held as follows :-
'6. Before adverting the merits of the case, it would be apposite to refer to section
9(1)(i), section 9(1)(vii) and section 9(2) of the Act, which read as under:
Section 9. Income deemed to accrue or arise in India.(1)The following incomes shall
be deemed to accrue or arise in India (i) all income accruing or arising, whether
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 2
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
directly or indirectly, through or from any business connection in India, or through
or from any property in India, or through or from any asset or source of income in
India, or through the transfer of a capital asset situate in India; (vii) income by way of
fees for technical services payable-
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in relation to any income
by way of fees for technical services payable in pursuance of an agreement made
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis before the 1st day April, 1976, and approved by the
Central Government.
Explanation 1. - For the purposes of the foregoing proviso, an agreement made on or
after the 1st day of April, 1976, shall be deemed to have been made before that date if
the agreement is made in accordance with proposals approved by the Central
Government before that date.
Explanation 2. - For the purposes of this clause, 'fees for technical services' means
any consideration (including any lump sum consideration) for the rendering of any
managerial, technical or consultancy services (including the provision of services of
technical or other personnel) but does not include consideration for any construction,
assembly, mining or like project undertaken by the recipient or consideration which
would be income of the recipient chargeable under the head 'Salaries'.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection(1), any pension payable
outside India to a person residing permanently outside India shall not be deemed to
accrue or arise in India, if the pension is payable to a person referred to in article 314
of the Constitution or to a person who, having been appointed before the 15 th day of
August, 1947, to be a Judge of the Federal Court or of a High Court within the
meaning of the Government of India Act, 1935, continues to serve on or after the
commencement of the Constitution as a Judge in India.
Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this section,
income of a non-resident shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India under clause (v) or clause (vi)
or clause (vii) of subsection (1) and shall be included in the total income of the non- resident,
whether or not, -
(i) the non-resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India ; or
(ii) the non-resident has rendered services in India." https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
7. On a reading of section 9(1)(vii) of the Act, we are not inclined to accept the plea taken by the
learned senior standing counsel appearing for the Revenue that commission paid by the assessee to
the non-resident agent would come under the term "fees for technical services". In the case on hand,
for procuring orders for leather business from overseas buyers wholesalers or retailers, as the case
may be, the non-resident agent is paid 2.5 per cent. commission on FOB basis. That appears to be a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 3
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
commission simpliciter. What is the nature of technical service that the so-called non-resident agent
has provided abroad to the assessee is not clear from the order of the Assessing Officer. The opening
of letters of credit for the purpose of completing export obligation is an incident of export and,
therefore, the non-resident agent is under an obligation to render such services to the assessee, for
which commission is paid. The non-resident agent does not provide technical services for the
purposes of running of the business of the assessee in India. The services rendered by the
non-resident agent can at best be called as a service for completion of the export commitment. We
are, therefore, of the considered opinion that the commission paid to the non-resident agent will not
fall within the definition of fees for technical services.
9. The Explanation to section 9(2) of the Act was substituted by the Finance Act, 2010, with
retrospective effect from June 1, 1976. The above said explanation would come into play only if the
said amount paid would fall under the headings :
(i) income by way of interest as set out in section 9(1)(v) of the Act ; or
(ii) income by way of royalty as set out in section 9(1)(vi) of the Act ; or
(iii) income by way of fees for technical services as set out in section 9(1)(vii) of the
Act.
10. While dealing with section 9(1) of the Act, the Supreme https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Court
in CIT v. Toshoku Ltd. [1980] 125 ITR 525(SC), on considering a transaction where tobacco was
exported to Japan and France and sold through nonresident assessees who were paid commission,
held as under:
"8. The second aspect of the same question is whether the commission amounts
credited in the books of the statutory agent can be treated as incomes accrued, arisen,
or deemed to have accrued or arisen in India to the non- resident assessees during
the relevant year. This takes us to section 9 of the Act. It is urged that the commission
amounts should be treated as incomes deemed to have accrued or arisen in India as
they, according to the department, had either accrued or arisen through and from the
business connection in India that existed between the non-resident assessees and the
statutory agent. This contention overlooks the effect of clause (a) of the Explanation
to clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Act which provides that in the case of
a business of which all the operations are not carried out in India, the income of the
business deemed under that clause to accrue or arise in India shall be only such part
of the income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India. If all
such operations are carried out in India, the entire income accruing therefrom shall
be deemed to have accrued in India. If, however, all the operations are not carried out
in the taxable territories, the profits and gains of business deemed to accrue in India
through and from business connection in India shall be only such profits and gains as
are reasonably attributable to that part of the operations carried out in the taxable
territories. If no operations of business are carried out in the taxable territories, it
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 4
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
follows that the income accruing or arising abroad through or from any business
connection in India cannot be deemed to accrue or arise in India (see CIT v. R. D.
Aggarwal and Co. [ 1965] 56 ITR 20( S C) andCarborandum Co. v. CIT [1977] 108 ITR
335(SC) which are decided on the basis of section 42 of the Indian
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Income-tax Act, 1922, which corresponds to section
9(1)(i) of the Act).
9. In the instant case, the non-resident assessees did not carry on any business
operations in the taxable territories. They acted as selling agents outside India. The
receipt in India of the sale proceeds of tobacco remitted or caused to be remitted by
the purchasers from abroad does not amount to an operation carried out by the
assessees in India as contemplated by clause (a) of the Explanation to section 9(1)(i)
of the Act. The commission amounts which were earned by the nonresident assessees
for services rendered outside India cannot, therefore, be deemed to be incomes which
have either accrued or arisen in India. The High Court was, therefore, right in
answering the question against the Department."
11. The facts of the present case are akin to the facts of the decision in Toshoku Ltd.'s case, referred
supra. In the instant case also the assessee engaged the services of non- resident agent to procure
export orders and paid commission. That apart, the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) as well
as the Tribunal have correctly applied the principle laid down in GE India Technology Centre (P.)
Ltd.'s case, referred to supra, to hold that the assessee is not liable to deduct tax at source when the
non-resident agent provides services outside India on payment of commission.
12. In the light of the above said decisions and the finding rendered by us on the earlier issue that
the services rendered by the non-resident agent can at best be called as a service for completion of
the export commitment and would not fall within the definition of fees for technical services, we are
the firm view that section 9 of the Act is not applicable to the case on hand and, consequently,
section 195 of the Act does not come into play. In view of the above finding, the decision of the
Supreme Court in Transmission Corporation of A. P. Ltd.'s case, referred to supra, relied upon by
the learned standing counsel for the Revenue is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis not applicable to
the facts of the present case. We find no infirmity in the order of the Tribunal in confirming the
order of the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals).
8. The above decision of this Court in Faizen Shoes (P.) case (supra) is squarely applicable to the
facts of the present case.
9. In the result, this Court finds no reason to interfere with the order passed by the Tribunal. No
question of law,much less substantial question of law arises for consideration in this appeal.
Accordingly, the order passed by the Tribunal is confirmed and this appeal is dismissed. No costs.”
3. It is also fairly submitted on the side of the appellant /Revenue that the first substantial question
of law is covered against the Revenue, by a decision of this Court, in Velayudhaswamy Spinning
Mills (P.) Ltd., vs. Assistant Commissioner of Income-tax reported in [2012] 21 taxmann.com 95
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 5
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
(Madras), wherein, it was held by the Division Bench as follows:
“19. In the present cases, there is no dispute that losses incurred by the assessee were
already set off and adjusted against the profits of the earlier years. During the
relevant assessment year, the assessee exercised the option under section 80-IA(2).
In Tax Case Nos.909 of 2009 as well as 940 of 2009, the assessment year was
2005-06 and in Tax Case No.918 of 2008 the assessment year was 2004-05. During
the relevant period, there were no unabsorbed depreciation or loss of the eligible
undertakings and the same were already absorbed in the earlier years. There is a
positive profit during the year. The unreported judgment of this Court cited supra
considered the scope of sub-section (6) of section 80-I, which is the corresponding
provision of sub-section (5) of section 80-IA. Both are similarly worded and,
therefore, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis we agree entirely with the Division
Bench judgment of this Court cited supra. In the case of CIT v. Mewar Oil and
General Mills Ltd. (No.1) (2004) 271 ITR 311 (Raj); (2004) 186 CTR (Raj) 141, the
Rajasthan High Court also considered the scope of section 80-I and held as follows
(page 314 of 271 ITR):
“Having considered the rival contentions which follow on the line noticed above, we
are of the opinion that on finding the fact that there was no carry forward losses of
1983-84, which could be set off against the income of the current assessment year
1984-85, the re computation of income from the new industrial undertaking by
setting off the carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation or depreciation allowance
from previous year did not simply arise and on the finding of fact noticed by the
Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals), which has not been disturbed by the
Tribunal and challenged before us, there was no error much less any error apparent
on the face of the record which could be rectified. That question would have been
germane only if there would have been carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation and
unabsorbed development rebate or any other unabsorbed losses of the previous year
arising out of the priority industry and whether it was required to be set off against
the income of the current year. It is not all required that losses or other deductions
which have already been set off against the income of the previous year should be
reopened again for computation of current income under section 80-I for the purpose
of computing admissible deductions thereunder.
In view thereof, we are of the opinion that the Tribunal has not erred in holding that
there was no rectification possible under section 80-I in the present case, albeit, for
reasons somewhat different from those which prevailed with the Tribunal. There
being no carry forward of allowable https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis deductions
under the head depreciation or development rebate which needed to be absorbed
against the income of the current year and, therefore, re computation of income for
the purpose of computing permissible deduction under section 80-I for the new
industrial undertaking was not required in the present case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 6
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
Accordingly, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.”
20. From a reading of the above, the Rajasthan High Court held that it is not at all
required that losses or other deductions which have already been set off against the
income of the previous year should be reopened again for computation of current
income under Section 80-I for the purpose of computing admissible deductions
thereunder. We also agree with the same. We see no reason to take a different view.
21. The standing counsel appearing for the Revenue is unable to bring to our notice
any relevant material or any compelling reason or any contra judgment of other
courts to take a different view. He only relied heavily on the Memorandum explaining
the provisions in the Finance (No.2) Bill, 1980, (1980) 123 ITR (St.) 154 to support
this case and the same reads as follows:
“ Clause 30(iii). In computing the quantum of 'tax holiday' profits in all cases, taxable
income derived from the new industrial units, etc., will be determined as if such units
were an independent unit owned by a taxpayer who does not have any other source of
income. It the result, the losses, depreciation and investment allowance of earlier
years in respect of the new industrial undertaking, ship or approved hotel will be
taken into account in determining the quantum of deduction admissible under the
new section 80-I even though they may have been set off against the profits of the
taxpayer from other sources.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
22. We are not agreeing with the counsel for the Revenue. We are, therefore, of the
view that loss in the year earlier to the initial assessment year already absorbed
against the profit of other business cannot be notionally brought forward and set off
against the profits of the eligible business as no such mandate is provided in Section
80-IA(5).”
4.Following the aforesaid decisions, all the substantial questions of law raised in this
appeal are answered against the appellant / Revenue and in favour of the
respondent/assessee. Accordingly, the tax case appeal is dismissed. No costs.
(R.M.D., J.) (M.S.Q., J.)
20.12.2021
dhk/rsh
Internet : Yes / No
Index : Yes/No
To
1. The Commissioner of Income Tax
Chennai
2. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
Chennai (D) Bench
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 7
The Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Tamilnadu Newsprint And Papers ... on 20 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
R. MAHADEVAN, J
and
MOHAMMED SHAFFIQ, J
dhk/rsh
20.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75340274/ 8
