The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.R.C.No.1468 of 2016
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 13.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE Ms.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.R.C.No.1468 of 2016
The President
rep. by Mr.P.Rajendiran
S.1337 Salem Industrial Employees
Coop. House Construction Society Ltd.,
1-A, Yercadu Main Road,
Thirunagar, Salem-7.
... Petitioner
Vs.
1.N.Karthikeyan
2.S.P.Murugan
3.R.Ramakrishnan (died)
4.R.Padma
5.A.Kasirajan
6.S.Dhanalakshmi
7.S.Arjunan
8.A.Selvaraj (died)
9.State represented by
Inspector of Police,
CCIW-CID, Salem Unit,
Salem, Salem District.
(Crime No.2 of 2003)
... Respondents
Criminal Revision filed under Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C praying to call
for the records of order dated 25.11.2013 made in C.C.No.228 of 2005 on the
file of The learned Judicial Magistrate No.III (FAC), Salem, Salem District and
set aside in so far as releasing the accused persons on Probation u/s 4(1) of
Probation of Offenders Act and impose major punishment against them.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/21
(cid:12) Crl.R.C.No.1468 of 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 1
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
For Petitioner : Mr.M.R.Jothimanian
For Respondents : Mr.K.V.Sridharan for R1& 2
R3 & R8 - died
Mr.A.Gopinath
Government Advocate (Crl. Side) for R9
***
ORDER
This Criminal Revision case has been preferred challenging the judgment of the learned Judicial
Magistrate-III, Salem dated 25.11.2013 made in C.C.No.228 of 2005.
2. The revision petitioner is said to be the President of S1337 Salem Industrial Employees
Co-operative House Construction Society Limited. The Industrial Employees Co-operative House
Construction Society Limited is formed by its members for constructing houses to its members. The
accused (Karthikeyan), who was functioning as a Secretary, was alleged to have misappropriated the
funds entrusted to him by forgery, falsification of accounts and failed to maintain proper accounts.
On the basis of the inspection report prepared by the Deputy Registrar (Housing) (PW2), Salem
Region, a case has been registered in Crime No.2 of 2002 under Sections 408, 409, 467, 471 and
477(A) by PW5/Venugopal, Inspector of Police. After concluding the investigation, charge sheet has
been filed against the accused for the offence under Sections 120(B), 408, 467, 471 and 477(A) read
with 109 IPC. After the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis case was taken on file and on being
satisfied with the materials produced before the Court, the learned Trial Judge framed the charges
against the accused under Sections 408 and 477(A) IPC. When the accused was questioned, he
pleaded innocence and he claimed to be tried.
3. During the course of the trial, on the side of the prosecution 5 witnesses have been examined as
PW1 to PW5 and 6 documents were marked as Exs.P1 to P6. On the side of the defence, no witness
was examined and no document was marked.
4. At the conclusion of the trial and on consideration of the evidence produced before the Court, the
learned Trial Judge found the accused guilty for the offence under Sections 408 and 477(A) IPC.
However, the learned Magistrate had chosen to give the benefit of Section 4 of Probation of
Offenders Act to the accused. Challenging the above judgment with regard to the granting of
benefits under Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, neither the State nor the Official Deputy
Registrar of Society had filed any revision for revising punishment. However, the President of the
Society has filed this revision for awarding punishment to the accused by setting aside the order of
the release passed under Section 4 of Probation of Offenders Act. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
5. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner submitted that the learned Magistrate had chosen
to give the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act on the promise that the accused would make good
the loss by paying the misappropriated amount. But in reality, the amount has not been paid and the
documents also do not disclose the above payment. He further submitted that the subscription
amount of the members of the Society forms part of the fund of the Society and hence if the funds of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 2
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
the Society is misappropriated, the real victims would be the members of the Society only. Hence,
the President of the Society has assumed the responsibility of challenging the order of releasing the
accused under the Probation of Offenders Act.
6. The learned counsel for the first respondent/accused submitted that the order of the learned
Magistrate cannot be challenged because the finding has been recorded as to the payment of the
misappropriated amount to the Society and hence, the revision has to be dismissed. He further
submitted that the petitioner has got no locus standi to file this revision.
7. The learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) appearing for the 9th respondent/State submitted
that appropriate orders may be passed.
8. Heard the learned counsel for the revision petitioner, the learned counsel for the respondents 1 &
2 and the learned Government Advocate https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (Crl.Side) appearing for
the 9th respondent.
9. Point for consideration:
Whether the release of the accused on Probation under Section 4 of Probation of
Offenders Act by the learned Judicial Magistrate based on the materials available on
record is legal and proper?
10. As per Section 372 Cr.P.C, a victim can have the right to prefer an appeal against the order of
acquittal or for enhancement of sentence. The language of Section 372 Cr.P.C is extracted as below:-
“372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. - No appeal shall lie from any
judgment or order of a Criminal Court except as provided for by this Code or by any
other law for the time being in force.
[Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order
passed by the Court acquitting the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or
imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the Court to which
an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court.]”
11. If the accused gets the benefit of release under the Probation of Offenders Act, without repaying
the amount misappropriated by him, no doubt the persons affected would be the members of the
Society with whose funds the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Society is being run. If the State did
not opt to challenge the inadequacy of compensation or no compensation, the victim has got no
other option except to take recourse to Section 372 proviso. The revision petitioner cannot be strictly
seen as a third person, who is not interested in the outcome of the case proceedings. The Society
being a juridical person, it has to be represented by any of its office bearers, who is authorised to
represent the Society. Accordingly, the President of the Society has filed this revision for projecting
the interest of its members, whose funds have been misappropriated by the accused. It is to be noted
that the first respondent/accused has not challenged the finding of 'guilt' by the learned trial Judge.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 3
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
So the findings as to guilt of the accused has become final and unchallenged. It is probably because
he was given with the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act. During the course of these proceedings,
a maintainability question was raised by the learned Public Prosecutor. The learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the law has been well settled on this point by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of Mallikarjun Kodagali (Dead) Vs. State of Karnataka and others reported in (2019) 2
SCC 752 and the relevant paragraphs are paragraphs 72 & 73, which read as follows:-
“72. What is significant is that several High Courts have taken
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis a consistent view to the effect that the victim of an
offence has a right of appeal under the proviso to Section 372 of the Cr.P.C. This view
is in consonance with the plain language of the proviso. But what is more important
is that several High Courts have also taken the view that the date of the alleged
offence has no relevance to the right of appeal. It has been held, and we have referred
to those decisions above, that the significant date is the date of the order of acquittal
passed by the Trial Court. In a sense, the cause of action arises in favour of the victim
of an offence only when an order of acquittal is passed and if that happens after 31st
December, 2009 the victim has a right to challenge the acquittal, through an appeal.
Indeed, the right not only extends to challenging the order of acquittal but also
challenging the conviction of the accused for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate
compensation. The language of the proviso is quite explicit, and we should not read
nuances that do not exist in the proviso.
73. In our opinion, the proviso to Section 372 of the Cr.P.C.
must also be given a meaning that is realistic, liberal, progressive and beneficial to the victim of an
offence. There is a historical reason for this, beginning with the Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, adopted by the General Assembly of the United
Nations in the 96th Plenary Session on 29th November, 1985. The Declaration is sometimes
referred to as the Magna Carta of the rights of victims. One of the significant declarations made was
in relation to access to justice for the victim of an offence through the justice delivery mechanisms,
both formal and informal. In the Declaration it was stated as follows:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “4. Victims should be treated with compassion and
respect for their dignity. They are entitled to access to the mechanisms of justice and
to prompt redress, as provided for by national legislation, for the harm that they have
suffered.
5. Judicial and administrative mechanisms should be established and strengthened
where necessary to enable victims to obtain redress through formal or informal
procedures that are expeditious, fair, inexpensive and accessible. Victims should be
informed of their rights in seeking redress through such mechanisms.
6. The responsiveness of judicial and administrative processes to the needs of victims
should be facilitated by:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 4
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
(a) Informing victims of their role and the scope, timing and progress of the
proceedings and of the disposition of their cases, especially where serious crimes are
involved and where they have requested such information;
(b) Allowing the views and concerns of victims to be presented and considered at
appropriate stages of the proceedings where their personal interests are affected,
without prejudice to the accused and consistent with the relevant national criminal
justice system;
(c) Providing proper assistance to victims throughout the legal process;
(d) Taking measures to minimize inconvenience to victims, protect their privacy,
when necessary, and ensure their safety, as well as that of their families and
witnesses on their behalf, from intimidation and retaliation;
(e) Avoiding unnecessary delay in the disposition of cases and the execution of orders
or decrees granting awards to victims.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
7. Informal mechanisms for the resolution of disputes, including mediation, arbitration and
customary justice or indigenous practices, should be utilized where appropriate to facilitate
conciliation and redress for victims.”
12. The learned counsel for the petitioner also cited the decision of the Full Bench of this Court in
the case of K.Rajalingam Vs.R.Suganthalakshmi etc., reported in 2020 (4) CTC 1. In the said
judgement, the Hon'ble Full Bench of this Court held that such revisions or appeals filed by the
victim challenging the acquittal or inadequate compensation would only lie before the High Court.
Relevant paragraph is paragraph 28 and the same reads as follows:
“28. Accordingly, we answer the reference as under.
1. As against an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate on a complaint, an appeal
will lie only before the High Court, under Section 378 (4) of Cr.PC. In such cases, the
complainant has to seek for Special leave under Section 378 (5) of Cr.PC. The first
Crl.R.C. Nos.494 & 536 of 2019 & Crl.M.P.No.1789, 1794 & 7289 of 2019 question in
the order of reference is answered accordingly.
2. By virtue of the answer given to the first question, the questions 2 to 6 raised in the
order of reference becomes more academic and therefore, there is no need to
undertake the exercise of answering those questions.
3. The decision rendered in S.Ganapathi case is declared as a judgement
per-incuriam, since it has been decided without reference
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 5
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to the binding authority in Damodar S.Prabhu and
Subash Chand.
That apart it is no longer a good law by virtue of the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Mallikarjun Kodagali. We answer the 7th question in the order of reference accordingly and proceed
to issue the following directions :-
(a) An appeal which was pending before this Court and which was remanded to the
Sessions Court pursuant to S.Ganapathi (Supra) and the same is pending, the same
should be transferred back to the file of the High Court and should be considered to
be pending before the High Court. The same effect will be given even for cases where
the original appeal was filed before the Sessions Court and is pending.
(b) In cases where the Sessions Court has confirmed the order of acquittal passed by
the Magistrate and a revision petition has been filed before this Court by the
complainant and the same is pending, the order of Sessions Court must be
disregarded and the revision petition filed before this Court by the complainant must
be treated as an Appeal by virtue of Section 401(5) of Cr.PC. Those revision petitions
must be renumbered as Criminal Appeals by the Registry.
(c) In cases, where, the order of acquittal has been confirmed by the Sessions Court
and it has not become final or it has not been acted upon by the parties and the
complainant wants to challenge the same, he shall file a Criminal Appeal before this
Court against the order passed by the Magistrate, disregarding the order passed by
the Sessions Court, within the limitation period prescribed for filing Appeal and
which shall be calculated from the date on which the Sessions Court order was made
ready. In such cases, the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis complainant has to seek
for a Special leave under Section 378 (5) of Cr.PC.
(d) In cases, where, the Sessions Court has reversed the order of acquittal passed by
the Magistrate and the same has been challenged by the accused before this Court by
way of revision petition and the same is pending, the same should be treated as an
Appeal pending before this Court against the order of Acquittal passed by the
Magistrate, by disregarding the order passed by the Sessions Court. In all those cases,
the complainant must file a transpose petition and the Registry must convert the
same as Criminal Appeals by showing the complainant as the Appellant and the
accused as the respondent. The Memorandum of grounds of Criminal Appeal filed
before the Sessions Court will be considered as the memorandum of grounds of
appeal in the renumbered Criminal Appeal.
(e) In cases, where the Sessions Court has reversed the order of acquittal passed by
the Magistrate and convicted the accused and this order has not become final or the
same has not been acted upon, the accused person has to necessarily challenge the
said order by filing a criminal revision petition before this Court by quoting this Full
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 6
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
Bench judgement. After notice is served on the complainant and he enters
appearance, the same should be treated as an Appeal pending before this Court
against the order of Acquittal passed by the Magistrate, by disregarding the order
passed by the Sessions Court. In all those cases, the complainant must file a
transpose petition and the Registry must convert the revision as Criminal Appeal by
showing the complainant as the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Appellant and the
accused as the respondent. The Memorandum of grounds of Criminal Appeal filed
before the Sessions Court will be considered as the memorandum of grounds of
appeal in the renumbered Criminal Appeal.
(f) In all those cases, where, either after remand or by means of filing, an Appeal has
been finally decided by the Sessions Court and the same has not been challenged or it
has been acted upon, the order passed by the Sessions Court will be final inter-partes
and it cannot be re-opened by virtue of this judgement.
(g) In all those cases, where, the order of the Sessions Court was put to challenge
before this Court, either by the complainant or by the accused, as the case may be,
and final orders have been passed by this Court and it has become final inter-partes
or has been acted upon, it cannot be re-opened by virtue of this judgement.”
13. In view of the clarity shown through the above judgments, there is no dispute that a victim of
such an offence is entitled to file an appeal for challenging the inadequacy of compensation or no
compensation before the High Court by invoking Section 372(1) Cr.P.C. But in this case the Revision
Petitioner has chosen to file only a petition and not an appeal, despite the lower Court has not
awarded any compensation to be payable to the Society. This is because the trial Court had believed
that the accused had paid the loss to the Society. Since the petitioner claims that the loan has not
been paid by the accused, he has preferred this Revision by challenging the propriety and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis legality of the above order passed by the learned Magistrate.
14. While giving the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act to the first respondent/accused, the
learned Magistrate has made the following observations:-
“10. When the accused was questioned under Section 248(2) Cr.P.C as to the
sentence proposed to be past against him, he submitted that he has paid the entire
amount to the society and prayed to release him on admonition. Since the accused
seems to be the first offender and the entire amount have been paid to the Society,
this Court is inclined to find out “whether the benefit under the Probation of Offender
Act can be given to the accused or not”
11. In the result accused found guilty under 408 & 477(A) IPC.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the accused seems to be first offender, and the
previous conviction is not mentioned in the charge sheet. This Court is inclined to find out “whether
the benefit under the Probation of Offender Act can be given to the accused or not”. Hence called for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 7
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
report of the probationary officer.
Friday, the 21st day of August 2013 Report of the Probationary Officer received on 13.08.2013.
12. In the report of the Probationary Officer it reported as follows:
Fw;wk; rhl;lgl;l fhh;j;jpnfad; j-bg. eluh$d;
vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
nkw;fz;ljpy; ,tuJ Kd; elj;ij jpUg;jpfukhf
,Ue;Js;sJ/ nghjpa mDgtk; ,y;yhj fhuzj;jhy;
Fw;wk; epfH;e;Js;sJ vd;gij xg;g[fb
; fhz;L ,dp
ve;j jtWf;Fk; ,lk; bfhLf;fhky; ey;yKiwapy;
thH;ntd; vd cWjp TWfpwhh;/ FLk;gj;jpdh;
cj;juthjKk; cz;L/ jtWf;F tUe;Jfpwhh.;
jz;lidf;F m";Rfpwhh;/ FLk;gj;ijf; fhf;Fk;
bghWg;g[ cs;sJ/ tajhd bgw;nwhh; fhf;Fk;
bghWg;g[k; cz;L/
Fw;wk; rhl;lg;gl;l KUnfrd; j/bg/gHdpKj;J
(nyl;) vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz
nkw;fz;nld;/ ,tuJ Kd; elj;ij jpUg;jpfukhf
,Ue;jJ vd;gij cWjp bra;njd;/ ,th; nryk;
bjhHpypapay; gzpahsh; Tl;Lwt[ tPlL
; fl;Lkhd
r';fj;jpy; gy;ntW fLikahd gzpfSf;fpilapy;
jtwhd egh;fSf;F fld; tH';fpajpy;
ifbahg;gkpl;Ls;shh; vdt[k; ntz;Lbkd;nw jtwhf
mDkjpf;ftpy;iy vdt[k; tprhuizapy; mw;e;njd;/
,Ug;gpDk; bjhif kPjp brYj;jg;gl;Ls;sjhy;
kd;dpf;f nfhUfpwhh;/ bra;j jtWf;F tUe;Jfpwhh;/ jz;lidf;F m";Rfpwhh;/ ,dp ,Jnghd;W
ftdf;Fiwthft[k; bray;fspy; <Lglkhl;nld; vd cWjp TWfpwhh;/ tU';fhy ed;dlj;ijf;F
cj;juthjk; cz;L/ FLk;gj;ijf; fhf;Fk; bghWg;g[ cs;sJ/ Fw;wk; rhl;lgl;l jdyl;Rkp;
f-bg/rutzd;
vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz
nkw;bfhz;nld;/ ,th; Kd; Fw;wk; ,y;yhjth;
vd;gij tprhuizapy; mwpe;njd;/ nghjpa fy;tpawpt[ https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
,y;yhj fhuzj;jhy; ,th; ,tuJ rnfhjhp $hdfp bgahpy; fld; th';fpa[ss ; hh;/ tpist[fis
mwpahky;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 8
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
jtW bra;Js;shh;/ ,Ug;gpDk; Fw;wj;ij
xg;gf
[ ;bfhz;L ,dp ey;y Kiwapy; thH;tjhf cWjp
mspf;fpwhh;/ ,th; jz;lidf;F m";Rfpwhh;/
FLk;gj;ijf; fhf;Fk; bghWg;g[ cs;sJ/ ,tuJ
FLk;gj;jpdh; ,tiu ek;gpna cs;sdh;/
Fw;wk; rhl;lg;gl;l gj;kh f-bg. uhkd; vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz nkw;fz;nld;/
,th; Kd; Fw;wk; ,y;yhjth;/ ,th; vGj;jwptpd;ikahy;. fld; th';fpajpy; Fw;wk;
g[hpe;js;shs;/ ,Ug;gpDk;
bra;j jtWf;F tUe;Jfpwhs;/ jz;lidf;F
m";Rfpwhs;/ ,th; Foir tPlo
; y; tWikapy;
thH;fpwhs;/ mtuhy; elg;gjw;F nghjpa cld; jpwd;
,y;yhjtuhf cs;shs;/ tU';fhy ed;dlj;ijf;F
cj;juthjk; cz;L/
Fw;wk; rhl;lg;gl;l mh;$d
P d; j-bg. Rg;gukzp
vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz
nkw;bfhz;nld;/ ,tuJ Kd; elj;ij jpUg;jpfukhf ,Ue;Js;sJ/ ,th; jdJ mwpahikapshYk; gpd;
tpist[fisg; gw;wp rpe;jpf;fhkYk; Fw;wk;
g[hpe;Js;sjw;F tUe;Jfpnwd;/ jz;lidf;F
m";Rfpwhh;/ tU';fhy ed;dlj;ijf;F cj;juthjk;
jUfpwhh;/ ,tiu ek;gpna ,tuJ FLk;gk; cs;sJ/
jz;lidf;F m";Rfpwhh;/ ,tuJ thH;tpid rPh;
J}f;fyhk; vdf; fUJfpnwd;/
Fw;wk; rhl;lg;gl;l fhrp uh$h j-bg. m';fKj;J
vd;gthpd; Kd; elj;ij Fwpj;J tprhuiz
nkw;bfhz;nld;/ ,tuJ Kd; elj;ij jpUg;jpfukhf https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
,Ue;Js;sJ/ ,th; jdJ mwpahikapshYk; gpd;
tpist[fisg; gw;wp rpe;jpf;fhkYk; Fw;wk;
g[hpe;Js;shh;/ jtWf;F tUe;Jfpnwd;/ jz;lidf;F
m";Rfpwhh;/ ,Jnt Kjy; Fw;wk; ,dp Fw;wj;jpy;
<Lglkhl;nld; vd cWjp mspf;fpwhh;/ ,tUf;F
FLk;gj;ij fhf;Fk; bghWg;g[ cs;sJ/
vdnt vjpupfsJ thH;tpid rPh; Jf;fyhk;
vdf;fUjp Fw;wk; rhl;lg;gl;l nkw;go vjphpfis
1958k; Mz;L ;Fw;wthspfs; ed;dlj;ij rl;lj;jpd;
fPH; gphpt[ 4(1)d; go tpLtpj;J gphpt[ 4(3)d; fPH;
Xuhz;L fhyk; nryk; nfhl;lk; 2 ed;dlj;ij
mYtyhpd; nkw;ghh;itapy; itf;fyhk; vd;W
Mizfs; gpwg;gpf;FkhW ghpe;Jiu bra;Js;shh;/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 9
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
13. On the perusal of P.P.report this court has came to know that the accused are the first offender
and he apologizing for the offence committed by them. Moreover the witnesses and Investigating
Officer in this case have deposed in their evidence that the accused have paid entire amount to the
Society, this Court is of the view that the benefits under Probation of Offenders Act could be
afforded to the accused.
14. Considering the circumstances, the age of the accused and the their family circumstances stated
in the report and the accused have paid entire amount to the Society, this court is inclined to provide
the benefit provided under Sec.4(1) of the Probation of Offenders to the accused.
In the result accused will be released on probation under Sec.4(1) of the Probation Offenders Act, on
execution bond for Rs.20,000/- with 2 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis sureties and with a
condition of 'not to participate in the offences herein after, if they involved in the same kind of
offences, they have to receive the punishment'. The accused are put under surveillance of the
Probationary Officer for the period of 1 year from the date of this order under Sec.4(3) of the
Probation Offenders Act.”
15. It is strange to note the recommendation given by the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act
despite other case is pending against the accused in C.C.No.179/2012 before the Judicial Magistrate
No.V, Salem. The fundamental reason for which the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act is given is
to enable the first time offenders to get an opportunity to correct their criminal attitude without
having any records of the criminal antecedents. In this case, it is observed that the accused has got
another case pending. The accused, against whom more than one case is pending, is treated with
utmost lenience for the reason that he had already set right the loss by repaying the same to the
Society.
16. The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently denied the fact that the accused had repaid the
entire loss to the Society. Apart from this case, there were four more cases pending against the
accused in C.C.Nos.231/2005, 229/2005, 228/2005 and 230/2005. All these cases have been filed
against the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis accused for misappropriation of funds of the same
Society, but for different periods. In C.C.No.228/2005 there are totally eight accused and this first
respondent/accused is ranked as the first accused. It is submitted that the total amount
misappropriated in all these five cases is Rs.75,70,166/-. All these five cases were based on the same
report of PW3 dated 17.01.2002 sent by Co- Operative Sub Registrar to Housing Co-operative Sub
Registrar (Athur). In pursuance of the said report, Section 81 enquiry was conducted and at the end
of the enquiry, it is concluded that a sum of Rs.75,70,166/- have been misappropriated on different
heads. Hence, separate cases have been registered for separate Heads of Accounts. However, in all
the five cases, the same observation has been made by the learned Magistrate that the first
respondent/accused had paid the entire amount to the Society. The revision petitioner, who is
appearing for the Society, has denied the above fact and claimed that only a part payment of
Rs.18,30,940.50/- has been paid and the balance of Rs.57,39,225.50/- has not been paid. Despite
the learned counsel for the first respondent/accused has repeatedly submitted that the entire
amount has been paid by the first respondent/accused, no document has been produced either
before the trial Court or before this Court to substantiate the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 10
The President vs N.Karthikeyan on 13 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
17. In such circumstances, the observation of the learned trial Judge that the entire amount has been
paid by the first respondent/accused is questionable. While making such observation and taking the
same into consideration for giving the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act, the learned Magistrate
ought to have seen the relevant records and only thereafter, he ought to have recorded the finding
with regard to payment. The appreciation of materials that is alleged to have been produced before
the Magistrate for considering the granting benefits under Probation of Offenders Act is found to be
short-sighted and incomplete and not legal.
18. I feel that the matter has to be remanded back to the learned trial Judge for getting relevant
materials and to record afresh as to the payment of the loss to the Society by the accused and the
consequential benefits given to him under Section 4 of Probation of Offenders Act. However, this
order will not have any impact on the finding of the guilt of the first respondent/accused.
19. In the result, this Criminal Revision is allowed and the judgement dated 25.11.2013 made in
C.C.No.228 of 2005 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate No.III (FAC), Salem is hereby set
aside only with regard to the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis granting of benefit under Section 4 of
Probation of Offenders Act and the matter is remitted back to the learned Judicial Magistrate No.III
(FAC), Salem for getting relevant materials and pass an order afresh as to the payment of the loss to
the Society and the benefits given to him under Section 4 of Probation of Offenders Act.
13.12.2021 (5/5) Index: Yes/No Speaking / Non Speaking Order kmi To
1.The Judicial Magistrate No.III, (FAC), Salem.
2.The Inspector of Police, CCIW-CID, Salem Unit, Salem, Salem District.
3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court of Madras, Chennai-600 104.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N.MANJULA, J kmi 13.12.2021 (5/5)
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188481141/ 11
