The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29 November, 2021
The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29
November, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.21971 of 2015
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 29-11-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.21971 of 2015
And
MP No.1 of 2015
The Managing Director,
M/s.Lingeswara Textiles,
V.C.Muthusamy,
S/o.Chinnachamy,
D.No.299, Muthur Road,
Vellakovil,
Kangeyam,
Tiruppur District. .. Petitioner
vs.
1.Secretary to Government,
Energy Department,
Fort St. George,
Chennai,
Tamil Nadu.
2.Chairman,
The Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation,
TANGEDCO,
Anna Salai,
1/12
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187268685/ 1
The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29 November, 2021
(cid:12) WP No.21971 of 2015
Chennai-2.
3.Assistant Executive Engineer,
O&M, The Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution
Corporation, TANGEDCO/SOUTH,
Vellakovil,
Tirupur District. .. Respondents
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Certiorari, calling for the records
pertaining to the Final Assessment Order in Letter No.AEE/O&M/S/VKL/F.
11/D.No.231/15-16 dated 24.06.2015 passed by the third respondent and
quash the same as ex-facie illegal, arbitrary, ultra vires and error apparent
on the face of record.
For Petitioner : Mr.V.Balamurugane
For Respondent-1 : Mr.C.Selvaraj,
Additional Government Pleader.
For Respondents-2 and 3 : Mr.L.Jai Venkatesh,
Standing counsel for TANGEDCO.
ORDER
The Final Assessment Order for unauthorised use of electricity under Section 126 of the Electricity
Act, 2003, is under challenge in the present writ petition.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner mainly contended that there is
non-application of mind on the part of the Authorities even in referring the appellate remedy
provided under the Electricity Act and Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
3. The impugned order states that the petitioner may prefer an appeal before the Appellate
Authority-Executive Engineer/Distribution/ Kangeyam, within 30 days from the date of receipt of
the order on deposit of half of the assessed amount with the Board as per Section 127(2) of the
Electricity Act, 2003 along with an appeal fee of Rs.100/- by Demand Draft.
4. In this regard, the learned counsel for the petitioner drew the attention of this Court through the
Notification issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Power dated 07.02.2006, wherein the
Government of India in exercise of powers conferred by clause (u) of sub-section (2) of Section 176
of the Electricity Act, 2003, issued the Rules prescribing the Appellate Authority for preferring an
appeal. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187268685/ 2
The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29 November, 2021
5. As per the abovesaid Notification for the purpose of appeal under Section 127, the Statement
Government may, by Notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Appellate Authority
consisting of one or more persons such that one of the persons shall have knowledge of matters
related to assessment of electricity charges and none of them shall be directly related to the affairs of
the territorial jurisdiction of the Licensee or Supplier of the electricity.
6. The abovesaid Notification is issued only to ensure the compliance of principles of natural justice,
as no person, who sit in his own case, more specifically as Appellate Authority to review his own
order, which is against the basic principles of law.
7. This Court is of the considered opinion that the point raised is undoubtedly acceptable, as the
principles of natural justice requires transparency and the Appellate Authority cannot be the
Original Authority, who issued the orders or decided the disputes. Even the Tamil Nadu
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Electricity Supply Code is concerned, the same may not be
relevant as far as the case of the petitioner is concerned.
8. In view of the fact that the impugned Final Assessment Order was issued under Section 126 of the
Electricity Act, 2003, Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum and Electricity
Ombudsman, is the Regulation applicable in the present case.
9. Regulation 5 deals with kind of grievances that can be taken up by the Forum and the same reads
as under:-
“5. Kind of grievances that can be taken up by the Forum.--The Forum shall take up
any kind of grievances/complaints as defined in Clause 2(f) of these Regulations.
However, the consumer's grievances concerned with-
(i) unauthorised use of electricity as detailed under Section 126; and
(ii) offences and penalties as detailed under Sections 135 to 141 of the Electricity Act,
2003 (36 of 2003) are excluded from the purview of this Forum.”
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
10. Regulation 3 speaks about the constitution of Forum for redressal of consumer grievances.
Regulation 4 speaks about the jurisdiction of the Forum. Filing procedures, handling procedures are
also contemplated under the Regulations. Thus, the petitioner has to approach the Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum and Electricity Ombudsman.
11. This Court is of an opinion that the Authority, who decided the issues, determine the
consumption charges or otherwise or the Authority passed orders cannot sit as an Appellate
Authority or he cannot participate as a Member in the Forum constituted to redress the grievance of
the consumers. All such appeals are to be decided by the Forum, which should not contain the
Authority who has decided the issue in respect of the aggrieved person.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187268685/ 3
The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29 November, 2021
12. Frequently, such complaints are brought to the notice of this Court that the Authority, who
passed the order is entertaining an appeal https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis under the Regulation or
under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. Such a practice or procedure is strictly in violation of
the Rule of Law and on that ground alone, such orders passed by the Forum are to be quashed.
13. To avoid these basic controversies and to comply with the principles of natural justice, the
second respondent-Chairman, Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation (TANGEDCO)
has to issue necessary circulars to all the Competent Authorities to ensure that the Authority, who
issued the orders or decided the disputes, cannot sit as a Chairman or Member of the Grievance
Redressal Forum, if any appeal is filed by the aggrieved person.
14. In the present case, the apprehension raised by the petitioner is reasonable and therefore, the
respondents must ensure that the Authority, in the present case, namely, the Executive Engineer,
who decided the issue, cannot sit as a Chairman or Member of the Redressal Forum for the purpose
of considering the appeal, if any, is filed by the petitioner. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. As far as the grounds raised on merits are concerned, the petitioner has to approach the
Redressal Forum for adjudication with reference to documents and evidences available. Such an
elaborate adjudication cannot be done in the writ proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India by this Court, as it involves scrutinisation of documents.
16. The learned counsel for the petitioner made a submission that at the time of admission of the
present writ petition, the petitioner has deposited a sum of Rs.2 lakhs with the third respondent
herein. The said amount is to be adjusted at the time of hearing of the appeal.
17. The second respondent-Chairman, Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation
(TANGEDCO) is directed to issue appropriate circulars to all the Authorities, so as to ensure that the
Authorities, who decided the issues and passed orders, shall not sit as a Chairman or Member of the
Consumer Redressal Grievance Forum constituted under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code or
under the Regulations for Consumer https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Grievance Redressal Forum
and Electricity Ombudsman to comply with the principles of natural justice.
18. The principles required the Authorities, who dealt with the issues and passed order in original
may not be allowed to sit as a Member of the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum and it is
important to note that even the officials working in the very same office cannot be appointed as a
Member of the Grievance Forum in order to comply with the principles of natural justice. Thus, it is
preferable to appoint the officials from the other District or from the other Wing of the Electricity
Board or any other Officer, who has not dealt with the issues against which an application is filed
under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, for the purpose of adjudication of the application
filed under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
19. Under these circumstances, the petitioner is at liberty to approach the Consumer Grievance
Redressal Forum constituted under the Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum and
Electricity https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Ombudsman and in the event of filing any such appeal,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187268685/ 4
The Managing Director vs Secretary To Government on 29 November, 2021
the period during which the writ petition was pending before the High Court, is to be taken into
consideration for the purpose of condoning the delay, if any application to condone the delay is filed
by the petitioner. The issues raised by the petitioner are to be decided by the Authorities on merits
and in accordance with law as expeditiously as possible, by affording an opportunity to the
petitioner.
20. With abovesaid liberty, the writ petition stands disposed of. However, there shall be no order as
to costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
29-11-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1.Secretary to Government, Energy Department, Fort St. George, Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
2.Chairman, The Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation, TANGEDCO, Anna Salai,
Chennai-2.
3.Assistant Executive Engineer, O&M, The Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation,
TANGEDCO/SOUTH, Vellakovil, Tirupur District.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 21971 of 2015 29-11-2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187268685/ 5
