The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21
December, 2021
Author: C.V.Karthikeyan
Bench: C.V.Karthikeyan
W.P.(MD) No.22409 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 21.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.V.KARTHIKEYAN
W.P.(MD) No.22409 of 2021
and
W.M.P.(MD)Nos.18955 an 18957 of 2021
The American College,
Rep. by its Principal and Secretary,
Dhavamani Christopher,
Tallakulam, Madurai. ... Petitioner
vs.
1.The State of Tamil Nadu,
Rep. by its Secretary,
Highways Department,
Fort St. George,
Chennai.
2.The District Collector,
Madurai District, Madurai.
3.The Revenue Divisional Officer,
Competent Authority,
Highways Acquisition,
Madurai.
4.The District Revenue Officer,
Competent Authority Highways Acquisition,
District Collectorate Office,
Madurai. ... Respondents
1/18
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 1
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
(cid:12) W.P.(MD) No.22409 of 2021
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for
issuance of Writ of Certiorari, to call for the records relating to the impugned
acquisition notification issued by the fourth respondent in Na.Ka.No.
35616/2014/P7, dated 13.11.2021 and the consequential private notices issued in
Na.Ka.No.35616/2014/P7, dated 18.11.2021 of the fourth respondent and quash
the same as illegal.
For Petitioner : Mr.M.Ajmalkhan
Senior Counsel
M/s.Ajmal Associates
For Respondents : Mr.Veerakathiravan
Additional Advocate General
Assisted by Mr.D.Ghandiraj
Special Government Pleader
ORDER
Heard Mr.M.Ajmalkhan, learned Senior Counsel and Mr.Veerakathiravan, learned Additional
Advocate General assisted by Mr.D.Ghandiraj, learned Special Government Pleader, who had taken
notice on behalf of the respondents.
2. The writ petition has been filed in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, calling into question a
notification issued by the fourth respondent/The District Revenue Officer, Competent Authority
Highways Acquisition, District https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Collectorate Office, Madurai in
Na.Ka.No.35616/2014/P7, dated 13.11.2021 and also calling into question the further and
consequential notice issued in Na.Ka.No.35616/2014/P7, dated 18.11.2021 passed by the fourth
respondent and to interfere with both the aforesaid notifications.
3. The petitioner herein, is the American College and is represented in this writ petition by the
Principal and Secretary. As an introduction, the American College had been established in the year
1881 by the Christian Minority Missionaries called “The American Mission”. They had also
established St.Stephen College, New Delhi in the same year. The petitioner College has acquired
reputation imparting education to students of southern Districts of Tamil Nadu. It is the first college
to take on roll, lady students, as early as in the year 1921. Naturally, the construction and the
building is also an old/heritage construction. It is stated that as on date, there are about 18 under
graduate courses and 15 post graduate courses offered by the College and, there are about 5000
students pursuing education.
4. The aforesaid preliminary introduction has been given, since the College claims that it has been
very seriously prejudiced by the notification issued by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis fourth
respondent and the consequential notification issued by the third respondent. The notification had
been issued under Section 15(2) of the Tamil Nadu Highways Act, 2001, and is dated 15.02.2018. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 2
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
had been issued by the third respondent. In the notice, it had been stated that the respondents
intend to construct a fly overbridge over and on the land, which is admittedly under the possession
of the petitioner College. To construct the overbridge, lands measuring an extent of 9211 sq.mtrs in
S.No.4771, Ward X, Madurai North Taluk, Madurai is required. This is the entire extent of the land.
The lands of the petitioner college in Town S.Nos.10, 14, 15, 16 and 1, Madurai North Taluk, Madurai
would be affected, if such acquisition is proceeded with by the respondents.
5. Mr.M.Ajmalkhan, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner assailed the notification issued under
Section 15(2) of the said Act on the ground that a preliminary notification, primarily, under Section
8 of the very same Act, had not been issued and unless the road, which is sought to be acquired is
declared as a highway, further notification under Section 15(2) would not lie and necessarily, will
have to be struck down by the Court. The learned Senior Counsel pointed out the provisions of
Section 8 of the Act.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
6. Section 8 stipulates the authority who gives power to the competent authority to fix the highway
boundary, building line, control line etc. This is done, where construction or development of a
highway is undertaken or proposed to be undertaken. Naturally, it can be undertaken only in an
existing road, which has been declared as a highway.
7. There might be an another instance, where a particular road would be, for the first time
constructed as a highway. In that case, the existing road which is acquired should be declared to be a
highway. For that, the highway boundary, the building line, the control line will necessarily have to
be fixed.
8. This has to be done prior to the issuance of a notice under Section 15 of the very same Act. Section
15 of the said Act, gives the authority the power to acquire the land. Section 15 (2) can be considered
to be an inbuilt safeguard in the Act. This provision has to be read in conjunction with the Rules
which have been appended to the said Act. Rule 5 gives the manner of publication of the public
notice. Let me first extract Section 15 of the Tamil Nadu Highways Act, 2001, for better
appreciation:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “Section 15: Acquisition of Property:-
(1) If the Government are satisfied that any land is required for the purpose of
acquire land. any highway or for construction of bridges, culverts, causeways or other
structures thereon or for any purpose incidental or ancillary thereto, in furtherance of
the objects of this Act, they may acquire such land by publishing in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette a notice specifying the description of such land and the
particular purpose for which such land is required.
(2) Before publishing a notice under sub-section (1), the Government 1[…], 2 […], 3[ ]
shall call upon the owner and any other person having interest in such land to show
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 3
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice, why the land should not be
acquired.
The Government 1[…], 2 […], 3[ ] shall also cause a public notice to be given in such manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) The Government may, after considering the cause, if any, shown by the owner or other person
having interest on such land, pass such an order under sub-section (1), as they may deem fit.”
9. Section 15(1) provides, the power to acquire land by publishing in the Tamil Nadu Government
Gazette, a notice specifying the description of such land and the particular purpose for which such
land is required. Prior to the issuance of notice or the acquisition proceedings in the Tamil Nadu
Government Gazette, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 15(2) has to be resorted to, which
stipulates that the Government should call upon the owner or any other person having interest on
such land and in this case, the petitioner, to show cause, within a specified period, the reasons why
the land should not be acquired.
10. A reading of Section 15(2) contemplates that the Government had taken a decision to acquire the
lands and the onus shifts to the owner of the lands to give reasons why the lands should not be
acquired. It is not a question of the Government justifying acquisition of the lands, but rather the
owner, coming forward and giving reasons why the lands should not form part of the acquisition
proceedings. Therefore, it necessitates that the owners should be put on notice. There should be a
publication or a public notice. Public notice is normally given in newspapers and it is also given in
both vernacular and in English newspapers.
11. In this case, the choice of the newspaper has also been assailed by the learned Senior Counsel. He
says that the notice had been published in Makkal Kural in Tamil and in Trinity Mirror and the
publishing date was 14.11.2021. Learned Senior Counsel stated that he had never heard of a
newspaper called Trinity Mirror and questions whether such a newspaper has wide publication and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis publication in such newspaper can be considered on compliance
of the conditions as required.
12. A reading of Rule 5 of the Tamil Nadu Highways Rules, 2003, shows that the Rule provides the
method in which, the publication should be given. It indicates that the public notice stating that the
lands are to be acquired must be published in one English and in one Tamil newspaper, having
circulation in the locality. Circulation in the locality is an issue of fact. This Court can never examine
whether a particular newspaper has wide circulation or less circulation. It is an information known
exclusively to the people of the local area.
13. At any rate, the petitioner has been made aware of the notification and the notification as such,
has been published as required, in one English and in one Tamil newspaper. The word 'substantial'
circulation or 'wide' circulation has not been used in the Rule and what has been stipulated is that
the newspaper should have circulation in the locality. The local people should be in a position to
purchase the newspaper and should be in a position to understand that a notice had been issued in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 4
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
that local area that the lands mentioned in the notice are proposed to be acquired.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
14. Thereafter, Rule 5 (2) of the Tamil Nadu Highways Rules, 2003, also gives the manner in which,
the objections of the owners have to be dealt with by the authorities. Rule 5(2) of the Tamil Nadu
Highways Rules, 2003, it is extracted below:-
“5(1)..................
5(2) If any objection is received from a person interested in the land within the time
prescribed in the public notice issued under sub- section 2 of section 15, the
Government or the Collector, as the case may be, shall fix a date for hearing the
objections and give notice thereof to the objector as well as to the Highways
Department. Copies of the objection shall 2 also be forwarded to the Highways
Department. The Highways Department may file on or before the date fixed by the
Government or the Collector as the case may be, a statement by way of answer to the
objections and may also depute a representative to attend the enquiry; ..”
15. The above Rule contemplates adherence to the principles of natural justice, which is inbuilt in
the Rules. There has to be a date for hearing. There has to be notice issued to the objector. There has
to be a notice issued to the Highways Department Authority. There has to be forwarding of copies of
objection to the Highways Department. There has to be an opportunity to the Highways Department
to file their statement and answer the objections and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis thereafter,
they must also attend the enquiry. Naturally the onus is on the person interested in attending the
enquiry. There must be a hearing of the objector or a person authorized by him. This naturally
indicates there must be an opportunity of personal hearing being given. Thereafter, after following
due procedure during the course of enquiry, an order can be finally passed under Section 15(3) of
the Act.
16. These are all protections, which are inbuilt in the Statute, and I am confident that the petitioner
does not imply they would be denied such protection. The petitioner would be given necessary
protection under the Statute as envisaged under Section 15(2) r/w Rule 5 of the Rules. Naturally,
only after going through all these processes would an order under Section 15(3) of the Act be passed.
17. The learned Senior Counsel placed reliance on a Judgement of a learned Single Judge of this
Court in a batch of matters in the case of R.Moorthy and 28 others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and
anothers reported in 2014 (2) CWC 763 in W.P.(MD)Nos.39261 of 2003 etc batch, dated
25.09.2014. The learned Single Judge had taken a view, that if the Statute prescribed a particular act
is to be done in a particular manner, then, no leverage can be granted to the authority
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to do that particular act in any other manner but a direct burden
is caused on the said authority to do that act in the manner prescribed. No excuses can be given or
can be sought or can be granted for any deviation in the procedures.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 5
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
18. The deviation in the procedures which has been pointed in the instant case is, non-issuance of
notification or declaration that the road which is sought to be acquired under Section 8 of the Act.
19. The learned Single Judge was actually presented with two differing rulings of two learned Single
Judges of this Court and he had followed the dictum laid down in one and stated that the other one
was distinguishable on facts.
20. The learned Senior Counsel also relied on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in the
case of R.Kumar and Others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu reported in 2006 (4) CTC 640. The Division
Bench of this Court had distinguished the judgment in Jayaraman Vs. State of Tamil Nadu reported
in 2014 (1) CWC 635.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
21. In R.Moorthy and 28 others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and another, the learned Single Judge of
this Court, had stated that with respect to delegation of power by the District Collector to the District
Revenue Officer, the District Revenue Officer was not competent to issue such notification under
Section 15(2) of the State Act. He had been stated that the officer or the authority who issued the
notice in those cases did not have any such authority to issue the notices. Thereafter in para.147 of
the said decision, the learned Single Judge had also observed that the impugned Notification under
Section 15(2) of the State Act, had been issued without complying with the pre-requisite of issuing a
Notification under Section 8(1) of the Act, fixing the highway boundary, building line or control line
and without even issuing notice as per Section 8(2)(b) of the Act to the persons likely to be affected
by such Notification. It had been stated in the judgment that the alignment and other technical
issues are to be decided by the Highways Authority and therefore, there must be an identification of
the lands before a decision is taken. Further in Para.151, the learned Single Judge has stated that
since there was no such Notification declaring the road as Highways and since no marking was also
done, enquiry as contemplated under Section 15(3) would be meaningless.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
22. The learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the respondents pointed out that the
above are issues which can be examined during the course of enquiry, as contemplated under
Section 15(2) and also as laid down under Rule.
23. Whether the Notification issued under Section 8 is required or not is an issue of fact. The nature
of the lands which are now sought to be acquired are again issues of facts. In R.Moorthy and 28
others Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and another, it was clearly held that the road which was sought to be
acquired, was to be developed as a highway. The learned Senior Counsel stated that even in that
case, it was for the construction of a overbridge.
24. But there is a distinction between an overbridge being constructed in the course of development
of a highway and an overbridge being constructed in the heart of a city. The petitioner's objections,
particularly, with respect to alignment and whether the lands of the petitioner are actually required,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 6
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
will have to be examined only by the authorities, who had taken a decision to acquire the said lands.
This Court cannot substitute itself for those authorities. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
25. It would only be appropriate that the petitioner is relegated back to the authorities and granted
liberty to raise necessary objections to the Notification itself and an obligation is placed on the
respondents to enquire whether this particular notification requires pre-issuance of a notification
under Section 8 or not. These are issues on facts. Eventhough the learned Single Judge has stated in
R.Moorthy's case (referred supra), that a Notification not preceded by a prior Notification under
Section 8 of the Act can be interfered with, in the present case, I would confine myself to the
provisions of law as given in the Act and in the Rules and hold that the petitioner has been given
necessary safeguards and can raise all these objections before the authorities. I would also give
liberty to the petitioner that if the objections are over ruled or not considered, then, he may also
invite a ruling whether for the particular land which is acquired, the Notification should be preceded
by a Notification issued under Section 8 of the Act.
26. Let the facts be first decided. The petitioner has come to the Court immediately when a notice
under Section 15(2) had been issued. Let the petitioner first approach the authorities. Let the
petitioner give the reasons why the lands should not be acquired. Among reasons, the petitioner can
also state that https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Notification under Section 8 was not issued. That is
also an issue to be advanced by the petitioner before the competent authority and thereafter, the
competent authority should examine the objections in manner known to law and in manner
prescribed by law.
27. The provisions had been extracted aforesaid and I am confident that the respondents would
examine the objections in the light of the provisions of the Act.
28. Granting that liberty to the petitioner herein and directing the respondents to proceed in
manner known to law and consider the objections which are raised by the petitioner, I hold that the
writ petition at this stage is premature.
29. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner had also relied on the Judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the case of Laljibhai Kadavabhai Vs. State of Gujarat reported in 2016 (9)
SCC 791. The learned Senior Counsel stated that the provisions under which, the lands in that
particular https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis case had been acquired is para-materia to the
provisions of the Tamil Nadu Highways Act and therefore, reference can also be made to that
judgment.
30. I would, with respects, confine myself to the provisions of the Act under which the present
notification has been issued. It does not contemplate that the authority should either be a Sub-Judge
or a Judicial Officer. The facts are also distinguishable.
31. I would still maintain the order of dismissal of the writ petition, however, giving liberty as
aforesaid, to the petitioner to approach the competent authority in manner known to law. Let the
petitioner approach the authority concerned with their objections and thereafter, let an order be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 7
The American College vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 21 December, 2021
passed in accordance with the Statute and the Rules appended therein.
32. In the result, the Writ Petition is dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petitions are closed.
21.12.2021 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes / No sji https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Note: In view of
the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be utilized for
official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the correct copy, shall
be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned. To
1.The Secretary, State of Tamil Nadu, Highways Department, Fort St. George, Chennai.
2.The District Collector, Madurai District, Madurai.
3.The Revenue Divisional Officer, Competent Authority, Highways Acquisition, Madurai.
4.The District Revenue Officer, Competent Authority Highways Acquisition, District Collectorate
Office, Madurai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.V.KARTHIKEYAN,J.
sji and W.M.P.(MD)Nos.18955 an 18957 of 2021 21.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140942705/ 8
