The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3
January, 2023
Author: V. Srishananda
Bench: V. Srishananda
1
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 03RD DAY OF JANUARY, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V. SRISHANANDA
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.200060/2016
BETWEEN:
THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
THROUGH BHALKI TOWN
POLICE STATION,
BIDAR DISTRICT
... APPELLANT
(BY SRI GURURAJ V. HASILKAR, HCGP)
AND:
SHAIK ROUF S/O PASHA MIYAN
AGE: 35 YEARS, OCC: LABOUR,
R/O BASAVANAGAR, KALWADI
TQ. BHALKI, DIST. BIDAR.
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI ISHWARAJ S. CHOWDAPUR, ADVOCATE)
THIS CRIMINAL APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION
377(1)(B) OF CR.P.C., PRAYING TO MODIFY THE ORDER
DATED 07/09/2015 PASSED BY THE LEARNED SPECIAL
JUDGE AND ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS
JUDGE, BIDAR, IN SPECIAL CASE NO.58/2014 WHERE BY
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 1
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
IMPOSING MAXIMUM SENTENCE ON THE RESPONDENT
FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 376 OF
IPC AND SECTION 4 OF THE POCSO ACT, 2012; CONVICT
AND SENTENCE THE RESPONDENT/ACCUSED FOR ALL THE
OFFENCES WITH WHICH HE HAS BEEN CHARGED, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH LAW.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR FINAL HEARING THIS
DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
The present appeal is filed by the State with the following prayer:
"WHEREFORE, The Appellant/State most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble
Court may kindly be pleased to call for the records of Special Case No.58/2014
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Bidar.
a) GRANT LEAVE to appeal against the judgment and order of Inadequate
punishment /sentence dated: 07.09.2015 passed by the Learned Special Judge and
Additional District and Sessions Judge at Bidar, in Special Case No.58/2014 may be
modified by imposing maximum punishment and imposing fine amount to the
respondent for offence punishable under Section 376 of IPC and Section 4 of the
POCSO Act, 2012.
b) Modify the order dated: 07.09.2015 passed by the Learned Special Judge and
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Bidar, in Special Case No.58/2014 where by
imposing maximum sentence on the respondent for the offence punishable under
Section 376 of IPC and Section 4 of the POCSO Act of 2012.
c) CONVICT AND SENTENCE the respondent/ accused for all the offences with
which he has been charged in accordance with law, in the interest of justice and
equity."
2. Brief facts which are necessary for disposal of the appeal are as under:
Accused/respondent was chargesheeted for the offence punishable under Section 376
of IPC and Section 4 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, (for
short, hereinafter referred to as 'POCSO Act'). Accused pleaded not guilty and
therefore, the trial was held.
Prosecution in order to prove its case, examined 21 witnesses as P.Ws.1 to 21 and
relied on 17 documentary evidence which are exhibited and marked as Exs.P.1 to P.17.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 2
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
The prosecution also placed reliance on 9 material objects which are marked as
M.Os.1 to 9. Thereafter, statement of accused as contemplated under Section 313 of
Cr.P.C., was recorded wherein accused denied all the incriminating materials that are
found against the accused.
Accused did not chose to place any defence evidence or his written statement as is
contemplated under Section 313 (5) of Cr.P.C.
3. In other words, the presumption contemplated under Section 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act, were
not rebutted by the accused by placing rebuttal evidence on record.
4. Thereafter, learned Special Judge heard the parties in detail and after considering the material
evidence on record, passed an order of conviction, convicting the respondent/accused for the
offence punishable under Sections 376 of IPC and Section 4 of the POCSO Act. The order of sentence
is extracted as under:
"1. Convict / accused is sentenced to undergo Simple Imprisonment for a period of
05 years and shall pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-, for the offence punishable under section 376 of IPC. In
default to pay fine, he shall undergo further S.I. for a period of two months.
2. Convict / accused is sentenced to undergo Simple Imprisonment for a period of 05 years and shall
pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-, for the offence punishable under section 4 of POCSO Act. In default to pay
fine, he shall undergo further S.I. for a period of two months.
Both the above sentences shall run
concurrently.
Furnish free copy of this judgment to the convict/accused forthwith.
Convict / accused is given benefit of set off, for the period of imprisonment undergone by him as
provided under section 428 of Cr.P.C.
Further it is ordered that the victim i.e, P.W.1 approached District Legal Services Authority for
victim compensation under sec. 357(a) of Cr.P.C., M.O.1 to 9 are worthless and valueless ordered to
be destroyed after appeal period is over."
5. Being aggrieved by the order of sentence passed by the learned Special Judge in respect of the
offence under Section 4 of the POCSO Act, the State has preferred the present appeal with the
following grounds:
x It is submitted that, the offence punishable under Section 376 is for life or
imprisonment for 10 years and fine but the trial court in order to reduce the period of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 3
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
imprisonment for the said offence against the respondent/accused has not given any
reasons. So the sentence and fine ordered by the trial court for the above offence is
totally in adequate and liable to be modified and pass the order of sentence and fine
as proved under Section 376 of IPC, so the order under challenge require interference
by this Hon'ble Court.
x That, the Trial Court had found that the prosecution has proved the case by
examining all material important witnesses, as discussed in the judgment under
appeal. So, the Trial Court is not correct in getting reduced the quantum of sentence
and fine amount against the respondent/accused. So the order under challenge
required modification and there by enhanced the period of sentence and fine amount.
x It is submitted that, the Trail Court has not considered the material important
evidence of victim girl and has not awarded maximum punishment under Section 4
of the POCSO Act, this Hon'ble Court to please to modify the order under challenge
and there by convict by awarding maximum punishment to the respondent/accused.
x It is submitted that, on going through the judgment under challenge the
respondent/accused has not given any acceptable explanation and reasoning, when
he was heard on the quantum of sentence by Trial Court. The explanation given by
the respondent/accused that he had wife and Children's also coming from poor
family is not at all acceptable. Since, the respondent/accused by committing heinous
offence had ruined future life of just 12 years old minor girl and her well reputed
status in the society is defamed and caused social concern to society at large. So, the
sentence fine amount order by the Trial Court is very much in adequate and same is
not in accordance with IPC and the POCSO Act. The Learned Trial Court Judge has
not applied the provision of Section 357 of Cr.P.C. while imposing the maximum fine
amount on the respondent/ accused, so the appeal may kindly be allowed.
x In viewed of the above grounds urged and catena of decision of this Hon'ble Court
and appeal may kindly be allowed.
6. Reiterating the grounds urged in the appeal, Sri Gururaj V.Hasilkar, learned High Court
Government Pleader vehemently contended that approach of the trial Court in sentencing the
respondent/accused for a period of five years for the offence under Section 4 of the POCSO Act is
illegal as minimum sentence that is prescribed under the provisions of Section 4 of the POCSO Act is
seven years and there is no discretion vested in the learned Special judge to reduce the minimum
sentence of seven years to five years and sought for allowing the appeal.
7. Per contra, Sri Ishwaraj S. Chowdapur, learned counsel for the respondent/accused vehemently
contended that the trial Court was not justified in convicting the accused both under Sections 376 of
IPC and 4 of the POCSO Act and therefore, taking note of the fact that he has been convicted for
both the offences and sentencing the accused for a period of five years is justified in the facts and
circumstances of the case, more so, in view of Section 42 of the POCSO Act and hence, sought for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 4
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
dismissal of the appeal.
8. In view of the rival contentions urged by the parties, this Court perused the material available on
record meticulously. On such perusal of the records, the sole point that would arise for
consideration is:
Whether sentencing the accused/respondent for a period of 5 years for the offence under Section 4
of the POCSO Act is justified?
9. In the case on hand, the order of conviction passed by the trial Court insofar as convicting the
accused under Section 376 of IPC and under Section 4 of the POCSO Act is not challenged by the
respondent / accused. As such, the conviction order has become final. The accused did not choose to
file cross appeal after the present appeal was admitted by this Court.
10. Therefore, it is necessary for this Court to delve into the merits of the matter and the validity of
the order of conviction passed by the learned Special Judge.
11. Even otherwise the material on record clearly disclose that the victim girl having supported the
case of the prosecution and other material on record having corroborated the oral testimony of the
victim girl, the learned Special Judge was justified in passing the order of conviction for the offence
punishable under Section 376 of IPC and Section 4 of POCSO Act.
12. Section 42 of the POCSO Act reads as under:
"42. Alternate punishment.-Where an act or omission constitutes an offence
punishable under this Act and also under sections 166A, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D,
370, 370A, 375, 376, [376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB], [376E,
section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or section 67B of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000)], then, notwithstanding anything contained in
any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be
liable to punishment under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code as provides for
punishment which is greater in degree.]"
13. It is the argument of the learned counsel for the respondent/accused, Sri Ishwaraj S. Chowdapur
that the learned Special Judge ought not to have convicted the accused for the offence punishable
under Section 376 of IPC, when once accused was convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 4 of the POCSO Act. Said argument looses its significance in view of the fact that
punishment prescribed under Section 376 of IPC and Section 4 of POCSO Act are one and the same.
14. Section 4 of the POCSO Act reads as under:
"4. Punishment for penetrative sexual assault.-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 5
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
[(1)] Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than [ten years]
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
[(2) Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child below sixteen years of age
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty
years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of natural life of that person, and shall also be liable
to fine.
(3) The fine imposed under sub-section (1) shall be just and reasonable and paid to
the victim to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of such victim.]"
15. As could be seen from Section 4 of the POCSO Act (Unamended), the minimum sentence that
was to be imposed after finding the accused guilty under Section 4 of the POCSO Act is seven years.
It is pertinent to note that since the statute has prescribed a minimum sentence of seven years for
the offence punishable under Section 4 of the POCSO Act, learned Special Judge did not have any
power whatsoever to reduce minimum sentence to five years. Perhaps, the said aspect of the matter
has missed the notice of the learned Special Judge while passing the order of sentence.
16. It is settled principle of law and requires no emphasis that when a statute prescribes minimum
sentence, the trial judge or the appellate judge has no discretion whatsoever to reduce the minimum
sentence prescribed by the statute.
17. Said view of this Court in this regard, is fortified by the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in
the case of Mohd. Hashim vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Others reported in (2017)2 SCC 198. The
relevant paragraph of the said judgment reads as under:
" 15. The three-Judge Bench while adverting to the concept of "minimum sentence",
relied on the observations made in Bahubali (supra) which we have reproduced
hereinabove, and opined that:-
"9. The above observations also clearly show that where there is a statute which bars
the exercise of judicial discretion in the matter of award of sentence, the Probation of
Offenders Act will have no application or relevance. As Rule 126-P(2)(ii) of the DI
Rules manifestly bars the exercise of judicial discretion in awarding punishment or in
releasing an offender on probation in lieu of sentencing him by laying down a
minimum sentence of imprisonment, it has to prevail over the aforesaid provisions of
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 in view of Section 43 of the Defence of India Act,
1962 which is later than the Probation of Offenders Act and has an overriding effect.'"
18. Applying the said principle of law enunciated in the aforesaid decision to the case on hand,
awarding sentence of five years to the respondent/accused by the learned trial judge ignoring the
fact that statute has prescribed the minimum sentence of seven years for the offence punishable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 6
The State Of Karnataka vs Shaik Raouf S/O Pasha Miyan on 3 January, 2023
under Section 4 of POCSO Act, is thus, clearly illegal and calls for interference by this Court in this
appeal.
19. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the State has made out a case for enhancing
the sentence to seven years which is minimum sentence prescribed by statute under Section 4 of
POCSO Act.
20. However, the material on record would not make out a case for sentence to be passed for more
than seven years, having regard to the fact that the incident is of the year 2013 and victim was aged
13 years at that point of time and accused has already spent the period of imprisonment as ordered
by the trial Court, therefore, the only modification that is required insofar as the sentence imposed
by the learned Special judge which is impugned in this appeal, is to now enhance the sentence of five
years to seven years.
21. Accordingly, the point is answered in negative and following order is passed:
ORDER
i) Appeal is allowed.
ii) While maintaining the conviction of the respondent/accused for the offence
punishable under Section 376 of IPC and Section 4 of POCSO Act, the sentence
ordered by the learned Special Judge for the offence under section 4 of the POCSO
Act is enhanced to seven years.
iii) Needless to emphasise that respondent/ accused shall surrender before the trial
Court on or before 31.01.2023 and in the event of respondent failing to surrender to
serve balance period of sentence before the trial Court, the trial Court is at liberty to
issue modified conviction warrant and secure the presence of accused for serving
remaining part of the sentence.
Sd/-
JUDGE VNR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127399628/ 7
