The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad
Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
Author: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A. Guneshwar Sharma
REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
Cril.Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Chief Secretary (Home),
Government of Manipur, Babupara Old Secretariat Building,
Imphal West, Manipur-795001.
2. The Officer-in-Charge/Investigating Officer, Thoubal Police
Station, Thoubal District, Manipur-795138.
...... Petitioner/s
- Versus -
1. Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba, aged about 32 years, S/o Md.
Zakir Hussain of Thoubal Wangkhem Muslim Mamang Leikai,
P.O. & P.S. Yairipok, Thoubal District, Manipur.
2. Kyaw Kyaw Niang @ Abdul Jabar @ Ula Sin of Kawhmu
Village, Moha Rangoon, Myanmar.
3. Md. Ayub Khan, aged about 41 years, S/o (L) Md. Azizur
Rahaman of Yairipok Wangkhem Muslim Mamang Leikai, P.O.
& P.S. Yairipok, Thoubal District, Manipur.
4. Md. Abdul Rajaque, aged about 35 years, S/o Abdul Rahim of
Yairipok Tulihal near Aam Walli Masajid, P.O. & P.S. Yairipok,
Thoubal District, Manipur.
5. Mr. Jhutan Malakar @ Jhuthan Malakar, aged about 29 years,
S/o Mr. Shuamal Malakar of Kamalpur Village, P.O. anandpur,
P.S. PR Bari (Purana Raj Bari), Belonia District, South Tripura.
6. Tanmoy Pal, aged about 22 years, S/o Tapan Kanti Pal of
Krishnapur Village Ward No. 7 Dhupirbond GP. P.S.
Dharmanagar, North Tripura.
7. Biman Das, aged about 38 years, S/o (L) Bimal Das @ Dimal
Chandra Das of South Ramnagar Itkhalapoara near Mahindra
Workshop, P.S. West Agartala, P.O. Agartala, West Tripura A/p
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 1
Gandhigram Kathaltali Village near Tripureswari Mandir
English School, P.O. Gandhigram, P.S. Airport, West Tripura
District.
8. Abdul Hashim, aged about 42 years, S/o Abu Tahar Nia of
Rajnagar Village, P.O. Ramnagar, P.S. West Agartala, West
Tripura District, A/p Bhadramishipara Village, P.O. NIT
Agartala, P.S. Jirania, West Tripura District.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 1
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
9. Saikh Muhamad Ahnsan, aged about 39 years, S/o MV Ahmed
of Phoudel Mayai Leikai, P.O. Thoubal, P.S. Yairipok, Thoubal
District, Manipur.
........Respondent/s
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA
For the Petitioners :: Mr. M. Devananda Addl. AG (Spl.PP)
& Ms. N. Jotsna, Advocate.
For the Respondents :: Mr. HS. Paonam, Sr. Adv. assisted by
Ms. Lekhakumari, Adv; Mr. L.
Shashibhusan, Sr. Adv. assisted by
Ms. Kangungailui Kamei, Adv; Mr. H.
Nabachandra, Adv.; Mr. S. Jhaljit, Adv.
Date of Hearing :: 17.04.2023/19.04.2023/06.02.2024/
04.03.2024/03.04.2024/02.05.2024/
06.05.2024/
Date of Judgment and Order :: 03.06.2024
JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
[1] Heard Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. A.G. assisted by Ms.
Jyotsana, learned counsel for the petitioners/State; Mr. HS. Paonam,
learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. Lekhakumari, Advocate; Mr. L.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 2
Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. Kangungailui Kamei,
Advocate; Mr. S. Jhalajit, learned counsel; and Mr. H. Nabakumar, learned
counsel for the respondents/accused persons.
[2] Vide order dated 29.04.2024 in SLP(Crl.) No. 1536 of 2024 filed
by the respondent/accused No.2 herein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court desired
this Court to decide the revision petition filed by the State against the
discharge order as expeditiously as possible and in any case, by the end of
May, 2024. Accordingly, this case was listed on 30.05.2024 for
pronouncement of judgment. However, due to sudden flash flood in Manipur,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 2
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
there were no court sittings on 30 & 31 May, 2024 and the case is again
listed on 03.06.2024, the next working day available, for pronouncement of
judgment.
[3] The present Revision Petition has been filed under Section 397
CrPC read with Section 36-B of the ND&PS Act, against the discharge order
dated 20.01.2021 passed by the learned Special Judge (ND&PS) Thoubal
in Spl. T. Case No. 12 of 2020 in connection with FIR No. 94(8) 2019 TBL
Police Station under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act added Section 468
IPC and in the ex-parte interim prayed U/S 482 of the CrPC read with Section
36-B of the ND&PS Act for issuing a warrant directing the accused be
arrested by any Sub-ordinate Court and lodge them to prison pending the
disposal of the above referred revision petition. The respondent Nos. 1 to 9
are accused Nos. 1 to 9 before the court below. The point for
determination in the present case is whether the ingredients for the
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 3
offences punishable under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act and
Section 468 IPC are made out against the accused persons or not.
[4] The brief facts of the case are that on 24.08.2019 at about 1:10
am, the Thoubal District Police with the assistance of the members of
Phoudel Keirambi Youths Club, Phoudel Keirambi intercepted one Tata Di
vehicle bearing Regd. No. MN06LA-2847 at IVR (Inter Village Road) of
Phoudel Keirambi Mathak Leikai under the jurisdiction of Yairipok PS and
the driver was identified as Mohammad Hussain (accused No. 1) and some
suspected illegal items were recovered from the said vehicle, around 40,000
(forty thousand) Nos. of suspected WY tablets. The accused No. 1 was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 3
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
arrested by observing all the formalities. From the disclosure of the accused
No. 1, one international drug smuggler, namely Mr. Kyaw Kyaw Naing @
Abdul Rahim (accused No. 2) was arrested from Imphal International Airport,
Tulihal and recovered from him Indian Currency Rs. 60,000/- in cash, 15
Nos. of 100 denomination US Dollars, one 1000 Kyat, one 5000 kyat, one
100 kyat, one 20 kyat, one 20 taka, one passport being No. SMB110ED with
Burma SIM card and one Samsung Duos being No. 6909503887, two pint
out e-ticket, one boarding pass issued in the name of Niang Kyaw Yaw being
Flight No. 6E 939, one Indian E-VISA being ID No. 1002v0851519.
[5] Again, from the disclosure of accused No. 1, one person
namely Md. Ayub Khan (accused No. 3) was arrested from Yairipok Lamkhai
on 24.08.2019 at about 1:40 pm and seized one Maruti 800 being Regd. No.
DL2CAF-0821 and two mobile handsets, one Nokia being Mobile No.
9874512487 and one Redmi mobile phone handset being No. 9366342176.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 4
Further, from the disclosure of accused No. 1, arrested one Md. Abdul
Rajaque (accused No. 4) from Yairipok Lamkhai on 24.08.2019 at around
2:15 pm as he was also accomplice with accused No. 1 in the transport of
narcotic substance. As such, a regular case was registered being FIR No.
94(8)2019 TBL PS U/s 22(c)/29/60(3) ND & PS Act.
[6] On 27.08.2019, seized one Saving Bank Account Pass Book
being No. 86021011002909 in the name of accused No. 1 of Vijiya Bank,
MG Avenue (Saikul) Branch from the rented house of accused No. 1 and
one Biman Das (accused No. 7) had deposited money to the said bank
account of accused No. 1 and on further checking of the passbook and
deposit slip, accused No. 1 received a sum of Rs. 2,20,000/- on different
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 4
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
dates from his business partner like Jhutan Malakar @ Jhuthan Malakar
(accused No. 5) and Biman Das (accused No. 7). It is also stated that
accused persons namely Jhutan Malakar (accused No. 5), Tanmoy Pal
(accused No. 6) and Mohammed Hussain (accused No. 1) had checked in
on 21.04.2019 and checked out on 22.04.2019 from PHOU-OI-BEE Hotel,
North AOC Imphal East District along with Kyaw Kyaw Naing @ Md. Abdul
Rahim (accused No. 2) as they were the same business partners. The
accused persons were interrogated one after another and on interrogation
of the accused persons, it revealed that the accused No. 2 hired accused
No. 1's Tata DI to transport 30 rolls of carpet at the rate of Rs. 30,000/- only
as a transport charge from Moreh to Silchar. On reaching Silchar, they met
Abdul Hashim (accused No. 8) and handed over the carpets and fruits to
him.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 5
[7] On 03.09.2019, the accused persons namely accused Nos. 1,
2, 3 & 4 were produced before the Court and remanded them into judicial
custody and on interrogation, it was disclosed that the accused Nos. 5, 6, 7
& 8 were also business partners of the other accused persons and involved
in the same case. The accused Nos. 5 & 6 were arrested on 19.09.2019 from
the house of accused No. 5 with the assistance of PR Bari Police Station,
South Tripura. Thereafter, accused Nos. 5 & 6 were produced before the
Court of Spl. Judge, Belonia, South Tripura on 20.09.2019. Further, the
accused persons were produced before the Spl. Court (ND & PS), Thoubal
and remanded into police custody till 03.10.2019. During the police custody,
the arrested accused persons i.e. accused Nos. 5 & 6, were interrogated one
after another. On interrogation of the accused persons, they admitted that
they were the accomplice of the other accused persons. On further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 5
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
investigation of the accused persons, one Saikh Muhamed Ahnsan (accused
No. 9) was arrested in connection with FIR No. 535 of Silchar P.S. dated
16.02.2020 U/s 120-B/489(B)/489(C) IPC and remanded into judicial
custody by the Court of CJM, Cachar, Silchar on 21.02.2020. Thereafter,
production warrant of the accused No. 9 was issued by the Spl. Court (ND &
PS), Thoubal vide order dated 20.02.2020 and on 24.02.2020, he was
released from Silchar Central Jail and on 26.02.2020, he was produced
before the Spl. Court (ND & PS), Thoubal and remanded into police custody
till 03.03.2020.
[8] Vide impugned the order dated 20.01.2021 passed by learned
Special Judge (ND&PS), Thoubal in Spl.T. Case No.12 of 2020, the accused
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 6
persons (respondents herein) were discharged from the charges punishable
under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC. The
grounds for discharging the accused persons are- (i) change of place of
occurrence, and (ii) non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Sections
41, 42 and 50 of ND&PS Act. The relevant para recording the reasons for
the discharge are reproduced below:
"29. The changing/shifting of place of occurrence from IVR of
Phoudel Kairembi Mathak Leikai to inside the campus of Thoubal
PS suffers from illegalities which is not sustainable in the eyes of
law. And I do not come across any provision of law about the
changing of place of occurrence in the Chapters of Criminal
Procedure Code as well as in the special Act of ND&PS Act and
Rules. The place and time of occurrence is the backbone and from
these, the investigation has to begin. In the instant case, the
search, seizure and arrest were made without complying the
provisions of Sec. 41(2), Sec. 42(1) and 50 of the ND&PS Act.
.....................................................
32. In such serious case, it is very unfortunate on the part of the investigating team to discard and
over looked the mandatory provisions of law laid down in Cr.P.C. and ND&PS Act, particularly the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 6
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
changing/shifting of place of occurrence as recorded in the FIR. The case has been charge sheeted
through proper channel by the I.O. of the case through the O.C. Thoubal P.S., the SDPO- Thoubal,
the Addl. SP(LO) Thoubal, the Superintendent of Police, Thoubal and the Addl. S.P.(P), Manipur
and ultimately reached this Court.
33. Wadded through all the materials on record, the documents and the relevant case laws discussed
above, it is made crystal clear that the seizing officer has violated the mandatory provisions of Sec.
42(1)(d) of the ND&PS Act and their non-compliance would render the investigation illegal. As per
record, search, seizure and arrest were made by the complainant without giving/recording the
grounds of his belief, so it is mandatory to invoke the proviso to Sec. 42(1) which is made in the case
of State of Manipur vs. Beikhokim @ Veikhokin Kukini:
1996 (II) GLT 449 Full Bench that "the proviso to Sec. 42(1) if such officer has to
carry search between sunset and sunrise, he must record the grounds of his belief."
As such, there are so many infirmities, loopholes and lacuna in the investigation of
the case which leads failure to the prosecution case. Ld. Spl. PP cannot Cril. Revision
Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 7 convince the Court in the course of hearing that there
occurs no lacuna in the legal formalities during investigation of the case such as
changing/shifting of place of occurrence and drawal of rough sketch map of the
premises of Thoubal Police Stattion.
34. Considering all these, I am of the opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused persons. Hence, all the accused persons are discharged from the liabilities of the
case. Surety bonds (if any) stand cancelled and the security deposit (if) any be returned
accordingly." [9] Being aggrieved by the impugned order of the Special Trial Court, the present
Criminal Revision Petition has been filed mainly amongst the following grounds:
(i) The Ld. Trial Court has misconstrued the facts of the present case and also the
relevant provision of law by applying Section 42 (1) of ND&PS Act, without satisfying
the two components of Section 42 of the ND&PS Act, 1985.
(ii) The Ld. Trial Court has misinterpreted the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court by misquoting the relevant provision of law.
(iii) The Ld. Trial Court has failed to satisfy herself to the correctness, legality &
propriety of the impugned order passed by herself.
(iv) The accused No. 2 being the citizen of Myanmar has tried to leave the State of
Manipur after the present impugned discharge order of the Ld. Trial Court. All the
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 8 accused persons in the present case has
been trying to hamper the evidence and also try to leave the State of Manipur as no
trial be done or completed against them..
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 7
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(v) The Ld. Trial Court has passed impugned order by misusing its inherent power by
apparent obvious reasons.
[10] Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG was empowered as Special PP to conduct the present case
on behalf of the prosecution vide order dated 28.04.2023 issued by the Deputy Secretary (Law),
Government of Manipur under the provisions of Section 24(8) CrPC. Learned Spl. PP submits that
the learned Special Court (ND&PS), Thoubal has committed manifest error in discharging the
accused persons who were members of a syndicate of trans border racket dealing in illegal drug
trafficking led by a foreign national. The syndicate operates over the areas extending from Myanmar
to India (passing through Manipur, Assam, Nagaland & Tripura) to Bangladesh and is active for a
long period. As disclosed during the course of investigation, it has been revealed that before the
seizure and arrest made in the present case, many consignments were delivered through this route
by the same syndicate. In the present case, the seizure is of 40,000 WY tablets concealed in 100 rolls
of carpets and the said lot was transported from Moreh by a Bolero vehicle and transferred to the
seized Tata DI vehicle at Yairipok Phoudel. It is pointed out that the only grounds cited for
discharging the accused persons are - (i) for changing/shifting the place of Cril. Revision Petition
No. 10 of 2021 Page 9 occurrence and (ii) non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Sections
41, 42 and 50 of ND&PS Act, 1985.
[11] Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG submits that the assumption by the trial Court that the
place of occurrence is at IVR of Phoudel Keirambi Mathak Leikai under the jurisdiction of Yairipok
PS, has been made without any substance. Learned Addl. AG draws the attention of this Court to the
provisions of Sections 177 and 178 CrPC which provide for place of trial and occurrence of an
offence. He explains that as per Section 177 of CrPC for single offence, the place of trial shall be in a
court within whose jurisdiction the offence was committed, such as place of murder or place of theft,
etc. However, under Section 178 of CrPC for continuing offence and/or where the offence was partly
committed in one place and partly in another place, any of the courts within whose jurisdiction the
offence was partly committed, shall have jurisdiction to conduct the trial. It is highlighted that the
offence of transportation of any psychotropic substances of commercial quantity punishable under
Section 22(c) of ND&PS Act was initiated at Moreh where the 40,000 WY tablets were loaded in a
Bolero pick- up vehicle and then transferred to the Tata DI goods vehicle bearing registration No.
MN 06LA 2847 by A-1, A-3 & A-4 at Thoubal Wangkhem. The contrabands were detected by the
locals when the vehicle broke down and subsequently transferred to Thoubal PS for safety and the
seizure was made in the campus of Thoubal PS in presence of witnesses. It is submitted that the
offence was initiated at Moreh (in Indian territory), continued at Thoubal Wangkhem (reloading
from Bolero vehicle to Tata DI vehicle), Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 10 detected by
the local villagers at IVR of Phoudel and the seizure was made at Thoubal PS. Learned Addl. AG has
pointed out that the offence was not completed and still was continuing and would be completed on
successful transportation of the narcotic drugs to Bangladesh through Assam and Tripura. It is
clarified that IVR at Phoudel is not the only place of occurrence. Since it is a continuing offence, the
campus of Thoubal PS can be treated as a place of occurrence within the ambit of Section 178 CrPC,
as the seizure of the WY tablets was done there. It is submitted that the finding of the learned
Special Judge with regard to shifting of place of occurrence is without any substance and it has
failed to appreciate the provisions of Section 178 CrPC correctly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 8
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
[12] With regard to the second point of violation of mandatory provisions of Sections 41, 42 and 50
of ND&PS Act, it pointed out that the same is to be examined during trial on appreciation of
evidence and materials relied by the prosecution. It is submitted that such factual aspects cannot be
presumed at the stage of charge hearing. On merit also, Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG argues
that the provisions of Sections 41 and 42 of ND&PS Act will not be applicable to the facts of the
present case. It is pointed out that for application of Sections 41 & 42, there should be a prior
knowledge or information of existence of contraband in any building, conveyance or closed place
and prescribe procedures for entry and search of such place and make arrests and seizures
therefrom. It is submitted that in the facts of the present case, the provision of Section 43 of the Act
will be applicable where the seizure of contraband is from a public place or Cril. Revision Petition
No. 10 of 2021 Page 11 conveyance on chance search without any prior information of such
contraband. It is further reiterated that the provisions of Section 50 of the Act will not be applicable
as the search and seizure was from vehicle and not from any person.
[13] Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG relies on the following case laws to fortify his argument:
(i) Umar Abdul Sakoor Sorathia v. Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau,
(2000) 1 SCC 138: Hon'ble Supreme Court held that while framing charge, the court
is only to examine the materials produced by the prosecution on record and is not to
examine minutely them.
(ii) State of T.N. v. R. Soundirarasu, (2023) 6 SCC 768:
Hon'ble Supreme Court discussed the principles to be followed in framing of charge
under Sections 239 and 240 of CrPC. It was held that at the stage of charge hearing,
the only exercise to be taken is whether on consideration of the police report and
documents filed by the prosecution, the allegations against the accused can be said
groundless or not.
(iii) Ghulam Hassan Beigh v. Mohd. Maqbool Magrey, (2022) 12 SCC 657, Hon'ble
Supreme Court re-iterated the principles to be followed in charge hearing, ie, to
examine whether the materials filed by the prosecution disclose the ingredients of the
alleged offence or not.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 12
(iv) Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460:
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that existence of materials constituting the offence is
sine qua non for framing charge. It may be even weaker than a prima facie case.
Existence of material constituting the offence is sufficient for framing charge.
However, sufficiency of such materials for conviction is to be examined only in trial
and not at the stage of charge hearing.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 9
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(v) Krishna Kanwar v. State of Rajasthan, (2004) 2 SCC 608: Hon'ble Supreme Court
held that in case of search and seizure of vehicle found on random frisking,
provisions of Section
43 of ND&PS Act will be applicable and Section 42 has no role as there is no prior information of the
contraband.
(vi) State of Haryana v. Jarnail Singh, (2004) 5 SCC 188:
Hon'ble Supreme Court distinguished the difference between Sections 42 and 43 of
ND&PS Act. It was held that Section 42 deals with the entry, search and seizure in
any building, conveyance and closed space based on personal knowledge while
Section 43 deals with chance seizure from public place without prior knowledge.
(vii) Raju v. State of W.B., (2018) 9 SCC 708: Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the
intricate difference between Sections 42 and 43 of ND&PS Act. Section 42 deals with
entry, search, arrest and seizure made on prior information from a conveyance or
closed place while Section 43 stipulates seizure of contrabands from public place
including conveyance.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 13
(viii) Kallu Khan v. State of Rajasthan:
MANU/SC/1221/2021: AIR 2022 SC 50: Where the search and seizure was made
from the vehicle used, by way of chance recovery from public road, the provisions of
Section 43 of the ND&PS Act would apply.
(ix) R. Maringchan Maring v. State of Manipur [Cri. Rev. P. No. 2 of 2017; Judgment
dated 22.04.2024; Coram: Mr. Justice Siddharth Mridul, CJ, High Court of
Manipur]:
MANU/MN/0038/2024: Relying on a catena of cases, this Court has observed that at
the stage of framing of charge, the court is to examine whether there are sufficient
materials to proceed against the accused and in case of 50:50 situation, charges are to
be framed. Exercising the power under Section 397 CrPC of superintendence over
courts under its jurisdiction, High Court can examine whether the proceeding of
and/or the order on charge is perverse or not. Para 29 is reproduced for better
understanding.
29. Considering the conspectus of the decisions discussed hereinabove, the following
legal position emerges with regard to the law on charge; the revisional jurisdiction of
the High Court; and the powers exercisable by the High Court in revisional
jurisdiction whilst dealing with an order on charge:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 10
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(i) The jurisdiction of the Trial Court whilst exercising power under Section 397 of
the CrPC is limited.
(ii) At the stage of charge, the Trial Court has to merely peruse the evidence in order
to find out whether there is a sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused or
not.
(iii) If upon consideration of the material placed before it, the Trial Court is satisfied
that a prima facie case is made out against the Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021
Page 14 accused, it must proceed to frame charge in terms of Section 228 of the CrPC.
(iv) The Trial Court cannot conduct a roving and fishing inquiry into the evidence or
a meticulous consideration thereof at this stage.
Marshalling and appreciation of evidence, and going into the probative value of the material on
record, is not in the domain of the Court at the time of framing of charges.
(v) In other words, at the beginning and the initial stage of the trial, the truth, veracity and effect of
the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged, and nor is
any weight to be attached to the probable defence of the accused. Thus, a 'mini trial' is not to be
conducted.
(vi) It is not obligatory for the Trial Court at the time of framing of charges, to consider in any detail
and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be incompatible with the
innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is to be finally applied
before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be applied
at the stage of deciding the matter under Section 227 or Section 228 of the CrPC.
(vii) Thus, it is axiomatic that at the initial stage if there is a strong/grave suspicion which leads the
Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, then it
is not open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(viii) The Trial Court may sift the evidence to determine whether the facts emerging therefrom taken
at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence or not.
(ix) Detailed orders are not necessary whilst framing charges and contentious issues are not
required to be answered by the Trial Court at the stage of framing of charges.
(x) Only in a case where it is shown that the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce to
prove the guilt of the accused, even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or
rebutted by defence evidence cannot show that the accused committed the crime, then and then
alone the Court can discharge the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 11
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(xi) Further, if the scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the accused are something like even at
the initial stage of making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then, in such a situation,
ordinarily and generally, the order which will have to be made will be one under Section 228 and not
under Section 227 of the CrPC.
(xii) The provisions of section 397 of the CrPC empower the High Court with supervisory
jurisdiction to consider the correctness, Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 15 legality or
propriety of any finding, sentence or order and as to the regularity of the proceedings of any inferior
court.
(xiii) Revisional jurisdiction is severely restricted, and ought not to be exercised in a routine and
casual manner. It has to be exercised, normally, without dwelling at length upon the facts and
appraising the evidence of the case.
(xiv) Further, the Court in revision ought to refrain from substituting its own conclusion on an
elaborate consideration of evidence.
(xv) Whilst in revisional jurisdiction, the High Court cannot enter into the realm of appreciation of
evidence at the stage of the framing of the charges itself.
(xvi) The High Court, under statutory obligation, ought to be loath in interfering at the stage of
framing the charges against the accused, merely on hypothesis, imagination and far-fetched reasons
which in law amount to interdicting the trial against the accused person. Thus, self-restraint on the
part of the High Court should be the rule unless there is a glaring injustice staring the Court in the
face. (xvii) Revisional powers could be exercised only when it is shown that, (a) there is a legal bar
against the continuance of the criminal proceedings; (b) the framing of charge or the facts as stated
in the first information report even if they are taken at the face value and accepted in their entirety
do not constitute the offence for which the accused has been charged;(c) where the exercise of
revisional power is absolutely essential to prevent patent miscarriage of justice and for correcting
some grave error that might be committed by the subordinate courts.
(xviii)Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution. Where the offence
is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to permit continuation of prosecution
rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The Court is not expected to marshal the records with a
view to decide admissibility and reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed
prima facie. [14] In conclusion, learned Addl. AG emphasises that the provisions of Section 41, 42
and 50 of the ND&PS Act will not be applicable to the facts of the case in hand and the learned
Special Judge (ND&PS), Thoubal was wrong in discharging the accused persons when the seizure of
the contrabands from the accused persons at a public place, had been established and they were
closely participating in the transportation of the contrabands. It is also submitted that applicability
and non-compliance of the Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 16 mandatory provisions of
Sections 41, 42 and 50 of the ND&PS Act are to be decided during the trial on appreciation of
evidence produced by both the prosecution and the accused. There can be no presumption of such
factual aspects. On the question of shifting of place of occurrence, it has been explained that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 12
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
offence is a continuing one and it will culminate when the contrabands cross border to Bangladesh
and as such the campus of Thoubal PS is also a place of occurrence and the trial Court was wrong in
discharging the accused persons on this ground also. It is highlighted that in exercise of power
conferred under Section 397 CrPC read with Section 36- B ND&PS Act, this Court can interfere with
the impugned order of discharge, as the same is perverse on law as well on facts. It is prayed that the
impugned order be set aside the accused persons be directed to face trial for the offences punishable
under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC.
[15] Mr. H. Nabachandra, learned counsel for respondent/accused No. 6 submits that there is no
error in the impugned order discharging the accused persons, even not to speak of perversity. It is
submitted that the place of occurrence was at IVR of Phoudel and without any basis, the same was
shifted to the campus of Thoubal PS. There is an unexplained delay of 15 hours in registration of the
FIR. It is also stated that the offence cannot be said to a continuing act, once the contrabands had
been detected at Phoudel and hence no cause of action arose at the Thoubal PS. Reliance is placed
on the decisions reported as Golak Patel Volkart Ltd. V. Dundayya Gurushiddaiah Hiremath: (1991)
2 SCC 141 regarding the concept of continuing offence and Rajinder Singh v. State: 1999 (1) Crimes
271 Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 17 (Delhi) regarding place of occurrence as the place
where the offence was actually committed. It is prayed that the revision petition be dismissed being
devoid of any merit.
[16] Mr. HS Paonam, learned senior counsel for the respondent/accused Nos.3 & 4 adopts the
submission of Mr. H. Nabachandra, learned counsel for respondent No.6. He has further pointed
out that no seizure has been made from them and the accusation against them is for facilitating in
transport of narcotic substances. However, it is pointed out that except for the statement of the
complainant, no other material is placed by the prosecution to connect respondent Nos.3 & 4 to the
crime. It is submitted that these materials will not be sufficient for proceeding against the
respondent/accused Nos. 3 & 4 and it is prayed that the revision petition be dismissed with cost.
[17] Mr. S. Jhaljit, learned counsel for the respondent/accused No.9 submits that his client was not
arrested in connection with narcotic substance. The allegation against the respondent No.9 is for his
involvement in manufacturing of a fake Aadhar card and he cannot be roped in a trial under ND&PS
Act. No material is placed by the prosecution to link the respondent No.9 for the offence of
conspiracy within the purview of Section 29 of ND&PS Act. Learned counsel relies on the decisions
of (i) Sajjan Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 for the principles of framing charge on existence of
materials constituting the offence and (ii) Sharif Ahmed and Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
(01.05.2024 - SC) :
MANU/SC/0368/2024: 2024 INSC 363, where Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
there should be clarity in the charge sheet so as to enable the accused Cril. Revision
Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 18 to understand the accusations against him. It is
submitted that the materials are not so clear with respect to the respondent/accused
No.9 and it is prayed that the revision petition be dismissed with heavy cost. [18] Mr.
L. Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel for the respondent/accused No.2 submits
that without any material, his client has been branded as main accused. It is pointed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 13
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
out that there was no seizure of contrabands from the possession of the
respondent/accused No.2, except for some currency notes and mobile phones. It is
stated that these materials are not sufficient to proceed against the respondent No.2
for the offences under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC. The
other accused are unknown to him. Further, it is reiterated that there is no material
in the charge sheet to indicate that the seized contrabands belong to the respondent
No.2.
[19] In addition to the grounds of shifting of place of occurrence and non-compliance
of the mandatory provisions of Sections 41, 42 and 50 of ND&PS Act as held by the
learned Special Judge, Mr. L. Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel for the
respondent No.2 has also raised for the first time the new plea of non-compliance of
the stipulation under Section 52A of ND&PS Act. It is explained that Section 52A(2)
of ND&PS Act mandates a competent officer to prepare an inventory of the seized
narcotic drugs with adequate particulars relevant to the identity of the seized drugs in
any proceeding and produce before a Magistrate for the purpose of certifying the
correctness of the inventory, taking relevant photographs in presence of the
Magistrate and due certification of the drawing of the samples in presence of the
Magistrate. Under sub-section (4), such inventory, the photographs of Cril. Revision
Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 19 narcotic substances and any list of samples drawn,
will be primary evidence in respect of such offence. It is pointed out that in the
present case there is a total non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Section
52A of the ND&PS Act and as such the seized contrabands cannot be treated as
primary evidence against the accused No.2 as well against other accused persons.
Accordingly, the trial will be vitiated and the accused persons could have been
discharged on this point also, even if the same was not considered during the charge
hearing.
[20] Mr. L. Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel for the respondent/accused No.2
relies on the following decisions with regard to the provisions of Sections 41, 42, 43
and 52A of ND&PS Act:
(i) Yusuf vs. State (13.10.2023 - SC) :
MANU/SC/1142/2023: AIR 2023 SC 5041, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
non-compliance of the provisions of Section 52A of ND&PS Act would vitiate the trial
and conviction. In that case, the sample was drawn in presence of the gazetted officer
and not before the Magistrate as contemplated under Section 52A(2) of ND&PS Act.
(ii) Union of India v. Mohanlal, (2016) 3 SCC 379, it is held that provisions of Section
52A of ND&PS Act is mandatory.
Drawing of samples in presence of the Magistrate is mandatory.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 14
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(iii) Mohammed Khalid and Ors. vs. The State of Telangana (01.03.2024 - SC) :
MANU/SC/0154/2024: 2024 INSC 158, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the provisions of Section
52A of ND&PS Act is mandatory and violation of such rule vitiates Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of
2021 Page 20 the trial and hence the conviction. FSL report based on samples drawn in violation of
the provisions of Section 52A of the Act will be a waste paper and cannot be read in evidence.
(iv) Roy V.D. vs. State of Kerala (10.11.2000-SC):
MANU/SC/ 0693/2000: AIR 2001 SC 137, it is held that the provisions of Sections 41
and 42 of ND&PS Act are mandatory and their non-compliance will vitiate the trial.
(v) Boota Singh v. State of Haryana, (2021) 19 SCC 606:
Difference between Sections 42 and 43 of ND&PS Act have been explained. It was
held that a private vehicle will not come within the meaning of public place as
mentioned in explanation to Section 43 of the Act.
[21] With respect to the principles to be followed in charge hearing, Mr. L.
Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel refers to the following case laws:
(vi) Vishnu Kumar Shukla and Ors. vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
(28.11.2023 - SC) : MANU/SC/1268/2023:
AIR 2024 SC 90, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that a duty is cast on the courts to
examine as to whether the documents and materials placed on record disclose an
offence or not.
(vii) Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4, Hon'ble Supreme Court
laid down the principles to followed while considering charge hearing as follows.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 21
10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the following
principles emerge:
(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out.
(2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 15
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion
against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused.
(4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which
under the present Code is a senior and experienced court cannot act merely as a Post
Office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities
of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the
Court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not
mean that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the
matter and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
(viii) Sajjan Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368, Hon'ble Supreme Court prescribed the
essence in charge framing proceeding as follows:
Exercise of jurisdiction under Sections 227 and 228 CrPC
21. On consideration of the authorities about the scope of Sections 227 and 228 of the
Code, the following principles emerge:
(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under Section
227 CrPC has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited
purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out. The test to determine prima facie case would depend upon the facts of each
case.
(ii) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution
but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence
and the documents produced before the court, any basic infirmities, etc. However, at
this stage, Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 22 there cannot be a roving
enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if he was
conducting a trial.
(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it can frame the charge, though for conviction
the conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has
committed the offence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 16
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the material on
record cannot be gone into but before framing a charge the court must apply its
judicial mind on the material placed on record and must be satisfied that the
commission of offence by the accused was possible.
(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the court is required to evaluate the
material and documents on record with a view to find out if the facts emerging
therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it
cannot be expected even at that initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states
as gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad probabilities of the
case.
(vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion only, as
distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered to discharge
the accused and at this stage, he is not to see whether the trial will end in conviction
or acquittal.
(ix) Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of Gujarat, (2019) 16 SCC 547, Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that at the stage of framing of charge, the court can sift evidence
in order to satisfy itself the materials are available for proceeding against the accused.
(x) Ghulam Hassan Beigh v. Mohd. Maqbool Magrey, (2022) 12 SCC 657: Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed that court can sift materials at the stage of charge hearing as
to see existence of sufficient materials against the accused.
[22] In conclusion, Mr. L. Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel for the respondent/accused No.2
submits that the materials collected in violation of the mandatory provisions of Section 52A of the
ND&PS Act for not producing the samples for certification before the Magistrate cannot be Cril.
Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 23 a primary source of evidence against the accused persons
during the trial and as such there are no valid materials to constitute the ingredients of the offences
alleged against the accused. It is submitted that in a charge hearing proceeding, the court can
examine whether there are valid materials against the accused for proceeding further in a
full-fledged trial. It is reiterated that in view of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases
cited above, there are no materials to constitute the offences under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS
Act and Section 468 IPC. It is prayed that the revision petition may also be dismissed for
non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Section 52A of ND&PS Act.
[23] Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG replies to the new plea of violation of Section 52A of the
Act raised by the accused No.2 that such plea cannot be raised for the first time in the revision
petition, as the trial Court has not discussed the same. It is pointed out that revision petition is to be
confined to the grounds and materials considered by the court below. In any case, it is stated that
such plea of non-compliance of the mandatory statutory provision has to be examined during the
trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 17
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
[24] This Court has considered the materials on record including the whole LCR, the submissions
made at bar including the new plea and relevant case laws. Before proceeding further, it will be
fruitful to reproduce the relevant provisions from various statutes as below:
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 - (Central) :
Section 177 : Ordinary place of inquiry and trial.
Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired inland tried by a Court within whose local
jurisdiction it was committed.
Section 178 : Place of inquiry or trial Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 24
(a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence was committed, or
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another, or
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local
areas than one, or
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas, it may be inquired
into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas.
Section 227 : Discharge If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents
submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this
behalf, the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he
shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing.
Section 228 : Framing of charge (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge
is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which-
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused and,
by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate 3[or any other Judicial
Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or,
as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and
thereupon such Magistrate] shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of
warrant-cases instituted on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused.
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the charge shall be read
and explained to the accused and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence
charged or claims to be tried.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 18
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES ACT, 1985 - (Central) :
Section 22 : Punishment for contravention in relation to psychotropic substances
Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made or
condition of licence granted thereunder, manufactures, Cril. Revision Petition No. 10
of 2021 Page 25 possesses, sells, purchases, transports, imports inter-State, exports
inter- State or uses any psychotropic substance shall be punishable,--
(a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to 1[one year], or with fine which may extend to ten
thousand rupees or with both;
(b) where the contravention involves quantity lesser than commercial quantity but
greater than small quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may
extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
(c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to twenty years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a
fine exceeding two lakh rupees.
Section 29 : Punishment for abetment and criminal conspiracy (1) Whoever abets, or
is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable under this
Chapter, shall, whether such offence be or be not committed in consequence of such
abetment or in pursuance of such criminal conspiracy, and notwithstanding anything
contained in section 116 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), be punishable with
the punishment provided for the offence.
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence,
within the meaning of this section, who, in India abets or is a party to the criminal
conspiracy to the commission of any act in a place without and beyond India which--
(a) would constitute an offence if committed within India; or
(b) under the laws of such place, is an offence relating to narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances having all the legal conditions required to constitute it such
an offence the same as or analogous to the legal conditions required to constitute it
an offence punishable under this Chapter, if committed within India.
Section 36A : Offences triable by Special Courts ........................................................................... (2)
When trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court may also try an offence other than an offence
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 19
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
under this Act with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
be charged at the same trial.
.................................................................................
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 26 Section 60 : Liability of illicit drugs, substances,
plants, articles and conveyances to confiscation (1) Whenever any offence punishable under this Act
has been committed, the narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, controlled substance, opium poppy,
coca plant, cannabis plant, materials, apparatus and utensils in respect of which or by means of
which such offence has been committed, shall be liable to confiscation.
(2) Any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance 2[or controlled substances] lawfully produced,
imported inter-State, exported inter-State, imported into India, transported, manufactured,
possessed, used, purchased or sold along with, or in addition to, any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance or controlled substances] which is liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) and there
receptacles, packages and coverings in which any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance 2[or
controlled substances], materials, apparatus or utensils liable to confiscation under sub-section (1)
is found, and the other contents, if any, of such receptacles or packages shall likewise be liable to
confiscation. (3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance or controlled substance], or any article liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or conveyance proves
that it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and
the person-in-charge of the animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable
precautions against such use. Section 41 : Power to issue warrant and authorisation (1) A
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class or any Magistrate of the second-class
specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, may issue a warrant for the arrest of
any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed any offence punishable under this Act,
or for the search, whether by day or by night, of any building, conveyance or place in which he has
reason to believe any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance in respect of
which an offence punishable under this Act has been committed or any document or other article
which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally acquired property or
any document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property
which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act is kept or concealed.
(2) Any such officer of gazetted rank of the departments of central excise, narcotics, customs,
revenue intelligence or any other department of the Central Government including the paramilitary
forces or the armed forces as is empowered in this behalf by general or special order by the Central
Government, or any such officer of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police or any other
department of a State Government as is empowered in Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 27
this behalf by general or special order of the State Government if he has reason to believe from
personal knowledge or information given by any person and taken in writing that any person has
committed an offence punishable under this Act or that any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance
or controlled substance in respect of which any offence under this Act has been committed or any
document or other article which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 20
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
illegally acquired property or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding
any illegally acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA
of this Act is kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or place, may authorise any officer
subordinate to him but superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or a constable to arrest such a person or
search a building, conveyance or place whether by day or by night or himself arrest such person or
search a building, conveyance or place. (3) The officer to whom a warrant under sub-section (1) is
addressed and the officer who authorised the arrest or search or the officer who is so authorised
under sub-section (2)shall have all the powers of an officer acting under section 42.
Section 42 : Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant or authorisation (1) Any such
officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon, sepoy or constable) of the departments of central
excise, narcotics, customs, revenue intelligence or any other department of the Central Government
including paramilitary forces or armed forces as is empowered in this behalf by general or special
order by the Central Government, or any such officer (being an officer superior in rank to a peon,
sepoy or constable) of the revenue, drugs control, excise, police or any other department of a State
Government as is empowered in this behalf by general or special order of the State Government, if
he has reason to believe from persons knowledge or information given by any person and taken
down in writing that any narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance, or controlled substance in
respect of which an offence punishable under this Act has been committed or any document or other
article which may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence or any illegally acquired
property or any document or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally
acquired property which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act is
kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or enclosed place, may between sunrise and sunset,--
(a) enter into and search any such building, conveyance or place;
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any obstacle to such entry;
(c) seize such drug or substance and all materials used in the manufacture thereof and any other
article and any animal or conveyance which he has reason to believe to be liable to confiscation
under this Act and any Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 28 document or other article
which he has reason to believe may furnish evidence of the commission of any offence punishable
under this Act or furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable for
seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act; and
(d) detain and search, and, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has reason to believe to
have committed any offence punishable under this Act:
Provided that in respect of holder of a licence for manufacture of manufactured drugs
or psychotropic substances or controlled substances granted under this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder, such power shall be exercised by an officer not below
the rank of sub-inspector:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 21
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
Provided further that] if such officer has reason to believe that a search warrant or
authorisation cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment
of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search such
building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time between sunset and sunrise after
recording the grounds of his belief.
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under sub-
section (1) or records grounds for his belief under the proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two
hours send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior.
Section 43 : Power of seizure and arrest in public place Any officer of any of the departments
mentioned in section 42 may--
(a) seize in any public place or in transit, any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled
substance in respect of which he has reason to believe an offence punishable under this Act has been
committed, and, along with such drug or substance, any animal or conveyance or article liable to
confiscation under this Act, any document or other article which he has reason to believe may
furnish evidence of the commission of an offence punishable under this Act or any document or
other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property which is liable
for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under Chapter VA of this Act;
(b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed an offence
punishable under this Act, and if such person has any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or
controlled substance in his possession and such possession appears to him to be unlawful, arrest
him and any other person in his company.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, the expression "public place" includes any public
conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public.] Section 50 :
Conditions under which search of persons shall be conducted Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021
Page 29 (1) When any officer duly authorised under section 42 is about to search any person under
the provisions of section 41, section 42 or section 43, he shall, if such person so requires, take such
person without unnecessary delay to the nearest Gazette Officer of any of the departments
mentioned in section 42 or to the nearest Magistrate.
(2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the person until he can bring him before the
Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate referred to in subsection (1).
(3) The Gazette Officer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he sees no
reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise shall direct that search
be made. (4) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a female. (5) When an officer duly
authorised under section 42 has reason to believe that it is not possible to take the person to be
searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate without the possibility of the person to be
searched parting with possession of any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, or controlled
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 22
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
substance or article or document, he may, instead of taking such person to the nearest Gazette
Officer or Magistrate, proceed to search the person as provided under section 100 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(6) After a search is conducted under sub-section (5), the officer shall record the reasons for such
belief which necessitated such search and within seventy-two hours send a copy thereof to his
immediate official superior.
Section 52A : Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances (1) The Central
Government may, having regard to the hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution,
constraint of proper storage space or any other relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyance
or class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances, class of controlled substances or
conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after their seizure, be disposed of by such officer and in
such manner as that Government may, from time to time, determine after following the procedure
hereinafter specified.;] (2) Where any 3[narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyances] has been seized and forwarded to the officer- in-charge of the nearest
police station or to the officer empowered under section 53, the officer referred to in sub-section (1)
shall prepare an inventory of such narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances containing such details
relating to their description, quality, quantity, mode of packing, marks, numbers or such other
identifying particulars of the narcotic drugs Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 30 or
psychotropic substances or the packing in which they are packed, country of origin and other
particulars as the officer referred to in sub- section (1) may consider relevant to the identity of the
narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances in any proceedings under this Act and make an
application, to any Magistrate for the purpose of--
(a) certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared; or
(b) taking, in the presence of such Magistrate, photographs of 4[such drugs, substances or
conveyances] and certifying such photographs as true; or
(c) allowing to draw representative samples of such drugs or substances, in the presence of such
Magistrate and certifying the correctness of any list of samples so drawn.
(3) Where an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as soon as may be,
allow the application.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offence under this Act, shall treat the
inventory, the photographs of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances] and any list of samples drawn under subsection (2) and certified by the Magistrate, as
primary evidence in respect of such offence. INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860 - (Central) Section 415 :
Cheating Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 23
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any
property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he
would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to
cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".
Explanation,--A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section.
Section 463 : Forgery Whoever makes any false documents or false electronic record or part of a
document or electronic record with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person,
or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any
express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed,
commits forgery.
Section 468 : Forgery for purpose of cheating Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 31 Whoever
commits forgery, intending that the document or electronic record forged shall be used for the
purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
[25] From the above quoted provisions, it is clear that in case of single offence, the place of trial will
be at the court within which jurisdiction, the alleged offence was committed as provided by Section
177 CrPC. In case of continuing offence and/or where part of the offence was committed at one place
and another in another places, under the provision of Section 178 CrPC all the courts within whose
jurisdiction the offence was partly committed will have jurisdiction. What is stipulated by Chapter
XIII of CrPC (including Sections 177 and 178) is the jurisdiction of the court to conduct trial of the
offence which was committed within its jurisdiction. This chapter refers to the jurisdiction of the
court alone and does not mention about the jurisdiction of police station. Admittedly, in the present
case IVR at Phoudel and the campus of Thoubal Police Station are within the jurisdiction of the
Special Court (ND&PS), Thoubal which is having territorial jurisdiction over the revenue districts of
Thoubal and Kakching. IVR at Phoudel and Thoubal PS are within Thoubal district and as such the
Special Court (ND&PS), Thoubal has jurisdiction in view of Chapter XIII of CrPC. Further, the
offence of possession and transportation of narcotic substance of commercial quantity is still a
continuing offence. It started from Moreh border town in Manipur and the drugs were to travel
through Assam and Tripura before reaching Bangladesh. This Court is of the opinion that the IVR at
Phoudel cannot be stated as the only place of occurrence. Accordingly, it is held that the Special
Court (ND&PS), Thoubal has committed manifest error in Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021
Page 32 concluding that the campus of Thoubal PS is not a place of occurrence. As already observed,
the Special Court (ND&PS), Thoubal will have jurisdiction to try any offence committed within the
territorial limits of Thoubal and Kakching revenue districts. The Special Court was wrong in
discharging the accused persons on this ground.
[26] It is the settled principle of law that in case of charge proceeding, the court is only to examine
the police report and the documents relied by the prosecution as to whether the ingredients of the
offences are made out against the accused for proceeding further. The court cannot indulge into a
roving inquiry to dissect whether such materials are sufficient for conviction or not. This is not in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 24
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
the realm of charge hearing. If necessary ingredients of the offence are established on perusal of the
materials on record, the charge is to be framed. Sufficiency of materials is to be decided during trial
on appreciation of evidence. [Kindly see Amit Kapoor (supra)]. Whether a mandatory provision of
law or precedent has been complied or not is to be verified during trial on examination of the
materials on record and the depositions of witnesses. The non-compliance of statutory mandate, if
any, cannot be presumed by the court at the time of charge hearing. It is repeated as the sake of
repetition that during charge hearing the court is to examine only as to whether the materials
constituting the alleged offence are disclosed in the police report and the relied documents. In the
present case, this Court is to examine whether the trial Court passed the discharge order within
these limits set by the statutory provisions and the precedents of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as cited
above.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 33
[27] The second ground for discharge relied by the learned Special
Judge (ND&PS), Thoubal is for non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of Sections 41, 42 and
50 of ND&PS Act. It is seen from the above cited judgments passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
that for the applicability of Sections 41 and 42 of the Act, there should be a prior information or
knowledge to the competent officers mentioned in the provisions about the possession and/or
storage of narcotic substance in a conveyance, building or closed area. Such information or
knowledge should be taken down in writing and should inform the higher officer before proceeding
for search, seizure and arrest. These processes are mandatory in nature and any violation of such
procedure will vitiate the trial. Section 50 deals with the situation where body search is conducted in
public place in presence of gazetted officer. It is also the settled law that the person to be searched
under Section 50 of the Act should be informed about his right to be searched in presence of a
gazetted officer and this is a mandatory requirement. The provisions of Section 43 of ND&PS Act
will be attracted in case of chance seizure of narcotic substance in transit or arrest in any public
place. The expression 'public place' includes any public conveyance, hotel, shop or other place
intended for use by or accessible to the public. As held in the case of Kallu Khan (supra), Section 43
of the Act will be applicable where the search and seizure is made from the vehicle used by way of
chance recovery from public place. Prior knowledge is not a mandatory requirement of Section 43,
unlike Sections 41 and 42 of ND&PS Act.
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 34
[28] In the case in hand, there was no prior information or
knowledge about the carrying of the contrabands in the seized vehicle. The contrabands were
detected by the local people first and then by the police, when the vehicle carrying them broke down
at the IVR of Phoudel. Situated such, the main ingredient for invoking the mandatory provisions of
Sections 41 and 42 of the Act of having prior information about the carrying or storage of the
contrabands seems to be missing. The contrabands were detected by the public and then by the
police personnel of Thoubal PS by chance. If the vehicle did not break down at the IVR of Phoudel,
the contrabands could not have been detected either by the local people or by the police. The present
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 25
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
case seems to fall within the ambit of the provisions of Section 43 of ND&PS Act dealing with seizure
on chance recovery. In the circumstances, this Court is of the firmed opinion that the provisions of
Sections 41 and 42 of the Act may not be attracted and discharge on this ground is not warranted.
The applicability and violation of such mandatory provisions have to be examined during the trial
on minute appreciation of the materials on record and the depositions of the witnesses. In a charge
hearing proceeding, the court ought not to have presumed the factual aspects which can be verified
only during the trial. What is to be done is to see whether the ingredients constituting the alleged
offences are made out from a bare reading of the police report and the documents relied by the
prosecution. Sufficiency and admissibility of these documents are to be decided in the trial. [29] The
next and ultimate step is to examine whether there are materials produced by the prosecution for
constituting the offences under Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 35 Sections
22(c)/29/60(3) of ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC against the accused persons or not.
[30] Section 22(c) of ND&PS Act deals with manufacturing, possession, selling, purchase,
transportation, import & export of illegal drugs in commercial quantity. In context of the present
case, it is a case of possession and transportation of illegal drugs. The drugs were seized from the
vehicle driven by the accused No.1. Section 29 of the Act explains the abetment of and conspiracy for
committing any offence under the Act. From the statements of the witnesses and as disclosed during
the investigation, the accused No.3 & 4 helped the accused No.1 in shifting the seized drugs from
Bolero vehicle coming from Moreh to the Tata DI vehicle seized by the police. Accused No.2, the
alleged kingpin of the syndicate of trans border drug trafficking, had closed connections with the
other accused persons. Accused Nos. 1, 5, 6, & 2 were also part of the cartel and they stayed in
Phou-Oi-Bee Hotel at Imphal from 21 to 22 April 2019 for preparation and transportation of the
drugs. There were many monetary transactions amongst the accused persons as reflected in the
bank statements filed by the prosecution. Accused No.2 used the mobile phone number of the
accused No.9 for preparation of a fake Aadhar card for himself in the name of one fictious person,
namely Md. Abdul Manal of Thoubal Phoudel. As per the police report, there were three
transportations of the narcotic drugs by this cartel prior to the present incident and all the accused
persons had closely been coordinating among themselves for smooth transportation of the
contrabands. Since the carrying of the narcotic substances in the seized Cril. Revision Petition No.
10 of 2021 Page 36 Tata DI vehicle was with the knowledge and participation of the accused No.1,
the ingredients of Section 60(3) of the Act would also be attracted. [31] This Court does not find any
merit in the submission of Mr. S. Jhaljit, learned counsel for the respondent/accused No.9 that he
could not be tried together with the other accused as his arrest was not related with ND&PS case and
no narcotic substance was seized from him. From the police report, it is clear that accused No.9's
mobile number was used to apply for a fake Aadhar card for the accused No.2 under a fictitious
name. The ingredients of Section 468 IPC are present. In exercising the power conferred under
Section 36-A(2) of the ND&PS Act read with Section 29 of the Act, the Special Court has jurisdiction
to conduct trial against the accused No.9 for the offence under Section 468 IPC read with Section 29
ND&PS Act along with other co-accused.
[32] From the discussions made at para 30 & 31 above, it is evident that the ingredients for the
offences under Sections 22(c)/29/60(3) of ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC are made out against
the accused persons who are respondents herein. The applicability of the mandatory provisions and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 26
The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... vs Mohammad Hussain @ Thoiba on 3 June, 2024
admissibility of the materials relied by the prosecution are to be decided during the trial and such
factual aspects cannot be presumed by the court in a charge hearing proceeding. Accordingly, the
impugned order dated 20.01.2021 passed by the learned Special Judge (ND&PS), Thoubal in Spl. T.
Case No. 12 of 2020 discharging the accused persons is hereby set aside with a direction to proceed
with the trial, after framing charges under Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 37 Sections
22(c)/29/60(3) ND&PS Act and Section 468 IPC against the accused persons.
[33] It is made clear that this Court does not express any opinion on the merits of the case including
the applicability of Sections 41, 42, 43, 50 & 52A of ND&PS Act, except for deciding the revision
petition and the trial Court shall not be influenced by any of the observations made by this Court on
these points.
[34] With these observations and directions, the revision petition is allowed and misc. applications,
if any, are also disposed of accordingly. No cost.
[35] Send a copy of this judgment/order to the learned Special Judge (ND&PS), Thoubal for
information and proceeding further as directed. [36] Send another copy of this judgment/order to
the Secretary General of the Hon'ble Supreme Court for placing the same in the file of SLP (Crl.) No.
1536 of 2024 for kind information.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
Kh. Joshua Maring
KH. Digitally signed
by KH. JOSHUA
JOSHUA MARING
Date: 2024.06.03
MARING 11:56:43 +05'30'
Cril. Revision Petition No. 10 of 2021 Page 38
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4157889/ 27
