The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29
March, 2022
Bench: Sanjay Kumar, M.V.Muralidaran
LAIREN Digitally signed
by
MAYUM LAIRENMAYUM (Through Video Conferencing)
INDRAJE INDRAJEET
SINGH
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
ET Date:
2022.03.29 AT IMPHAL
SINGH 13:23:38 +05'30'
WRIT APPEAL NO. 17 OF 2020
1. The State of Manipur, through the Principal Secretary (Social Welfare),
Government of Manipur, Secretariat Block, P.O. & P.S. Imphal,
Imphal West District, Manipur-795001.
2. The Director of Social Welfare, Government of Manipur, North AOC,
P.O. & P.S. Porompat, Imphal East-795001.
3. The Director of Vigilance, Government of Manipur,
State Vigilance Commission, Directorate of Vigilance & Anti-Corruption,
Manipur, North AOC, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal-795001.
....... Appellants
- versus -
1. Miss Ranjana Manohermayum, aged about 62 years old,
D/o (L) Mahohermayum Brajamani Sharma,
resident of Kwakeithel Moirangpurel Leikai,
P.O. Imphal, P.S. Singjamei,
Imphal West District, Manipur-795001.
.....Principal Respondent/
Writ Petitioner
2. The Accountant General, Manipur, having an office at Babupara, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West
District, Manipur, Imphal-795001.
.... Proforma Respondent For the Appellants :: Mr. M.Rarry, Addl. Advocate General, Manipur.
For Respondent No.1 :: Mr. H.S.Paonam, Sr.Advocate
For Respondent No.2 :: Mr. S.Suresh, Advocate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 1
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
Date of reserving of Judgment :: 17.03.2022
Date of delivery of Judgment :: 29.03.2022
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 1
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SANJAY KUMAR
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V.MURALIDARAN
JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
Sanjay Kumar (C.J.):
[1] The point for consideration in this case is whether gratuity and pension
payable to a retired employee can be withheld without even initiating disciplinary or judicial
proceedings against such employee as per due procedure. [2] A learned Judge of this Court did not
think so and allowed W.P(C) No.1013 of 2018 by order dated 30.04.2019, directing finalization and
payment of gratuity and pensionary benefits to the petitioner therein, presently respondent No.1,
within a time frame. Aggrieved thereby, the State of Manipur and its authorities in the Social
Welfare and Vigilance Departments preferred this appeal. [3] Heard Mr. Mangsatabam Rarry,
learned Additional Advocate General, Manipur, for the appellants; Mr. H.S.Paonam, learned senior
counsel, appearing for respondent No.1; and Mr. S.Suresh, learned counsel for respondent No.2. [4]
Respondent No.1 was appointed as a Child Development Project Officer in the Social Welfare
Department of the State on 02.02.1991. She was promoted to the post of Programme Officer (ICDS)
on 03.01.2000. She was transferred to the State Cell on 24.01.2005. By order dated 27.12.2005, the
Programme Officer, State ICDS Cell, was declared to be the Drawing and Disbursing Officer and also
Head of Office in respect of the Directorate of Social Welfare, Manipur. In consequence, respondent
No.1 became the Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) from that date.
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 2
[5] In March, 2014, a report was published in a local newspaper about `1.21
Crore meant for old age pensions being parked in the DDO's account for the previous two years. In
that context, the Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, addressed letter dated 26.03.2014 to the
Principal Secretary (Social Welfare), Government of Manipur, confirming that `1.21 Crore had been
sanctioned towards old age pensions and was deposited in the DDO's account but the same was not
available in the account as on date but no documents were available evidencing release of the
amount to the beneficiaries. The Joint Secretary (Social Welfare), Government of Manipur, replied
vide letter dated 01.04.2014, asking the Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, to refer the matter to
the Vigilance Department for inquiry. The Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, accordingly wrote to
the Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Department, Manipur, on 04.04.2014, asking him to take
necessary further action. Thereupon, the Vigilance Department registered Vigilance Case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 2
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
No.1/SP-V/2014 in relation to the missing `1.21 Crore and Vigilance Case No.1/SP-V/2015 apropos
another sum of money which was not properly accounted for. Respondent No.1, being the DDO, was
therefore involved in these vigilance inquiry cases.
[6] While so, respondent No.1 attained the age of superannuation. Order dated 25.6.2016 was issued
by the Deputy Secretary (Social Welfare), Government of Manipur, allowing her to retire from
service with effect from 31.03.2016. However, the order made it clear that payment of her gratuity
would be subject to completion of Vigilance Cases No.1/SP-V/2014 and No.1/SP-V/2015 pending
against her. However, the Director (Vigilance), Manipur, addressed Integrity Certificate/Vigilance
Clearance dated 10.10.2016 to the Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, informing him that no WA
No.17 of 2020 Page 3 vigilance case was pending against respondent No.1. The Director (Social
Welfare), Manipur, addressed letter dated 25.07.2017 to the Director (Vigilance), Manipur, referring
to the Integrity Certificate/Vigilance Clearance dated 10.10.2016, and requested him to issue closure
details of both vigilance cases so as to enable the department to process her retirement benefits. In
response, the Director (Vigilance), Manipur, addressed letter dated 26.09.2017 informing the
Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, that the State Vigilance Commission had recommended to the
Social Welfare Department to institute a special audit to look into the step-by-step outflow of the
`1.21 Crore meant for old age pensions during the financial year 2011-12, connected with Vigilance
Case No.1/SP-V/2014, and institution of a special audit to find out the utilization of `11.38 Lakh
meant for setting up the State Resource Centre for Women, connected with Vigilance Case
No.1/SP-V/2015. He reiterated that the Vigilance Clearance Certificate had been issued on
10.10.2016 as no charge could be framed against respondent No.1 in these vigilance cases and
confirmed that no case was pending against her. He further stated that the Administrative
Department would be in a position to fix responsibility against any official/officials of the Social
Welfare Department on the basis of the audit reports, as recommended by the Commission. [7]
Thereupon, the Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, addressed letter dated 27.08.2018 to the
Secretary, Finance (PIC), Government of Manipur, and the Director, (Vigilance), Manipur, seeking
clarification as to status of the High Powered Committee in relation to Vigilance Case
No.1/SP-V/2014. The matter was thereupon referred to the High Powered Committee constituted
under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, Government of Manipur. The Committee met on
05.11.2018 and the Minutes of the said WA No.17 of 2020 Page 4 meeting recorded that in the
earlier meeting held on 01.06.2016, the Committee had decided that the Finance Department
should call for a report from the Vigilance Department as to why the inquiry report was silent on the
case of misappropriation of the old age pensions. The Committee was informed of the
recommendation of the Vigilance Commission that a special audit be instituted to look into the
matter but finally decided that the Vigilance Department should inquire afresh into the
non-disbursement of old age pensions during the year 2011-12 and submit a report within one
month. In consequence, the Vigilance Department registered a fresh case on 24.12.2018, bearing
No.35/PE/SP-V & AC/2018.
[8] Though the High Powered Committee required the Vigilance Commission to submit its report
within one month, only a preliminary report was submitted by it under letter dated 16.07.2019.
Therein, it stated that a sum of `1, 21,46,600.00 had been sanctioned towards old age pensions
during the year 2011-12 and the said amount was drawn from the DDO's account but not disbursed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 3
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
to the beneficiaries. The Vigilance Department recorded that, prima facie, offences of cheating,
criminal misconduct/ misappropriation and criminal conspiracy were established against the then
Director, Social Welfare Department; the then Deputy Director (ICDS/DDO), Social Welfare
Department, viz., respondent No.1; and the then Superintendent-cum-Cashier, Social Welfare
Department; and other unknown public servants and private persons. This preliminary report was
considered by the High Powered Committee in the meeting held on 06.08.2019 and it was decided
that an appropriate FIR may be lodged. Thereupon, FIR No.6(11) 2019-V & AC PS was registered by
the Vigilance Department under Section 120-B read with Section 420 IPC along with Section 13(2)
read with Section WA No.17 of 2020 Page 5 13(1)(c) and (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988, on the file of the Vigilance & Anti-Corruption Police Station, Lamphel Sub-Division, Imphal
West District. The accused named therein were G. Satyabati Devi, the then Director, Social Welfare
Department, Manipur; Ranjana Manohermayum, the then Deputy Director (ICDS/DDO), Social
Welfare Department, Manipur, respondent No.1 herein; and P.Mohendro Singh, the then
Superintendent-cum-Cashier, Social Welfare Department, Manipur; and other unknown public
servants and private persons.
[9] This fact was brought to the notice of the High Powered Committee at its meeting held on
18.12.2019. By that time, the judgment under appeal had been passed and the Committee was
apprised of the fact that an appeal had been filed and was pending consideration on the condone
delay application filed therein. The Committee thereupon decided that provisional pension should
be paid to G.Satyabati Devi and Ranjana Manohermayum and that the Vigilance Department should
proceed with the case as per Rules. Pursuant thereto, letter dated 04.01.2020 was addressed by the
Deputy Secretary, (Social Welfare), Government of Manipur, requesting that necessary action be
taken for sanctioning provisional pension to the two officers at the earliest. This letter was sent to
the Director (Social Welfare), Manipur, and the Accountant General, Manipur. It appears that long
prior to this date, respondent No.1 had addressed letter dated 23.06.2018 to the Director (Social
Welfare), Manipur, stating that she had come to know that the process of approving provisional
pension for her was ongoing and requested that full pension along with full retirement benefits,
including gratuity, be released to her.
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 6
[10] It is, however, an admitted fact that respondent No.1 is not being paid
provisional pension as on date. She was only allowed to encash her earned leave, vide order dated
22.06.2017, and no other retirement benefits, viz., pension and gratuity, were released till date.
Mr. M. Rarry, learned Additional Advocate General, Manipur, would inform this Court that
investigation in relation to the FIR case is still ongoing as it was delayed due to the Covid-19
pandemic. Therefore, as on date, no charge-sheet/final report has been filed in relation to the
subject FIR. Further, neither disciplinary proceedings were initiated against respondent No.1 nor
was she suspended from service on this issue. [11] The matter under investigation is, no doubt, a
serious one. It relates to the alleged misappropriation of `1,21,46,600.00, comprising old age
pensions @ `200 per month for 15733 pensioners for four months (November, 2011 to February,
2012), totaling `1.20 Crore, and old age pensions @ `100 per month for 733 pensioners for two
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 4
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
months (September and October, 2011), totaling `1,46,600.00.
However, the short question that falls for consideration presently is whether the Government of
Manipur is legally justified in withholding the pension and gratuity payable to respondent No.1
pending the investigation into the subject FIR case. In so far as the gratuity is concerned, Section
4(6) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, speaks of forfeiture, wholly or in part, of the gratuity of an
employee, where there is termination of his/her services on any of the grounds specified therein. In
the case on hand, respondent No.1 was permitted to retire from service under order dated
25.06.2016. Though the said order stated to the effect that payment of her gratuity WA No.17 of
2020 Page 7 would be subject to the outcome of the two vigilance cases mentioned therein, the fact
remains that no disciplinary proceedings were pending against her as on that date, whereby her
retrospective termination from service could have been possibly effected. In consequence, the
question of respondent No.1 being terminated from service at this stage does not arise.
[12] Mr. M.Rarry, learned Additional Advocate General, Manipur, would rely upon the provisions of
the Manipur Public Servants Personal Liability Act, 2006 (for brevity, 'the Act of 2006'), and the
Manipur Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1977 (for brevity, 'the Rules of 1977'), in support of his
contention that the action of the Government in withholding the gratuity and pension of respondent
No.1 is lawful. [13] The Act of 2006 was promulgated to provide accountability and personal liability
for irregular actions of public servants in Manipur. Section 4 thereof speaks of liability for irregular
action by a public servant and provides that any public servant who indulged in such irregular action
would be entirely and personally liable for payment and liquidation of the financial liability arising
out of his action. Section 5 provides the measures for recovery of unauthorized liability and states
that such monies shall be recovered from the salaries and entitlements payable or incomes of such
public servants. However, the statutory scheme requires the High Powered Committee, constituted
under Section 7 thereof, to decide on the irregular action of the public servant and fix the financial
liability in respect thereof after following the prescribed procedure. Admittedly, no such decision or
determination has materialized as yet against respondent No.1.
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 8 Further, Rule 4 of the Manipur Public Servants Personal Liability Rules,
2006, framed under Section 11 of the Act of 2006, elaborates that the unauthorized liability
resulting from the irregular action of the public servant shall be recovered from the salary,
entitlements and incomes of the public servant and 'income' would include the value of private
properties and assets of the public servant and his family members. Rule 6 states that recovery of
the unauthorized financial liability arising from irregular actions shall be made from the salary and
entitlements payable to the public servant or from his/her incomes at any time before or after
superannuation. Rules 6(2) provides that, where the financial liability cannot be fully recovered
from the salary and entitlements payable to the public servant, the State Government shall take
suitable measures to recover the liabilities from other incomes of the public servant, either through
institution of a suit in a Court of law or any other means available as per law. [14] In so far as the
Rules of 1977 are concerned, Rule 3 thereof stipulates to the effect that the Central Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1972 (for brevity, 'the Rules of 1972'), as amended from time to time, are adapted
with modification of nomenclatures. The Manipur Civil Services (Pension) (Amendment) Rules,
2011, however, added a rider that the adaptation of the Rules of 1972, as amended upto 31.03.2010,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 5
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
would be subject to the Office Memoranda/Notifications issued by the State Government and the
provisions of the Rules of 1972 which were not in consonance therewith would not be applicable to
State Government employees/pensioners. However, no Office Memoranda/Notifications of the
Government of Manipur have been produced or relied upon presently so as to override the Rules of
1972. In effect, the legal basis, if any, for the State Government's present action would have to be
found in the Rules of 1972.
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 9
[15] Mr. M.Rarry, learned Additional Advocate General, Manipur, would
essentially rely on Rule 9 of the Rules of 1972, which deals with the right to withhold or withdraw
pension. Relevant portions of Rule 9 are discussed hereunder. Rule 9(1), in the context of the State
of Manipur, would read thus:
'9(1). The Governor of Manipur reserves to himself the right of withholding a pension
or gratuity, or both, either in full or in part, or withdrawing a pension in full or in
part, whether permanently or for a specified period, and of ordering recovery from a
pension or gratuity of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the
Government, if, in any departmental or judicial proceedings, the pensioner is found
guilty of grave misconduct or negligence during the period of service, including
service rendered upon re-employment after retirement ......' Rule 9(2)(a) provides
that the departmental proceedings referred to in Rule 9(1), if instituted while the
Government servant was in service, shall, after the final retirement of the
Government servant, be deemed to be proceedings under this rule and shall be
continued and concluded by the authority in the same manner as if the Government
servant had continued in service. Rule 9(2)(b) states that the departmental
proceedings, if not instituted while the Government servant was in service, shall not
be instituted, save with the sanction of the Governor of Manipur; shall not be in
respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution;
and shall be conducted by such authority and in such place as the Governor of
Manipur may direct and in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental
proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to
the Government servant during his service. Rule 9(4) states that a provisional
pension shall be sanctioned to the Government servant against whom departmental
or judicial proceedings are instituted or where departmental proceedings are
continued under Rule 9(2).
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 10 Rule 9(6) is of relevance and it reads as follows: -
'Rule 9 (6) For the purpose of this rule, ---
(a) departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted on the date on which
the statement of charges is issued to the Government servant or pensioner, or if the
Government servant has been placed under suspension from an earlier date, on such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 6
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
date; and
(b) judicial proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted----
(i) in the case of criminal proceedings, on the date on which the complaint or report
of a Police Officer, of which the Magistrate takes cognizance, is made, and
(ii) in the case of civil proceedings, on the date the plaint is presented in the Court."
[16] In the case on hand, respondent No.1 was never placed under suspension from service in
relation to the subject issue. Further, till now, no statement of charges has been issued to her in
relation to any alleged misconduct or irregularity in carrying out her duties. In terms of Rule
9(6)(a), departmental proceedings cannot be deemed to have been instituted against her as on date.
In so far as judicial proceedings are concerned, only a FIR has been registered against her and the
investigation is still in progress. By no stretch of imagination can mere registration of a FIR be
equated with cognizance taken by a Magistrate under the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. Section 190 Cr.P.C deals with cognizance of offences by Magistrates and states to
the effect that a Magistrate may take cognizance of any offence either upon receiving a complaint on
the facts which constitute such offence or upon a police report of such facts or upon information
received from any person other than a police officer or by his own knowledge that such offence has
been committed. The 'police report' referred to in this provision is the 'final report' that would be
submitted after investigation by the police under Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. In the present case, the WA
No.17 of 2020 Page 11 investigation in the subject FIR case is still ongoing and no final report has
been submitted to the Magistrate concerned as on date. In effect, judicial proceedings cannot be
deemed to have been instituted against respondent No.1 at this time. [17] At this stage, it would be
apposite to note curial wisdom on this issue.
In State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Brahm Datt Sharma and another [(1987) 2 SCC 179], the Supreme
Court observed that though pension is not a bounty but is a right earned by the Government servant
on the basis of length of service, the grant of full pension would depend on approval of the service
rendered by such employee. It was further observed that if the Government incurs pecuniary loss on
account of misconduct or negligence of a Government servant and if he retires from service before
departmental proceedings are taken against him, it would be open to the Government to initiate
departmental proceedings and if he is found guilty of misconduct or negligence, as a result of which
the Government is put to pecuniary loss, the Government would be entitled to withhold, reduce or
recover the loss suffered by it by forfeiture or reduction of his pension. These observations were
made in the context of Civil Service Regulations which had statutory character and provided for
forfeiture and deduction in the pension of the Government servant who did not render satisfactory
service or who was found guilty of misconduct or negligence resulting in pecuniary loss to the
Government. [18] In U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd. and others vs. Kamal Swaroop Tondon
[(2008) 2 SCC 41], the Supreme Court observed that while resignation brought about complete
cessation of the master and servant relationship, retirement did not do so as the master-servant
relationship continued for grant of retiral benefits. That being so, the Supreme Court held that
departmental proceedings were continued lawfully after WA No.17 of 2020 Page 12 the retirement of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 7
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
the employee as regards financial loss caused to the Corporation owing to the negligence on the part
of the employee. It was further held that the loss caused to the Corporation could be recovered from
the retiral benefits of the employee. [19] In State of Jharkhand and others vs. Jitendra Kumar
Srivastava [(2013) 12 SCC 210], the Supreme Court reiterated that it is an accepted position that
gratuity and pension are not bounties and that an employee earns these benefits by dint of his long,
continuous, faithful and unblemished service and that this right cannot be taken away without due
process of law. Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules was under consideration in that case and it
reads on the same lines as Rule 9(1) presently under consideration. Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension
Rules is as under: -
'43.(b) The State Government further reserve to themselves the right of withholding
or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for specified
period, and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of
any pecuniary loss caused to the Government if the pensioner is found in
departmental or judicial proceeding to have been guilty of grave misconduct; or to
have caused pecuniary loss to the Government by misconduct or negligence, during
his service including service rendered on re-employment after retirement.'
Considering the ambit and scope of this Rule, the Supreme Court observed that the
Government would have power to withhold or withdraw pension when the pensioner
is found guilty of grave misconduct either in departmental proceedings or judicial
proceedings but held that the State was not empowered to invoke the said provision
while departmental proceedings or judicial proceedings are still pending. It was
affirmed that the said power could be invoked only when the proceedings concluded
with a finding of guilt against the Government servant and not before. The Supreme
Court further held that Rule 43(b) made it abundantly clear that, even after the WA
No.17 of 2020 Page 13 conclusion of the departmental inquiry, it would be
permissible for the Government to withhold pension only when a finding is recorded
either in the departmental inquiry or judicial proceedings that the employee had
committed grave misconduct in the discharge of his duty while in office but there was
no provision in the rules for withholding pension/gratuity when such departmental
proceedings or judicial proceedings are still pending.
[20] Following this edict in Dr. Hira Lal vs. State of Bihar and others [(2020) 4 SCC
346], the Supreme Court observed that in the absence of statutory rules permitting
withholding of pension or gratuity, the State could not do so by way of executive
instructions. Rule 43 of the Bihar Pension Rules was again under consideration. The
Supreme Court however noted that the position had changed after insertion of Rule
43(c) in the said Rules on 19.07.2012, which permitted withholding of 10% of the
pension amount in the event the departmental proceedings or judicial proceedings
did not conclude till the retirement of the Government servant. In that case, the
appellant had been placed under suspension from service and continued to remain so
till he attained the age of superannuation. At that stage, the Government sanctioned
payment of 90% of the provisional pension to him and withheld 10% thereof along
with the entire gratuity, leave encashment and GPF, due to pending criminal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 8
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
proceedings.
[21] In Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited vs. Rabindranath Choubey
[(2020) 18 SCC 71], a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the scope of Rule 34.2 of
the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules of Mahanadi Coalfield Limited. The two questions that fell
for consideration were:
1). Whether it was permissible in law for the employer to withhold payment of
gratuity to WA No.17 of 2020 Page 14 the employee after his superannuation from
service because of pendency of disciplinary proceedings against him; and 2). Whether
the punishment of dismissal could be imposed upon him even if he was found guilty
of misconduct in the departmental inquiry that had been instituted while he was in
service and continued after he attained the age of superannuation. In that case, the
employee was suspended from service pending the departmental inquiry instituted
on the basis of a charge-sheet. The suspension was thereafter revoked without
prejudice to the departmental inquiry and upon his attaining the age of
superannuation, he was permitted to retire from service. His gratuity was however
withheld owing to the pendency of the departmental inquiry. The majority opinion of
two learned Judges was that Section 4(6) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, was in
consonance with Rule 34.3 of the CDA Rules and therefore, the employer had a right
to withhold the payment of gratuity during the pendency of the disciplinary
proceedings. The learned third Judge also concurred with this view but dissented
with the majority opinion that dismissal from service could be imposed even after
retirement.
[22] In the light of statutory scheme obtaining under the State's Pension Rules and the case law set
out supra, it is clear that the authorities have no power to withhold gratuity and pension even during
the pendency of disciplinary/judicial proceedings in the event the government servant is allowed to
retire as there is no provision in the rules extant akin to Rule 43(c) of the Bihar Pension Rules or
Rule 34.2 of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules. As per Rule 9, which is applicable presently,
it is only after the conclusion of disciplinary/judicial proceedings and the rendering of a finding of
guilt therein against a Government servant that the question of withholding his/her gratuity and
pension would arise. As already noted supra, it cannot even be deemed at this WA No.17 of 2020
Page 15 stage that any departmental or judicial proceedings have been instituted against respondent
No.1. However serious the allegation of misconduct may be, without the sanction of law and a legal
foundation for such punitive action, it is not open to the authorities to withhold the lawful benefits
due and payable to a retired employee on the ground that he or she may, thereafter, be found guilty
of causing pecuniary loss to the Government. Bereft of such legal sanction, the action of the
authorities in withholding pension and gratuity cannot be countenanced.
[23] Further, as noted hereinbefore, it would be open to the State to recover the amount of loss
determined as payable by a public servant after a finding of guilt, even after retirement, be it from
the salary and entitlements payable to the public servant or from his/her other incomes, either
through institution of a civil suit or by any other means available in law. Therefore, it is not as if the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 9
The State Of Manipur vs Miss Ranjana Manohermayum on 29 March, 2022
Government would be remediless if the proceedings culminate in such a finding notwithstanding the
retirement of respondent No.1 and payment of her retirement benefits.
[24] On the above analysis, this Court finds that, as on date, no departmental or judicial proceedings
even exist or can be deemed to exist against respondent No.1, whereby recourse, however shaky, can
at least be attempted to some basis for withholding her pension and gratuity. In the absence of legal
sanction, the action of the State authorities in resorting to withholding her pension and gratuity
cannot be said to be lawful. The direction of the learned Judge to release such benefits therefore
does not warrant interference. In the event judicial proceedings initiated against respondent No.1, if
any, culminate in a sustainable finding of her guilt in relation to the missing `1.21 WA No.17 of 2020
Page 16 Crore, it would be open to the authorities to take recourse to the remedies available to them
in law for recovering such financial loss from respondent No.1.
Subject to this observation, the writ appeal is dismissed.
The appellants shall implement the order under appeal within one month from the date of receipt of
this judgment and order.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.
A copy of this order shall be supplied online or through WhatsApp to the learned counsel for the
parties.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
FR/NFR
Opendro
WA No.17 of 2020 Page 17
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196085197/ 10
