Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
Author: B.Veerappa
Bench: B. Veerappa
1
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 16TH DAY OF APRIL, 2018
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B. VEERAPPA
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.201299/2017
BETWEEN:
Thipparaju S/o Siddappa Hawaldar
Age: 40 years, Occ: Politician,
R/o. IDSMT Layout, Raichur,
Dist. Raichur - 584101.
... Petitioner
(By Sri Mahadev S.Patil, Advocate)
AND:
The State of Karnataka
Through Netaji Nagar Police Station,
East Circle Raichur, Dist. Raichur - 584101.
Rept. by High Court P.P.,
Kalaburagi Bench.
... Respondent
(By Sri Mallikarjun Sahukar, HCGP)
This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., praying to quash the entire proceeding in
C.C.No.28/2015 (Crime No.76/2013) pending before Addl.
Senior Civil Judge & JMFC-I, Raichur.
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 1
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
This petition is coming on for Admission this day, the
Court made the following:
ORDER
The petitioner has filed the present criminal petition to quash the entire proceedings in
C.C.No.28/2015 arising out of Crime No.76/2013 pending on the file of the Additional Senior Civil
Judge and JMFC-I, Raichur.
2. It is the case of the prosecution that one Sikandar Basha, an Government Officer Gazetted, Flying
Squad Chief lodged a written complaint before the Netaji Nagar police station alleging that he has
received information on 16.04.2013 at 11.00 a.m. at the time of submission of nomination of
assembly election in Raichur Rural Constituency 53, one Tipparaju Hawaldar, a BJP candidate
engaged unauthorized private vehicles by giving money to the said vehicle owners for the purpose of
bringing the voters and campaign at the time of submitting his nomination by violating the code of
conduct of election and without obtaining the permission from the authorized election officer. It was
further alleged that the Gazetted Officer along with his staff and panchas seized 11 vehicles and filed
the complaint before Netaji Nagar police station for the offences punishable under Sections 171-H
and 188 of IPC. The respondent - police have registered a case in Crime No.76/2013 against the
accused/petitioner and submitted the charge sheet against him. Hence, the present is filed petition
to quash the entire proceedings in Crime No.76/2013.
3. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties to the lis.
4. Sri Mahadev S. Patil, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that the very
initiation of proceedings under the provisions of Section 171-H of IPC without prior permission from
the learned Magistrate to investigate is not maintainable. He further contended that to initiate any
criminal proceeding against the accused under Section 188 of IPC, the complainant has to file a
private complaint as contemplated under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. He further contended that the
petitioner is innocent and has not committed any crime muchless as alleged in the complaint and
has been falsely implicated in the crime by the police. He further contended that the Court cannot
take cognizance unless a public servant files a private complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. It is
further contended that Section 171-H is non-cognizable offence and the police cannot investigate the
matter without prior permission from the jurisdictional Magistrate under Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C.
He further contended that though the petitioner has filed discharge under Section 239 of Cr.P.C.,
the learned Magistrate has held that this Court has power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and Trial
Court already took cognizance and cannot go behind the stage of taking cognizance. Therefore,
sought to quash the proceedings by allowing the present petition.
5. Sri Mallikarjun Sahukar, learned High Court Government Pleader for the respondent sought to
justify the impugned order passed by the Trial Court and has not disputed the fact that before
initiation of proceedings under Section 171-H of IPC, the police have to take prior permission of the
Magistrate. He also submits that the Court cannot take cognizance unless a public servant files a
private complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 2
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
6. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, the material on record clearly depicts that there
was no complaint in writing by the complainant, who was an official of Gazeetted Flying Squad Chief
against the petitioner before the jurisdictional Magistrate alleging the offence under Section 188 of
IPC. On the other hand, he has filed a complaint to the jurisdictional police for investigation. The
registration of a case by the police under Section 188 of IPC itself is illegal. On the date of
registration of case itself, the bar under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. was operating and the police gets no
jurisdiction even to register a case under Section 188 of IPC. Once an illegality perpetrates into the
investigation, such investigation is hit by the statutory principles, then it cannot be construed as a
legal proceeding or a legal investigation by the police. Therefore, as rightly contended by the learned
counsel for the petitioner, the Magistrate could not have taken cognizance for the offence under
Section 188 of IPC without there being a private complaint in writing by the public servant.
7. It is relevant at this stage to consider the provisions of Section 195 of Cr.P.C., which reads as
under:
"195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences
against public justice and for offences relating to document given in evidence. - (1)
No Court shall take cognizance -
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under Sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the
Indian Penal code (45 of 1860), or
(ii) of any abetment of, attempt to commit, such offence, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, except on the complaint in
writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is
administratively subordinate;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following Sections of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely Sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205
to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence is alleged to have been committed
in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or
(ii) of any offence described in Section 463, or punishable under Section 471, Section
475 or Section 476, of the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in
any Court, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of,
any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or sub-
clause (ii), [except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other
public servant to whom he is administratively subordinate].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 3
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub-section (1) any
authority to which he is administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint
and send a copy of such order to the Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings
shall be taken on the complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first
instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or
Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial
or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this Section.
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of Sub-
section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie
from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from
whose decrees no appeals ordinarily lies, to the principal Court having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate:
Provided that -
(a) Where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior
jurisdictional shall be the Court to which such Court shall be deemed to be
subordinate;
(b) Where appeals lie to a civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be
deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the
case or proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been
committed."
8. A plain reading of the said provision makes it clear that there is a statutory bar to the Court for
taking cognizance unless the complaint in writing made by the public servant concerned or some
other public servant to whom he is administratively subordinate. In view of the above, the said
provision takes away the general power of the Magistrate under Section 190 of Cr.P.C.
9. Insofar as initiation of proceedings under Section 171-H of IPC is concerned, which reads as
under:
"Illegal payments in connection with an election. - Whoever without the general or special authority
in writing of a candidate incurs or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publications, or in any other way whatsoever for the
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which
may extend to file hundred rupees.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 4
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the amount of ten
rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such expenses were
incurred the approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have incurred such
expenses with the authority of the candidate."
10. A plain reading of the said Section makes it clear that the punishment imposed is fine that may
extend to Rs.500/-. Therefore, the said provision is categorized as non-cognizable offence under the
classification of the offences in Schedule-I to the Cr.P.C. When the offence is declared as
non-cognizable in nature, Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. bars the police to investigate such matter without
valid permission from the jurisdictional Magistrate. The provisions of Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C.
clearly depicts that:
"Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases and sub-
section (2) specify that no police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case
without the order of a Magistrate having power to try such case or commit the case
for trial."
11. The Apex Court in the case of M.S.Ahlawat vs. State of Haryana and Another reported in (2000) 1
SCC 278 held that the provisions of Section 195 of Cr.P.C. are mandatory and no Court has
jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offences mentioned therein, unless there is a complaint in
writing as required under that Section.
12. The Apex Court in the case of Sachida Nand Singh and Another vs. State of Bihar and Another
reported in 1998(2) SCC 493, while considering the provisions of Section 190 of Cr.P.C. held in
paragraph No.7 as under:
7. Section 190 of the Code empowers "any magistrate of the first class" to take
cognizance of "any offence" upon receiving a complaint, or police port or information
or upon his own knowledge. Section 195 restricts such general powers of the
magistrate, and the general right of a person to move the Court with a complaint is to
that extent curtailed. It is a well-recognized canon of interpretation that provision
curbing the general jurisdiction of the Court must normally receive strict
interpretation unless the statute or the context requires otherwise (Abdul Waheed
Khan vs. Bhawani, AIR 1966 SC 1718)."
13. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Daulat Ram vs. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1962
SC 1206 wherein it was held that where the cognizance of the offence had been taken on police
report by the Magistrate and the appellant therein, had been tried and convicted, though the public
servant concerned, the Tahsildar, had not filed any complaint. Considering the factual background
and while allowing and setting aside the judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed on the
appellant it has been held as under:
"The cognizance of the case was therefore wrongly assumed by the Court without the complaint in
writing of the public servant, namely, the Tahsildar in this case. The trial was thus without
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 5
Thipparaju vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 April, 2018
jurisdiction ab-
initio and the conviction cannot be
maintained."
14. The provisions of Section 2(d) of Cr.P.C. defines the 'complaint', which reads as under:
"2(d). "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate,
with a view to his taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or
unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report."
15. Admittedly, in the present case, the public servant has not lodged any complaint before the
jurisdictional Magistrate in writing as contemplated under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. being mandatory
and there being non-compliance, the Magistrate has committed illegality in taking cognizance of the
offences i.e., without the complaint being made to him in writing by the public servant concerned.
16. This Court in identical circumstances in the case of Sri Manikanta vs. The State of Karnataka and
Others in W.P.No.23611/2015 dated 16.06.2015, wherein also the police have registered a case in
Crime No.167/2014 for the offences punishable under Sections 78 and 79 of the Karnataka Police
Act and also under Section 188 of IPC. This Court has come to the conclusion that the registration of
case under Section 188 of IPC becomes illegal as bar contained under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. held
that the remaining provision under Sections 78 and 79 of the Karnataka Police Act could not have
been investigated by the police without a valid permission from the jurisdictional Magistrate under
Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. Therefore, this Court has quashed the proceedings.
17. Admittedly, in the present case, the public servant has not lodged complaint in writing and no
permission was obtained from the jurisdictional Magistrate by the police as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. and the public servant has not filed any private complaint as contemplated
under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. to initiate proceeding under Sections 171-H and 188 of IPC. Therefore,
the initiation of proceeding made by the jurisdictional police and subsequently cognizance taken by
the Magistrate is contrary to the provisions stated supra. The petitioner has made out exceptional
circumstances to quash the proceedings as prayed for.
18. In view of the aforesaid reasons, the criminal petition is allowed. The entire proceedings in
C.C.No.28/2015 arising out of Crime No.76/2013 pending the file of the Additional Senior Civil
Judge and JMFC-I, Raichur for the offences punishable under Sections 171-H and 188 of IPC are
hereby quashed.
Ordered accordingly.
Sd/-
JUDGE Srt Ct: VK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107109406/ 6
