Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28
August, 2024
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
LAISHRA Digitally signed
by LAISHRAM
M DHAKESHORI
DEVI
DHAKESH Date:
ORI DEVI 2024.08.30
14:01:27 +05'30' Item Nos. 50
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 451 of 2024
Thongam Shyamo Singh ...Petitioner
Vs.
State of Manipur & 2 ors. ...Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 28.08.2024 Heard Mr. I. Denning,
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. Phungyo Zingkhei, learned Dy. GA appearing for
respondent Nos. 1 & 2; Mr. S. Nepolean, learned GA appearing for respondent No. 3 and Mr. L.
Shashibhushan, learned senior counsel assisted by Md. Fakirrudin, learned counsel appearing for
respondent No. 4.
[2] The present writ petition has been field challenging the show cause notice dated 19-06-2024
issued by the respondent No. 2 against the petitioner. In the said show cause notice, it has been,
inter alia, alleged that the petitioner has violated the provisions of Section 29(2)(d) read with
Section 59 of the Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994 by having share and interests in the execution of
contract works of the Thoubal Municipal Council and directing the petitioner to submit his show
cause as to why appropriate action shall not be taken against him.
The learned counsel appearing for the respondents raised a preliminary issue with regard to the
maintainability of the present writ petition. It has been submitted by the learned WP(C)No. 451 of
2021 Page 1 counsel appearing for the respondents that the impugned show cause notice does not
rise to any cause of action inasmuch as, no right of the petitioner has been affected nor any action
affecting the petitioner(cid:128)s right to be a councilor has been infringed by the said show cause notice. It
has also been submitted that the competent authority issued the show cause notice in terms of the
relevant provisions of the Manipur Municipalities Act 1994 and Rules made thereunder and the
same is perfectly valid and legally tenable and that the present petition is premature and liable to be
dismissed in the threshold. In support of the contentions, the counsel for the respondents have
relied on the following decisions of the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 1
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
"(i) "State of Uttar Pradesh -vrs.- Brahm Datt Sharma & anr." reported in (1987)2
Supreme Court Cases 179 wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in paragraph No. 9 of the
judgment held as under :-
"9. The High Court was not justified in quashing the show cause notice. When a show
cause notice is issued to a government servant under a statutory provision calling
upon him to show cause, ordinarily the government servant must place his case
before the authority concerned by showing cause and the courts should be reluctant
to interfere with the notice at that stage unless the notice is shown to have been
issued palpably without any authority of law. The purpose of issuing show cause
notice is to afford opportunity of hearing to the government servant and once cause is
shown it is open to the government to consider the matter in the light of the facts and
submissions placed by the government WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 2 servant and
only thereafter a final decision in the matter could be taken. Interference by the court
before that stage should be premature. The High Court in our opinion ought not have
interfered with the show cause notice."
(ii) "Union of India & anr. -vrs.- Kunisetty Satyanaraya" reported in (2006)12 Supreme Court Cases
28 wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in paragraph No. 13 & 14 of the judgment held as under :-
"13. It is well settle by a series of decisions of this Court that ordinarily no writ lies
against a charge- sheet or show-cause notice vide Executive Engineer, Bihar State
Housing Board -vrs.- Ramesh Kumar Singh, Special Director -vrs.- Mohd. Ghulam
Ghouse, Ulagappa -vrs.- Divisional Commr., Mysore, State of U.P. -vrs.- Brahm Datt
Sharma, etc. "14. The reason why ordinarily a writ petition should not be entertained
against a mere show- cause notice or charge-sheet is that at that stage the writ
petition may be held to be premature. A mere charge-sheet or show-cause notice does
not give rise to any cause of action, because it does not amount to an adverse order
which affects the rights of any party unless the same has been issued by a person
having no jurisdiction to do so. It is quite possible that after considering the reply to
the show- cause notice or after holding an enquiry the authority concerned may drop
the proceedings and/or hold that the charges are not established. It is well settle that
a writ petition lies when some right of any party is infringed. A mere show-cause
notice or charge-sheet does not infringe the right of anyone. It is only when a final
order imposing some punishment or otherwise adversely affecting a party WP(C)No.
451 of 2021 Page 3 is passed, that the said party can be said to have any grievance."
(iii) "Special Director & anr. -vrs.- Mohd. Ghulam Ghouse & anr." reported in (2004)3 Supreme
Court Cases 440 wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in paragraph No. 5 of the judgment held as under
:-
"5. This Court in a large number of cases has deprecated the practice of the High
Courts entertaining writ petitions questioning legality of the show-cause notices
stalling enquiries as proposed and retarding investigative process to find actual facts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 2
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
with the participation and in the presence of the parties. Unless the High Court is
satisfied that the show-cause notice was totally non est in the eye of the law for
absolute want of jurisdiction of the authority to even investigate into facts, writ
petitions should not be entertained for the mere asking and as a matter of routine,
and the writ petitioner should invariably be directed to respond to the show-cause
notice and take all stands highlighted in the writ petition. Whether the show-cause
notice was founded on any legal premises, is a jurisdictional issue which can even be
urged by the recipient of the notice and such issues also can be adjudicated by the
authority issuing the very notice initially, before the aggrieved could approach the
court. Further, when the court passes an interim order it should be careful to see that
the statutory functionaries specially and specifically constituted for the purpose are
not denuded of powers and authority to initially decide the matter and ensure that
ultimate relief which may or may not be finally granted in the writ petition is not
accorded to the WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 4 writ petitioner even at the threshold by
the interim protection granted."
[3] Relying on the law laid down by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in the aforesaid judgments, it has been
submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents that the present writ petition is
premature and not maintainable and the same is liable to be rejected.
[4] Mr. I. Denning, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner has
assailed the impugned show cause notice on the following two grounds :-
(i) The authority who issued the show cause notice has no jurisdiction to issue the
said show cause notice ;
(ii) The show cause notice has been issued with predetermined minds.
Elaborating the above points, it has been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
petitioner had been appointed as a Caretaker Chairperson of the Thoubal Municipal Council by
virtue of the order passed by this Court on 19-01-2023 in WP(C)No. 935 of 2022 and batches of writ
petitions. In the said order, one of the directions given by this court is that the interim order granted
by the court on 04-11-2022 in the said writ petitions should continue till issuance of the notification
of the Election of the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and Autonomous District Council.
[5] In compliance with the said directions given by this court, the Under Secretary (MAHUD),
Government of Manipur, issued an WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 5 order dated 06-03-2023 allowing
the concerned Ex-Caretaker Mayor, Ex-Caretaker Chairpersons and Ex-Caretaker Councilors of the
previous terms/Councils of the Urban Local Bodies, including the present petitioner, to continue as
Ex-Caretaker Mayor, Ex-Caretaker Chairpersons and Ex-Caretaker Councillors of the concerned
Urban Local Bodies till the issuance of the notification of the Election of the Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) by the Election Commissioner. The learned counsel further submitted that since the
petitioner had been appointed by an executive order pursuant to the direction given by this Court,
the provision of the Municipality Act and Rule are not applicable to the petitioner. In such view of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 3
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
the matter, it has been submitted that the authority, who issued the impugned show cause notice,
does not have the power or jurisdiction to issue the said show cause notice.
[6] Elaborating the second point, it has been submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner that initially 10(ten) Caretaker Councillors of the Thoubal Municipal Council made a
written complaint against the petitioner to the Commissioner (MAHUD), Government of Manipur,
raising certain allegations against the petitioner, however, subsequently 3(three) of the said
complainants have withdrawn themselves from the said complaint. However, the authorities never
disclose such development. The learned counsel further submitted that even though the petitioner
has submitted his written reply to the show cause notice, no action has been taken up by the
respondents and that such factum of submitting reply to show cause notice has not also been
disclosed by them. In view of the above, it has been submitted by the learned counsel that the action
of WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 6 the respondents in issuing the show cause notice is a predetermine
action.
[7] Mr. I. Denning, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner cited the case laws reported in
(2006)12 SCC 33 "Siemens Ltd. -vrs.- State of Maharashtra & ors." wherein the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court
held as under :-
"9. Although ordinarily a writ court may not exercise its discretionary jurisdiction in
entertaining a writ petition questioning a notice to show cause unless the same inter
alia appears to have been without jurisdiction as has been held by this Court in some
decisions including State of U.P. v. Brahm Datt Sharma, Special Director v. Mohd.
Ghulam Ghouse and Union of India v. Kunisetty Satyanarayana, but the question
herein has to be considered from a different angle viz. when a notice is issued with
premeditation, a writ petition would be maintainable. In such an event, even if the
court directs the statutory authority to hear the matter afresh, ordinarily such
hearing would not yield any fruitful purpose. (See K.I. Shephard v. Union of India). It
is evident in the instant case that the respondent has clearly made up its mind. It
explicitly said so both in the counter- affidavit as also in its purported show-cause
notice.
10. The said principle has been followed by this Court in V.C., Banaras Hindu
University V. Shrikant, stating :
(SCC p. 60, paras 8-9) WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 7 "48. The Vice-Chancellor
appears to have made up his mind to impose the punishment of dismissal on the
respondent herein. A post-decisional hearing given by the High Court was illusory in
this case.
"49. In K.I. Shephard v. Union of India this Court held : (SCC p.9, para 16) „It is
common experience that once a decision has been taken, there is a tendency to
uphold it and a representation may not really yield any fruitful purpose.'"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 4
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
11. A bare perusal of the order impugned before the High Court as also the statements made before
us in the counter-affidavit filed by the respondents, we are satisfied that the statutory authority has
already applied its mind and has formed an opinion as regards the liability or otherwise of the
appellant. If in passing the order the respondent has already determined the liability of the
appellant and the only question which remains for its consideration is quantification thereof, the
same does not remain in the realm of a show-cause notice. The writ petition, in our opinion, was
maintainable."
[8] I have carefully perused the aforesaid judgment rendered by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court and this
Court is of the considered view that the said principle of law had been laid down in the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case and such principle of law are not applicable in the present case for the
simple reason that the facts and WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 8 circumstances of the present case and
the facts and circumstances of the cases cited by the counsel for the petitioner are totally different.
[9] I have heard at length the submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties
and considered the rival submissions. In my considered view, even though, the petitioner was
appointed by the Under Secretary (MAHUD), Government of Manipur, by an order dated
06-03-2023 issued in compliance with the direction given by this Court, the facts still remains that
he is acting as a Councillor of the Thoubal Municipal Council and he is discharging his duties and
functioning within the four corners of provisions of the Manipur Municipalities Act and Rules made
thereunder. Accordingly, this court is of the considered view that the provisions of the Manipur
Municipality Act and Rules made thereunder are applicable to the petitioner and as such, this Court
cannot agree with the submission advanced on behalf of the petitioner that the authority who issue
the show cause notice has no jurisdiction or power to issue the said show cause notice.
[10] So far as the second contention made by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is
concerned, this court is of the considered view that there is no substance or merit in such
contention, inasmuch as, the competent authority issued the show cause notice on the basis of the
complaint made by some Councillors of the Thoubal Municipal Council alleging commission of
illegal acts by the petitioner. On the basis of such complaint, the competent authority issued the
show cause notice in terms of the provision of the aforesaid Act and Rules to find out the veracity or
truthfulness of such allegations and for taking appropriate action if required.
WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 9 Moreover, since no adverse action has been taken against the
petitioner, this court cannot agree with the submission made by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the show cause notice had been issued with a predetermined mind. This Court is also
of the view that the present writ petition is premature. Accordingly, at this stage, this Court is not
inclined to interfere with the impugned show cause notice. In the result, the writ petition is hereby
dismissed as it is not maintainable.
It is made clear that this Court has not decided or consider any merit of the present petition and the
authorities are at liberty to proceed with any further action relating to show cause notice, if so
advised and complete the same within a period of 3(three) months from today by passing
appropriate order as deem fit and proper.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 5
Thongam Shyamo Singh vs State Of Manipur & 2 Ors on 28 August, 2024
JUDGE
Dhakeshori
WP(C)No. 451 of 2021 Page 10
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32520149/ 6
