Tilakram vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Tilakram vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:67671
Court No. - 80
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 10168 of 2024
Appellant :- Tilakram
Respondent :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Appellant :- Krishna Gopal
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Rahul Saxena
Hon'ble Nalin Kumar Srivastava,J.
1. This criminal appeal under Section 14-A (1) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act (in short 'the SC/ST Act') has been preferred by the appellant - Tilakram with the
prayer to set-aside the quash /set aside the cognizance / summoning order dated 6.8.2024 passed
by the Special Judge (SC/ST Act), Bareilly and the entire proceedings of Criminal Case No. 1553 of
2024, arising out of case crime no. 475 of 2023, under Sections 500, 504, 506 IPC and 3(1)(da),
3(1)(dha), 3(2)(va) the SC/ST Act, P.S. Bhuta, District Bareilly. Further prayer has been made to
stay the further proceedings of the said case also the impugned summoning order.
2. Heard learned counsel for the appellant, learned counsel for the opposite party no.2 as well as the
learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the entire record.
3. As per the factual matrix of this case, it is alleged in the F.I.R. that on 17.9.2023 at 10.30 p.m. the
name of the niece of the informant was called on loudspeaker by Tilakram, the appellant with bad
intention and when it was protested by the informant, the father of the appellant insulted the
informant, who was a member of SC/ST community, by hurling abuses with caste related remarks
and threatened for dire consequences. F.I.R. was lodged and after thorough investigation charge
sheet has been submitted. The trial court after perusing the evidence available in the case diary took
cognizance of the matter and the appellant was summoned to face trial under Sections 500, 504,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110200595/ 1
Tilakram vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
506 IPC and 3(1)(da), 3(1)(dha), 3(2)(va) of the SC/ST Act.
4. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that appellant is innocent and has been
falsely implicated in this case. The present prosecution has been instituted with a malafide
intention. The entire prosecution story is false and fabricated. There are contradictions in the
statements of the informant and that of the witnesses recorded before the Investigating Officer
under Section 161 CrPC. The police has also submitted charge sheet on the basis of insufficient
evidence against the appellant. Essential ingredients to constitute the alleged offences are lacking. It
is also submitted that the offence under Section 500 IPC never comes into picture on the basis of the
contents of the F.I.R. as well as the statements of the witnesses of this case. Learned counsel for the
appellant pointed out certain documents and statements in support of his contention.
5. The next argument advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant is that the I.O. of this case
collected absolutely no evidence to the effect that the incident took place in any place within the
public view and intentional insult or intimidation was made by the appellant. It is further submitted
that there is not even an iota of evidence on record as collected by the I.O. that the appellant
committed the alleged offence for the simple reason of the injured/informant being a member of
SC/ST community. It is also submitted that the appellant never hurled abuses to insult him by caste
related remarks. The impugned order suffers from infirmity and illegality warranting interference
by this Court.
6. Per contra, the learned counsel for the opposite party no.2 as well as the learned AGA opposed the
appeal and submitted that the appellant never denied the incident and in the entire affidavit there is
no such averment that the alleged incident did not happen at all. It is further submitted that at the
stage of taking cognizance and summoning the accused, the Magistrate / Court dealing with the
matter is required to apply judicial mind only with a view to take cognizance of the offence to
find-out as to whether prima-facie case has been made out to summon the accused or not. The Court
concerned after applying its judicial mind has passed the cognizance and summoning order on the
basis of sufficient evidence on record. There is no infirmity or illegality in the impugned order
warranting interference by this Court. Hence, the appeal having no force is liable to be dismissed.
7. I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone
through the entire record including the impugned order.
8. It is trite law that at the stage of taking cognizance and summoning the accused, the Magistrate /
Court dealing with the matter is required to apply judicial mind only with a view to take cognizance
of the offence to find-out as to whether prima-facie case has been made out to summon the accused
or not. The Court at this stage is not required to analyze the material on record to find-out as to
whether the matter may lead to conviction or not. Sufficiency of materials for the purpose of
conviction is not required. It is also settled that even when there are materials raising strong
suspicion against the accused, the Court will be justified in taking cognizance and summoning the
accused. The Court / Magistrate is not required to analyze the evidence on merits but to scrutinize
the evidence only with a view as to whether sufficient grounds exist to initiate criminal proceedings
in respect of the offence which is said to have been committed (Vide : R.P. Kapur Vs. State of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110200595/ 2
Tilakram vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Punjab, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 866, State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 SCC (Cr.) 426, State of Bihar Vs.
P.P.Sharma, 1992 SCC (Cr.) 192 and Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. Vs. Mohd. Saraful Haq and
another, 2005 SCC (Cr.) 283).
9. In State of Gujarat v. Afroz Mohammed Hasanfatta, (2019) 20 SCC 539, the Hon'ble Apex Court
reiterated that for issuance of summons strict standard of proof of satisfaction of the Magistrate
regarding sufficiency of ground(s) to proceed in the matter is not required and such satisfaction
should be based only on prima facie evidence. Before summoning the accused, the facts stated will
have to be accepted as they appear on the very face of it. Sufficiency of evidence to hold accused
guilty, merits of matter and defence pleas have to be examined at the stage of trial and not at the
stage of issuance of process. Whether statement of a witness is hearsay and whether it is supported
by "contemporaneous exposition" and whether it would fall under "res gestae" and whether it is
admissible or not is to be seen only at the time of trial.
10. So far as the case in hand is concerned, the prosecution claims that the accused appellant hurled
abuses to the informant with caste related remarks and also made assault upon him on a public
place with a criminal intent to insult him. The witnesses of this case including the informant have
affirmed this fact when they were interrogated by the I.O. under Section 161 CrPC. Further, evidence
collected by the I.O. prima facie shows that the offence has been committed with the informant, who
is a member of the SC/ST community whereas the appellant is not member of SC/ST community
and accused appellant was very well knowing that the informant / injured is a member of SC/ST
community. However, I find force in the contention made by the learned counsel for the appellant
that no offence under Section 500 IPC is made out. Hence, all the offences, except offence under
Section 500 IPC, for which cognizance in this case was taken by the Court concerned are prima facie
made out on the basis of evidence collected by the Investigating Officer.
11. As is evident, all the submissions made at the bar relate to the disputed questions of fact, which
cannot be adjudicated upon by this Court in this appeal. At this stage only a prima facie case is to be
seen in the light of the settled law, as discussed here-in-above. From a perusal of the material
available on record and keeping in view the facts of the case, at this stage it cannot be said that
offences levelled against the appellant, except offence under Section 500 IPC, are not made out and
the record shows that a cognizable offence is clearly made out against the appellant. Sufficient
evidence has been collected against the appellant during the course of investigation. The Court
concerned did not err in taking cognizance into the matter and thereby to summon the accused /
appellant to face trial for the offences under Sections 504, 506 IPC and 3(1)(da), 3(1)(dha), 3(2)(va)
the SC/ST Act prima facie made out. There is some force in the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the appellant. The impugned order so far as it relates to the offence under Section 500
IPC is liable to be set aside but for other offences it does not suffer from illegality, infirmity,
perversity or lack of judicial mind. Hence, the impugned order to the extent of offence under Section
500 IPC against the appellant is set-aside and for the other offences it is affirmed and the criminal
appeal is partly allowed.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025/safi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/110200595/ 3
