Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18
September, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
HCP No. 4/2025
Reserved on: 01.08.2025
Pronounced on: 18.09.2025
Tufail Ahmad Zargar, aged 25 years S/o Ahmadullah Zargar R/o Feroz Shah
Bijbehara District Anantnag Kashmir through his father.
....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Uthman Gani, Advocate
Versus
1. Union Territory of J&K through Commissioner/Principal Secretary,
Home Department , J&K Govt. Civil Secretariat, Srinagar/Jammu
2. District Magistrate, Anantnag
3. Superintendent of Police Central Jail, Kothbhalwal Jammu.
....Respondent(s)
Through:
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Through the medium of this petition, Order no.17/DMA/PSA/DET/ 2024 dated 20.05.2024,
passed by District Magistrate, Anantnag - respondent no.2, (for short „detailing authority(cid:129)) whereby
detenu, namely, Tufail Ahmad Zargar, S/o Ahmadullah Zargar R/o Feroz Shah Bijbehara District
Anantnag, Kashmir has been placed under preventive detention with a view to prevent him from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State/UT of J&K, is sought to be quashed and
the detenu set at liberty on the grounds made mention of therein.
2. The case set up by the petitioner in this petition is that the detenu along with other OGWs as
alleged in the grounds of detention was apprehended by the Police Anantnag in case FIR
No.49/2024 for investigation, although, the evidence so collected against the detenu is not sufficient
to the extent to book him in the case under substantive laws but his involvement cannot be ruled
out. However, he has no connection with any terrorist organization or with terrorist cadres, being
vague, imaginary and without basis. It is also averred that detaining authority has passed the
impugned detention order mechanically without application of mind, inasmuch as the detenu has
neither past criminal record nor has any FIR lodged against him but has been falsely implicated in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 1
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
FIR No. 49/2024 U/S 18, 20 UAP Act 7/25 Arms Act ¾ Exp. Subs Act of P/S Anantnag, when the
detenu has never been put to investigation/enquiry in connection with the said FIR nor the detenu
is aware of any such FIR. It has been alleged that the order of detention has been passed without
mandate of law and jurisdiction, although the detention authority has jurisdiction to pass the order
of detention under Section 8 of PSA to prevent the activities of a person prejudicial to the Security of
State or Public Order but none of such allegations have been levelled against the detenu, inasmuch
as the grounds of detention, are vague, irrelevant, non-existent and the allegations are bereft of
specific details and without any reference to the past conduct of the detenu. The grounds of
detention do not disclose any activity which would be prejudicial to the security of State much less
the grounds which are based on mere apprehensions inasmuch as the detaining authority has not
applied its mind to the facts of the case but has acted to the report submitted by Sr. Superintendent
of Police, Anantnag, as the grounds of detention do not indicate any criminal case being registered
against the detenu at any point of time but has been bound down for keeping peace and tranquillity.
The respondents in the grounds of detention have itself stated that the evidence so collected against
the detenu is not sufficient to book him inasmuch as the statement prima facie speaks volumes
about the innocence of the detenu.
3. Respondents have filed reply affidavit, insisting therein that the activities indulged in by detenu
are highly prejudicial to the security of the State and, therefore, his remaining at large is a threat to
the security of State. The activities narrated in the grounds of detention have been reiterated in the
reply affidavit filed by respondents. The factual averments that detenu was not supplied with
relevant material relied upon in the grounds of detention have been refuted. It is insisted that all the
relevant material, which has been relied upon by the detaining authority, was provided to the detenu
at the time of execution of warrant.
4. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter. I have gone through the
detention record produced by the counsel appearing for respondents.
5. The counsel for petitioner states that in the dossier it is stated that on 17.01.2024, the detenu was
brought in PC Anantnag and during questioning it was alleged that he was providing logistic support
to terrorists but due to insufficient evidence the detenu could not booked under substantive laws,
but his involvement in the case cannot be ruled out at the first sight. However, the detenu was
bound down and released on surety bond and further investigation to burst the network of OGWs is
going on and investigating agency is on job to collect comprehensive evidence against the network.
The detenu can by no stretch of imagination support terrorism or indulge himself in any activity
which would be prejudicial to the Security of State or maintenance of public order. It is also stated
that there was no justification for the District Magistrate, Anantnag to order detention of the detenu
on the strength of FIR No. 49/2024 which the fact of the matter is that the detenu was never put to
investigation/enquiry in connection of the said FIR, therefore, it can never be inferred that the
detenu was/is OGW with banned terrorist organization inasmuch as the detaining authority has not
attributed any specific allegation against the detenu. The vague allegations levelled against the
detenu are based on mere whims, caprices and surmises of the detaining authority and are
ipso-facto insufficient and inconsistent to the provisions of Public Safety Act. The grounds are bereft
of specific details which renders the order of detention vague and non-existent in the eyes of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 2
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
Since the detenu is an innocent, a law abiding citizen with no past criminal background, thereof, the
order of detention is unwarranted. Learned counsel for petitioner has made reference to Dr. Ram
Krishan Bhardwaj v. The State of Delhi and others , 1953 SCR 708; Shalini Soni (Smt.) and others v.
Union of India and others 9180) 4 SCC 544; Icchu Devi Choraria (Smt.) v. Union of India and others
(1980) 4 SCC 531; and Jai Singh and ors v State of Jammu and Kashmir (AIR 1985 SC 764). It is
being also stated that in the grounds of detention it is mentioned that detenu was bound down and
released on surety bond. He also avers that although the respondents in their counter/reply affidavit
state that representation of detenu was rejected, but detenu/petitioner was never informed about
rejection of representation, as such, the guaranteed rights of detenu have been violated.
6. It is well settled that detaining authority must provide detenu a very early opportunity to make a
representation. The detaining authority is also required to consider the representation as soon as
possible and this preferably must be before the representation is forwarded to Advisory Board. The
representation must be forwarded to Advisory Board before the Board makes its report. The
consideration by detaining authority of representation must be entirely independent of the hearing
by the Board or its report, expedition being essential at every stage. The appropriate
Government/detaining authority is to exercise its opinion and decision on the representation of
detenu before sending the case along with detenu(cid:129)s representation to Advisory Board. Reference in
this regard is made to Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of W.B. (1970) 1 SCC 219; Pankaj Kumar
Chakraborty v. State of W.B. (1969) 3 SCC; FrancesCorallie Mullin v. W.C. Khambra (1980) 2 SCC
275; and Ankit Ashok Jalan v. Union of India and others, (2020) 16 SCC 127.
7. Right to make a representation is an enshrined right guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India. It incorporates a dual requirement:
first, it requires detaining authority to communicate grounds of detention as soon as
may be; and second, it requires to afford detenu an earliest opportunity to make a
representation. Both these procedural requirements are mutually reinforcing. The
communication, as soon as may be, of the grounds of detention is intended to inform
the detenu of the basis on which the order of detention has been made. The
expression "as soon as may be" imports a requirement of immediacy. The
communication of grounds is in aid of facilitating right of detenu to submit a
representation against order of detention. In absence of grounds being
communicated, detenu would be left in the dark about the reasons which have led to
issuance of order of detention. The importance which the constitutional provision
ascribes to communication of grounds as well as affording of an opportunity to make
a representation is evident from the use of the expression "as soon as may be" in the
first part in relation to communicating the grounds and allowing the detenu "the
earliest opportunity" of availing of the right to submit a representation. Thus, the
significance of Article 22 of the Constitution is that representation submitted by
detenu must be disposed of at an early date. The communication of grounds of
detention, as soon as may be, and the affording of earliest opportunity to submit a
representation against the order of detention will have no constitutional significance
unless detaining authority deals with representation and communicates its decision
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 3
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
with expedition.
8. Section 13 J&K Public Safety Act contains a requirement that when a person is detained in
pursuance of a detention order, the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but
ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded
in writing, not later than ten days from the date of detention communicate to him, in the language
which is understandable to him the grounds on which the order has been made, and shall afford him
the earliest opportunity of making a representation, against the order to the Government.
9. Article 22(5) of the Constitution provides for communication of grounds on which order of
detention is made by detaining authority "as soon as may be". Section 13 (1) of the Act uses the
expression "as soon as may be", qualifying it with the requirement that the communication of
grounds should ordinarily not be later than five days and, in exceptional circumstances, for reasons
to be recorded in writing not later than ten days from the date of detention. Section 8(1) of the Act,
thus, also embodies the second requirement of Article 22(5) of affording to detenu the earliest
opportunity of making a representation against the order to the appropriate government.
10. Article 22(5) of the Constitution reflects keen awareness of the framers of the Constitution that
preventive detention leads to the detention of a person without trial and, therefore, it incorporates
procedural safeguards which mandate immediacy in terms of time. The significance of Article 22 is
that the representation which has been submitted by detenu must be disposed of at an early date.
The communication of grounds of detention, as soon as may be, and affording of earliest
opportunity to submit a representation against order of detention will have no Constitutional
significance unless detaining authority deals with representation and communicates its decision
with expedition.
11. The Supreme Court in the case of Jayanarayan Sukul (supra) laid emphasis on the expeditious
consideration of the representation by the appropriate government. The Supreme Court held that
there was an inordinate delay in considering representation of petitioner. It was observed:
"18. It is established beyond any measure of doubt that the appropriate authority is
bound to consider the representation of the detenu as early as possible. The
appropriate Government itself is bound to consider the representation as
expeditiously as possible. The reason for immediate consideration of the
representation is too obvious to be stressed. The personal liberty of a person is at
stake. Any delay would not only be an irresponsible act on the part of the appropriate
authority but also unconstitutional because the Constitution enshrines the
fundamental right of a detenu to have his representation considered and it is
imperative that when the liberty of a person is in peril immediate action should be
taken by the relevant authorities.
.......
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 4
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
20. Broadly stated, four principles are to be followed in regard to representation of
detenu. First, the appropriate authority is bound to give an opportunity to the detenu
to make a representation and to consider the representation of the detenu as early as
possible. Secondly, the consideration of the representation of the detenu by the
appropriate authority is entirely independent of any action by the Advisory Board
including the consideration of the representation of the detenu by the Advisory
Board. Thirdly, there should not be any delay in the matter of consideration. It is true
that no hard and fast rule can be laid down as to the measure of time taken by the
appropriate authority for consideration but it has to be remembered that the
Government has to be vigilant in the governance of the citizens. A citizen's right
raises a correlative duty of the State. Fourthly, the appropriate Government is to
exercise its opinion and judgment on the representation before sending the case
along with the detenu's representation to the Advisory Board." (emphasis supplied)
12. As has been held by the Supreme Court in Jayanarayan Sukul (supra), four principles are
required to be followed with respect to representation of a detenu. First, appropriate authority is
bound to give an opportunity to detenu to make a representation and to consider it as early as
possible. Secondly, consideration of detenu(cid:129)s representation by appropriate authority is entirely
independent of any action by Advisory Board including consideration of representation of detenu by
Advisory Board. Thirdly, there should not be any delay in the matter of consideration and it has to
be remembered that Government has to be vigilant in governance of citizens. A citizen(cid:129)s right raises
a correlative duty of the State.
13. In the case of Ankit Ashok Jalan (supra) it was observed by the Supreme Court that
consideration of representation(s) by appropriate Government and by Advisory Board would always
be qualitatively different and the power of consideration by appropriate Government must be
completely independent of any action by Advisory Board. In the case of Pankaj Kumar Chakrabarty
(supra) it was stated by the Supreme Court that the obligation on the part of the Government to
consider representation would be irrespective of whether the representation was made before or
after the case was referred to the Advisory Board. Any delay in consideration of representation
would not only be an irresponsible act on the part of appropriate authority but also
14. In Sarabjeet Singh Mokha v. District Magistrate Jabalpur and others reported in (2021) 20 SCC
98, the Supreme Court has reproduced certain observations made by the Supreme Court on the
consideration of representation by appropriate government and by the Advisory Board in Ankit
Ashok Jalan (supra), which are reproduced hereunder:
"39. In a recent decision of a three judge Bench of this Court in Ankit Ashok Jalan v.
Union of India51, Justice UU Lalit revisited the body of precedent on the subject and
noticed the qualitative difference between the consideration of a representation by
the appropriate government on the one hand and by the Advisory Board on the other.
Justice UU Lalit, speaking for himself and Justice Indu Malhotra (with Justice
Hemant Gupta dissenting52) observed:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 5
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
"16. These decisions clearly laid down that the consideration of representations by
the appropriate Government and by the Board would always be qualitatively different
and the power of consideration by the appropriate Government must be completely
independent of any action by the Advisory Board. In para 12 of the decision in Pankaj
Kumar Chakrabarty [Pankaj Kumar Chakrabarty v. State of W.B., (1969) 3 SCC 400 :
(1970) 1 SCR 543] it was stated that the obligation on the part of the Government to
consider representation would be irrespective of whether the representation was
made before or after the case was referred to the Advisory Board. As stated in para
18, this was stated so, as any delay in consideration of the representation would not
only be an irresponsible act on the part of the appropriate authority but also
unconstitutional. The contingency whether the representations were received before
or after was again considered in para 29 of the decision in Haradhan Saha [Haradhan
Saha v. State of W.B., (1975) 3 SCC 198 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 816] ."
Justice UU Lalit categorized the different stages for when a representation is received and disposed,
with the underlying principle that the representation must be expeditiously disposed of, at every
stage:
"17. In terms of these principles, the matter of consideration of representation in the
context of reference to the Advisory Board, can be put in the following four
categories:
17.1. If the representation is received well before the reference is made to the
Advisory Board and can be considered by the appropriate Government, the
representation must be considered with expedition. Thereafter the representation
along with the decision taken on the representation shall be forwarded to and must
form part of the documents to be placed before the Advisory Board.
17.2. If the representation is received just before the reference is made to the
Advisory Board and there is not sufficient time to decide the representation, in terms
of law laid down in Jayanarayan Sukul [Jayanarayan Sukul v. State of W.B., (1970) 1
SCC 219 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 92] and Haradhan Saha [Haradhan Saha v. State of W.B.,
(1975) 3 SCC 198 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 816] the representation must be decided first and
thereafter the representation and the decision must be sent to the Advisory Board.
This is premised on the principle that the consideration by the appropriate Government is
completely independent and also that there ought not to be any delay in consideration of the
representation.
17.3. If the representation is received after the reference is made but before the matter is decided by
the Advisory Board, according to the principles laid down in Haradhan Saha [Haradhan Saha v.
State of W.B., (1975) 3 SCC 198 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 816], the representation must be decided. The
decision as well as the representation must thereafter be immediately sent to the Advisory Board.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 6
Tufail Ahmad Zargar vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 18 September, 2025
17.4. If the representation is received after the decision of the Advisory Board, the decisions are clear
that in such cases there is no requirement to send the representation to the Advisory Board. The
representation in such cases must be considered with expedition.
15. In the case in hand, it is an admitted position that representations had been made by detenu
through his father to respondent no.1 & 2 which, according to respondents, were rejected. However,
there is nothing on record to show that rejection of representations has been forthwith
communicated to detenu/petitioner inasmuch as the rejection of representation, according to
counsel for petitioner, has come to fore only when respondents filed their counter. It is pertinent to
mention here that it is not only consideration and/or rejection of representation of detenu, but it is
important to communicate such a rejection with reasons to detenu/petitioner. In the event there is
any delay in supplying/ communicating the order of rejection of the representation to the
detenu/petitioner, it would also cause prejudice to the detenu as he would be deprived of his right to
seek remedy vis-à-vis the order of rejection, which may prove fatal to the order of preventive
detention. Thus, it is fundamental to interfere with the order of detention in view of failure of
respondents to communicate rejection of representation to detenu/petitioner inasmuch as
non-communication and/or delay in communication of rejection of representation to
detenu/petitioner forms a part of infraction on detenu(cid:129)s constitutional right under Article 22(4) of
the Constitution of India. Reference is made to Biren Dutta v. Chief Commissioner of Tripura, AIR
1965 SC 596; State of Punjab v. Sukhpal Singh, (1990) 1 SCC 35; and Khaja Bilal Ahmed v. State of
Telangana, 2020 (13) SCC 596.
16. For the reasons discussed above, the detention Order no. 17/DMA/PSA/DET/2024 dated
20.05.2024, passed by District Magistrate, Anantnag, is quashed. Respondents, including
Superintendent Jail concerned, are directed to release the detenu forthwith, provided he is not
required in any other case.
17. Disposed of.
18. Registry to return the detention record to learned counsel for respondents.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 18.09.2025 (Qazi Amjad, Secy) Whether approved for
reporting? No 24.09.2025 16:09 HCP no.4/2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138851836/ 7
