U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
Author: Chief Justice
Bench: Chief Justice
Sr. No. 28
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CJ Court
LPA No. 160/2023
CAV No. 1484/2023
U.T. of J&K .....Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Amit Gupta, AAG.
v/s
Vinay Mahajan .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. K.S. Johal, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Navyug Sethi, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
ORDER(ORAL)
13.09.2023 N. KOTISWAR SINGH-CJ With the appearance of counsel for the caveator, the caveat
stands discharged.
1. This appeal has been preferred against the order dated 04.08.2023 passed by the learned Single
Judge in CM No. 4184/2023 arising out of WP(C) No. 1798/2023 in which the learned Single Judge
held that a prima facie case has been made out for passing an interim order and, accordingly, passed
the same, relevant part of which reads as follows:-
"12. Prima facie case is made out for interim relief, accordingly, it is directed that
pending final adjudication of the writ petition, the operation of the impugned order is
stayed. The premises of the clinic of the petitioner shall be de-sealed. With respect to
the items seized and sealed as per Seizure Memo concerning decoy operation, the
item no. 17 which is an Ultrasound Equipment, item no. 16 i.e. Currency Notes
amounting to (cid:128)20,000/- and the documents enlisted from item no. 1 to 15 shall be
released in favour of the petitioner subject to furnishing of an undertaking by the
petitioner that none of these released items except currency shall be disposed of,
wasted, destroyed or in any manner injured and further to produce any or all of such
items at any appropriate of time in the course of proceedings as may come to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 1
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
resumed in connection with the present case."
2. The said writ petition was filed by the present caveator-respondent, who is the proprietor of a
Clinic known as 'Karuna Ultrasound Centre', Kachi Chawni, Jammu. The respondent is running this
Clinic since 1995 onwards after having obtained necessary permission from the competent
authority. It has been submitted that purportedly on the basis of a sting operation conducted at the
Clinic of the petitioner on 06.07.2023 by the Chief Medical Officer, who was stated to be the District
Appropriate Authority, in collaboration with a team constituted by the Director, Health and Family
Welfare, Punjab, comprising of District Family Welfare Officer, Ludhiana, Gurdarspur, Pathankot,
an order was passed by the Chief Medical Officer, Jammu, suspending the registration of the Clinic
with immediate effect vide order No. DAA/PCPNDT/CMO-J/2023/418-22 dated 06.07.2023 which
was the subject matter of challenge in the writ petition.
The plea taken by the petitioner was that such a decoy operation was conducted without the
knowledge of the petitioner and without giving any opportunity of being heard and the team seized a
number of articles including certain equipments mentioned in the seizure memo without any
authority.
3. It was alleged by the petitioner that the entire decoy operation was illegal inasmuch as it was
conducted by an incompetent authority in contravention of the provisions of the Pre-Conception
and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (for short the 'Act').
According to the petitioner, only the 'Appropriate Authority' constituted under Section 17 of the
aforesaid Act was competent to undertake such an operation and, in the present case, according to
the petitioner, the Appropriate Authority has to consist of three members headed by an Officer of
the Health and Family Welfare as Chairperson, and two other members, namely, i.e., an eminent
women representing women's organization and an officer of Law Department of the State or the
Union Territory as provided under Section 17(3) of the Act. It has been submitted that in the present
case as the said raid was conducted by the Chief Medical Officer (CMO), who is not the Appropriate
Authority under Section 17 of the Act, the entire operation was illegal and consequently, the order of
suspension of the registration of the petitioner's Clinic was also illegal.
4. Another plea taken is that since the operation was conducted without giving a notice to the
petitioner, it was clearly in violation of the principles of natural justice. Further, the raid was
conducted with an involvement of authorities of another State which was impermissible.
5. Learned Single Judge after hearing the parties was of the prima facie view that a reading of
Section 17(3) of the Act would indicate that the Appropriate Authority has to comprise of three
members which is not only in respect of the whole of the State or Union Territory but also in respect
of a part of the State or Union Territory. The learned Single Judge was also of the view that even if
the CMO was claiming to be the Appropriate Authority under Section 17(3)(b) of the Act, the same
cannot be considered to be correct, inasmuch as, even for Appropriate Authority for a District of the
Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir as contemplated under Section 17(3)(b) of the Act, such an
Appropriate Authority has to consist of three members as in the case of Section 17(3)(a) of the Act
which provides for the whole of the State or Union Territory .
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 2
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
6. Learned Single Judge took the view that the difference between Clauses
(a) and (b) of Sub-Section 3 of Section 17 of the Act was that in respect of the Appropriate Authority
for the whole of the State or Union Territory it has to be headed by an officer of the rank of or the
above of the rank of Joint Director of Health, whereas, in respect of a part of Union Territory or
State, the officer leading may be of any rank as the State Government or the Central Government
notify as it may deem fit. However, the remaining two members have to be there also even in the
case of an Appropriate Authority for a part of the Union Territory as provided under Clause (b) of
Sub- Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act.
7. Learned Senior Counsel for the caveator also seeks to impress upon us that the learned Single
Judge also made the observation correctly that any course of action under the Act by an Appropriate
Authority is appealable under Section 21 of the Act before an appellate authority, which for the
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir has till so far not been constituted. Accordingly, learned
Single Judge was satisfied that a prima facie case was made out for passing the interim order as
mentioned above.
8. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, however, has strenuously argued before us that what
Section 17 of the Act contemplates is two kinds of authorities, one for the entire State or Union
Territory as provided under Clause (a) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 and, another, for the part of
the State or Union Territory, as contemplated under Clause (b) of Section 17(3) of the Act. It has
been submitted that in respect of the Appropriate Authority for the entire UT covered by Clause(a)
of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act that has to be a multi-member authority. However, no
such multi-member composition is contemplated when it refers to an Appropriate Authority in
respect of a part of the Union Territory, which includes a District. It has been submitted that the
learned Single Judge has made an error in reading into the provisions of Sub-Clause (a) to
Sub-Clause(b) and, in fact, the Central Government has already notified the composition of the
Appropriate Authorities in respect of the entire Union Territory of J&K as well as for the Districts.
In respect of the entire Union Territory of J&K, the same consists of the Joint Director of Health and
Family Welfare Services, an officer of Law Department of Jammu & Kashmir and an eminent
women representing Women's Organization as provided under Gazette Notification dated
15.11.2022 issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health and Family
Welfare. Vide the same Gazette Notification, in respect of the Appropriate Authority for a District,
the Appropriate Authority is the Chief Medical Officer and, as such, in view of the aforesaid Gazette
Notification, a different view could not have been taken by the learned Single Judge.
9. As regards alleged violation of the principles of natural justice, it has been submitted on behalf of
the appellant that since Section 21 of the Act does not contemplate giving of a notice, the same was
not required. It has been accordingly, submitted that there is no illegality in the order of suspension
of the registration of the petitioner's Clinic passed by the authority in terms of Act vide order dated
06.07.2023 and, as such, the interim order passed by the learned Single Judge is required to be set
aside.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 3
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
10. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the caveator on the other hand has strenuously argued
before us that reading of Section 17 of the Act would clearly indicate that the Appropriate Authority
even for a part of the Union Territory/State has to be a multi-member authority. The only difference
is that in respect to the Appropriate Authority in respect of the entire Union Territory, the officer
heading shall be of the rank of Joint Director or an officer above their rank with the other two
members mentioned under Clause
(a) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17, and in respect of Appropriate Authority for a part of Union
Territory, the said officer heading the team can be even below the rank of Joint Director as the
Central Government may deem fit. Otherwise, even for an Appropriate Authority for a District, the
Appropriate Authority has to consist of at least three members and, as such, the view of the learned
single Judge cannot be said to be perverse.
11. It has also been strenuously argued that whenever the provision of a statute is silent on giving
notice for hearing, it has to be read into such provision. It has been submitted that though
Sub-Section 3 of Section 20 of the Act does not mention of giving of prior notice of hearing, it has to
be assumed to be part of the said Section and, as such, before the Appropriate Authority issues any
such order of suspension, the petitioner ought to have been given a prior notice/hearing. Further,
referring to Section 30 of the aforesaid Act, it has been submitted that the provisions of Code of
Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.) also have to be followed, but in the present case, the seizure was
without following the due process as mentioned under Cr.P.C. and Section 30 of the Act.
12. Learned Senior Counsel for the caveator-respondent submits that the matter is already fixed for
final consideration on 19.10.2023 and hence it can be finally disposed of after hearing the parties by
the learned Single Judge and as such, this Court may not, at this stage, interfere with the interim
order passed by the learned Single Judge which is based on prima facie satisfaction. The said prima
facie satisfaction of the learned Single Judge, which is a possible view of the law, may not be
interfered by this Court.
13. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the materials on record, it
appears that the issue revolves around proper understanding of Section 17 of the Act, as well as the
issue of violation of principles of natural justice.
14. At the first instance, we will be dealing with the scope of Section 17 of the Act on which the
learned Single Judge has given his view as can be seen from the impugned order, which has been
supported by learned Senior Counsel for the caveator.
The composition of the 'Appropriate Authority' is mentioned in Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the
Act, the relevant portions of which read as follows:-
"17. (1) The Central Government shall appoint, by notification in the Official Gazette,
one or more Appropriate Authorities, for each of the Union Territories for the
purposes of this Act. (2) The State Government shall appoint, by notification in the
Official Gazette, one or more Appropriate Authorities for the whole or part of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 4
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
State for the purposes of this Act having regard to the intensity of the problem of
pre-natal sex determination leading to female foeticide.
(3) The officers appointed as Appropriate Authorities under Sub-
Section (l) or Sub-Section (2) shall be---
[(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union Territory, consisting of the following
three members---
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of Health and Family Welfare ---Chairperson:
(ii) an eminent woman representing women's organisation; and
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union Territory concerned
Provided that it shall be the duty of the State or the Union Territory concerned to
constitute multi-member State or Union territory level Appropriate Authority within
three months of the coming into force of the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Amendment Act, 2002:
Provided further that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within three
months of the occurrence.]
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union Territory, of such other
rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may
deem fit.
.................................................................."
From the above, it is clear that there are two kinds of Appropriate Authorities contemplated under
the statute, which may be constituted in a Union Territory, firstly, for the entire Union Territory
and, secondly, for any part of the UT. As regards the composition of the Appropriate Authority
which has jurisdiction for the whole of the Union Territory, it has been clearly mentioned under
Clause (a) of Sub-Section 3 of Section 17 of the Act as mentioned above, that it must have three
members, one, an officer of the rank of or above the rank of the Joint Director of Health and Family
Welfare who is the Chairperson, and two other members, one being an eminent women representing
the women's organization and the other an officer of Law Department of the Union Territory.
Clause (b) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act on the other hand deals with the Appropriate
Authority in respect of a part of the State or Union Territory in which it has been mentioned that it
can be of such other rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be,
may deem fit. However, as regard the presence of other two members, which is specifically
mentioned under Clause (a), we do not find that the same is mentioned in Clause (b) of Sub-Section
(3) of Section 17 of the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 5
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
15. The question, therefore, which arises for our consideration is whether the members mentioned
under Clause (a) can be brought in and read into Clause
(b) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act?
Learned Single Judge has taken a view that it should be brought in, as also submitted by the learned
Senior Counsel for the Caveator. However, we are doubtful as to whether such manner of
interpretation is permissible. From a reading of said Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act, there is
no such indication that the presence of other two members mentioned under Clause (a) has to be
also read in under Clause (b) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act.
In our view, such an interpretation will not be permissible when Clause (b) does not specifically so
mention, nor there is any such indication.
16. Therefore, we are of the tentative view that in respect of Appropriate Authority under Clause (b)
of Sub-Section 3 of Section 17 of the Act, the composition of the Appropriate Authority in respect of
a part of Union Territory need not consist of a three member body which would include an eminent
women and an officer of law as required for Appropriate Authority for the entire Union Territory. It
would suffice if the Appropriate Authority of a District consists only of an officer as the Government
may notify. We are of the view that the composition of the Appropriate Authorities contemplated
under Clause (b) of Sub-Section (3) of Section 17 of the Act does not postulate presence of other two
members i.e. an eminent women representing women's organization and an officer of law when it
relates to the part of the Union Territory.
17. We have also noted that the Gazette Notification dated 15.11.2022 issued by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare Department has specifically mentioned 'Appropriate Authority' in
respect of a District as the Chief Medical Officer. Hence, unless the said notification is challenged,
which has not been done in the present case, any view not in conformity with the said Notification
dated 15.11.2022, in our opinion will not be permissible.
18. Coming to the other issue of giving show cause notice to the respondent/ writ petitioner before
the operation, we are unable to agree to the submission advanced by the learned Senior Counsel for
the caveator as Sub-Section 3 of Section 20 of the Act clearly mentions that such suspension of
registration can be ordered without issuing any such notice referred in Sub-Section (1) of the said
Section.
Section 20 of the Act reads as follows:-
"20. Cancellation or suspension of registration.----(1) The Appropriate Authority may
suo motu, or on complaint, issue a notice to the Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic
to show cause why its registration should not be suspended or cancelled for the
reasons mentioned in the notice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 6
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
(2) If, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the Genetic Centre,
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic and having regard to the advise of the Advisory
Committee, the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the
provisions of this Act or the rules, it may, without prejudice to any criminal action
that it may take against such Centre.
Laboratory or Clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it may think fit or cancel its
registration, as the case may be.' (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (1) and (2),
if the Appropriate Authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public
interest, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any Genetic
Counseling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic without issuing any such notice referred to
in Sub-Section(1)"
19. Therefore, we are of the view that when the statute itself specifically provides for taking action
for cancellation or suspension of registration without issuing any show cause notice, we cannot read
into this provision a requirement for prior notice.
20. As regards the seizures made under Section 30 of the Act, the Section also does not provide for
issuing any prior notice before any search and seizure is conducted in any of the premises of the
Genetic Counseling Centre, Laboratory of Genetic Clinic etc.
21. Under these circumstances, we are of the view that the order dated 04.08.2023 passed by the
learned single judge in staying the operation of the suspension of the registration certificate, is not
warranted at this stage. Similarly, the direction to de-seal the premises of the respondent and
releasing of articles mentioned in Seizure Memo, viz. item nos. 1 to 16, is also not be warranted at
this stage, which can be released in favour of the writ petition after final adjudication in matter if
found unjustified. For similar reasons, the release of currency notes amounting to (cid:128) 20,000/- is also
stayed, as this may be required for proper investigation of the matter.
22. For the reasons stated above, we are inclined to allow the present appeal by setting aside the
order passed by the learned Single Judge on 04.08.2023 in CM No. 4184/2023 staying the
suspension of the registration certificate of the petitioner's Clinic and release of the seized articles.
23. However, we make it clear that the view expressed by us is a tentative view of the provisions of
Section 17 of the Act as we are dealing with the view of the learned Single Judge while passing the
impugned interim order. Resultantly, the learned Single Judge will be free to pass appropriate
orders finally after hearing the parties after pleadings are complete, uninfluenced by the
observations made by us in this Letters Patent Appeal, as regards the composition of the
Appropriate Authority for a District and the legality of the suspension of the registration of the
Clinic of the petitioner and other related issues at the time of the final disposal of the writ petition.
24. Considering the fact that the registration granted to the respondent - petitioner for running his
Clinic has been suspended vide order dated 06.07.2023, we would request the learned Single Judge
to take up the matter expeditiously on the mentioning of the parties.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 7
U.T. Of J&K vs Vinay Mahajan on 13 September, 2023
25. The instant Letters Patent Appeal is, accordingly, allowed and disposed of.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (N.KOTISWAR SINGH)
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
JAMMU
13.09.2023
SUNITA/PS
WHETHER THE ORDER IS REPORTABLE. YES/NO.
WHETHER THE ORDER IS SPEAKING. YES
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10985933/ 8
