Ukhrul District Taxi Welfare Assn vs State Of Manipur & Ors on 3 September, 2024
Ukhrul District Taxi Welfare Assn vs State Of Manipur & Ors on
3 September, 2024
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
IN. 95
SHOUGRAKPAM Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANANDA SINGH
SINGH Date: 2024.09.03 15:32:34 +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 13 of 2020
Ukhrul District Taxi Welfare Assn. ... Petitioner
Vs.
State of Manipur & ors. ... Respondents
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
O R D E R
03-09-2024 [1] Heard Mr. M. Hemchandra, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. Rinika Maibam,
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. Th. Vashum, learned GA appearing for the
respondents No. 1 to 3, 5 and 6 and Mr. Wungpam Yangya, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent No. 4.
The present petition has been filed with the prayer, inter alia, for quashing and setting aside the
impugned Certificate of Registration issued in favour of the respondent No. 4.
[2] It has been submitted by Mr. M. Hemchandra, learned senior counsel that Section 10 of the
Manipur Societies Registration Act, 1989 provides that no society shall be registered under a name
which is identical with or too nearly resembles, the name of any other society or any body corporate
which has been previously registered or incorporated under the Act or any other law for the time
being in force, as the case may be, or is deemed to have been registered under the Act..
[3] The learned senior counsel submitted that in the present case, the petitioner society was
registered under the Manipur Societies Registration Act and Registration Certificate dated
27-02-2009 was issued in their favour. However, in the case of the respondent No. 4, the
respondent No. 4 society was registered under the Manipur Societies Registration Act and
Certificate of such registration was issued only on 23-06-2018, much after the registration of the
petitioner society. Having WP(C) No. 13 of 2020 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113014229/ 1
Ukhrul District Taxi Welfare Assn vs State Of Manipur & Ors on 3 September, 2024
being aggrieved, the petitioner has already submitted a representation dated 06-08-2018 to the
Registrar of Societies, Manipur, with a request for initiating an enquiry under Section 22 of the said
Act and to take an action as per the provisions of the Act.
[4] It has also been submitted that the Registrar have made several efforts for an amicable
settlement between the disputing parties, however, no positive result has been achieved as yet.
The learned senior counsel pointed out that under Section 11 of the Manipur Societies Registration
Act, 1989, it is, inter alia, provided that if a society is registered under a name, or alters its name to
another, name which in the opinion of the State Government is identical with or too nearly
resembles the name of any other society or body corporate which have been previously registered,
the State Government may by order made in this behalf direct such society to change its name and
alter its memorandum within three months from the date of order or such longer period as the State
Government may think fit to allow.
[5] It has been submitted by the learned senior counsel that as the Government is empowered to
take necessary action as provided under Section 11, the writ petitioner be given liberty to approach
the competent authority of the State Government by filing a fresh representation to redress its
grievances as provided under Section 11 of the Act within a stipulated period and the competent
authority be directed to consider and dispose of such representation within a stipulated period. It
has further been submitted that by passing such an order, the present writ petition can be disposed
of.
[6] Mr. Th. Vashum, learned GA appearing for the official respondents submitted that he has no
objection in disposing of the present writ petition as prayed for by the learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioner, however, it has been submitted by the learned GA that if such a
representation is to be filed, the said representation be addressed to the Commissioner/ Secretary
(Coop.), Government of Manipur.
WP(C) No. 13 of 2020 Contd.../-
Mr. Wungpam Yangya, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 4 also fairly submitted
that he has no objection in disposing of the present writ petition as prayed for on behalf of the
petitioner.
[7] Taking into consideration the submissions advanced by the counsel appearing for the parties,
this court is of the considered view that interest of justice will be served by passing the following
directions:-
(i) Petitioner is given liberty to approach the Commissioner/ Secretary (Coop.),
Government of Manipur by filing a detailed representation to redress its grievances
in terms of Section 11 of the Manipur Societies Registration Act. Such representation
should be filed within a period of two weeks from today;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113014229/ 2
Ukhrul District Taxi Welfare Assn vs State Of Manipur & Ors on 3 September, 2024
(ii) In the event of filing such a representation by the petitioner within the stipulated
period, the Commissioner/ Secretary (Coop.), Government of Manipur, is hereby
directed to consider such representation on its own merit and strictly in terms of the
provisions of the Manipur Societies Registration Act and Rules made thereunder as
well as the Standing Order issued by the Government and to dispose of the same by
passing a speaking order within a period of three months from the date of receipt of
the said representation; and
(iii) Needless to mention here that at the time of consideration of the representation
submitted by the petitioner, the Commissioner/ Secretary (Coop.), Government of
Manipur, is directed to issue notice to the respondent No. 4 and to give a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition is disposed of.
JUDGE
Devananda
WP(C) No. 13 of 2020 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113014229/ 3
