Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
Page |1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(Crl) No. 56/2022
Reserved on: 23.02.2023
Pronounced on: 28.02.202
Umar Jan
...Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr.Arshid Majid Malik , Advocate.
Vs.
Union Territory of J&K & Anr.
...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner in the instant petition has been taken into preventive custody under Section 3 of the
Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (for short 'the
Act') read with SRO 247 dated 27.07.1988 in terms of the order of detention bearing No. PITNDPS
13 of 2022 dated 17.09.2022 (for short 'the impugned order).
2. The order of detention is challenged by the petitioner ( hereinafter called detenue) through the
medium of this petition on the following grounds:-
i. That the detaining authority, respondent no. 2 had given reference of FIRs bearing
No. 292/2016, 279/2018, 266/2021, 468/2021 of Police Station Udhampur and One
DDR No. 10.09.2022 of Police Post Ropun Domail, Udhampur in a very casual
manner in the grounds of detention and come to the Page |2 conclusion that the
petitioner is a drug peddler. There is no mention with regard to the status of the
aforementioned FIRs registered against the detenue and it is also not mentioned by
the detaining authority in the grounds of detention that bail in the aforementioned
FIRs was granted to the petitioner or not. As a matter of fact the petitioner stands
already bailed out in the aforementioned false FIRs and the respondent no. 2 is silent
on this aspect as to why detenue is required to be detained despite bail(s) granted by
the Court.
ii. That the respondent No. 2 (Detaining Authority) had not mentioned the period of
which the petitioner has been detained. The bare perusal of the impugned detention
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 1
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
order shows that petitioner has been detained forever; therefore the detention order
is without application of mind and according to the settled law, this type of lapse is a
criminal negligence. Further the case of the detenu was never referred to the Advisory
Board and this illegality is enough to set aside the detention of the petitioner. iii.
That, the grounds of detention have been prepared on the basis of police dossier and
the detaining authority has not applied its mind while passing the detention order
and the detention order is replica of the dossier, as such, on this count the order of
detention is bad in law and deserves to be set aside.
Page |3 iv. The detenue was never supplied with the copies of FIRs, Recovery memos,
statements if any, recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC and other relevant material
collected by the police during investigation in the aforementioned FIRs and DDR
report on the basis of which the impugned detention order has been passed and in
view of this the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
v. That the detenue is semi literate, whileas the order of detention is in hyper
technical language and same is beyond the knowledge of the detenue, the detention
order has neither been read over to the detenue in the language which he
understands nor the translated script was furnished to him.
vi. That, even otherwise also the alleged recovery from the detenue does not fall in the
category of commercial quantity but the detenue was booked under NDPS Act and
has not even applied for bail and there was no justification for passing the detention
order.
vii. That, as per the detention order it is stated that the detenue was providing drugs
with an established network of drug peddlers in District Udhampur but no instances
have been provided to when he has provided the drugs nor he has been provided with
the copies of FIRs and in Page |4 absence of such material including the statements
recorded under Section 161 CrPC, recovery of illicit trafficking of narcotic substances
and in absence of such a material the detenue could not make an effective
representation and as such the detention order is bad in law and deserves to be set
aside. viii. That, to the knowledge of the detenue the detention order has not been
executed as per the provisions of Public Safety Act and the detenue has not been
asked to make a representation against his detention order, as such, on this count
also the detention order is bad in law and deserves to be set aside.
ix. That, the right to liberty is a precious right and the same cannot be taken away by
passing detention order on the whims and caprices of the detaining authority, as
such, the detention order is illegal and renders to be set aside. x. The detenue was not
provided any material which enables him to file an effective representation before the
respondents No. 1 & 2, even then the detenu has filed a respresentation dated
12.10.2022 addressed to respondents 1 & 2 seeking withdrawal of his detention Order
No. PITNDPS 13 of 2022 dated 17.09.2022 whereby the detenu was detained Page |5
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 2
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
under the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance
Act, 1988 but the representation remain unattended. On this ground also the
detention is bad in law.
3. Learned counsel for the detenue in addition to the grounds of detention of which reference is
found in the petition has also made mention as to how counter affidavit filed by respondent No.2 is
suggestive of the fact that the order impugned is bad. He has referred to Paras 3 of the said counter
affidavit that the respondent No. 2 ( Detaining Authority) has power under section 3 of PITNDPS
Act, 1988 r/w SRO 247 dated 27.07.1988 to detain the detenue namely Umar Jan who is a habitual
drug peddler and is involved in number of cases in Narcotoc Drugs and Psychotropic Substances as
such a number of FIRs have been registered against him in District Udhampur and is serious threat
to the health and welfare of the people of District Udhampur and other adjoining areas. This illicit
traffic has a harmful affect not only on the economy but is also responsible for spoiling the lives of
hundreds of Youth. However, according to the learned counsel for the detenue there is no scope for
treating the same as clerical error, as the liberty of a person is involved and same has to be done in
accordance with the procedure established under law.
4. One more plea taken by learned counsel for the detenue is about the vagueness in the grounds of
detention. It is being stated that the detenue is exploiting the young generation making them
dependent on drugs and to make them habitual addicts, is not Page |6 being explained, thereby
incapacitating the detenue to make an effective representation in terms of Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India.
5. Heard and considered.
6. The grounds of detention formulated by the detaining authority inter alia would show that the
detenue was a member of habitual drug peddler working in district Udhampur, which was involved
in procuring, transporting and sale of psychotropic substances. According to the detaining authority
the detenue has spoiled the future of youth of the area by supplying them narcotic drugs leading and
posing a serious threat to the lives of young generation of the youth and even to the economy of the
UT of J&K. Accordingly, he was apprehended. The detaining authority was, thus, of the opinion that
it has become imperative to detain the detenue in preventive detention with a view to prevent him
from further committing any offence under the provisions of the NDPS Act.
7. It is true that the allegations leveled against the detenue that he was involved in exploiting the
young generation by making them drug addicts, is all vague and in such situation the detenue would
not be in a position to submit a meaningful representation before the detaining authority or the
competent authority to have a fresh look into the matter. Vagueness does invalidate the detention
order in the circumstance. In this regard reliance can be taken on the judgment of'Chaju Ram Vs.
State of J&K, AIR 1971 SC 263', wherein it has been observed and enunciated that:-
Page |7 "Even as to the grounds, we have something to say. The grounds charge him
with having conspired with some leaders of Democratic Conference and having
incited landless people of R.S Pura Tehsil to forcibly occupy the land comprised in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 3
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
Nandpur Mechanised Farm and to have persuaded them to resist violently any
attempt to evict them. No details of the leaders of the Conference or of the persons
incited or the dates on which he conspired or incited the squatters or the time when
such conference took place, are mentioned. It would be impossible for anybody to
make a representation against such grounds. These grounds, on the authorities of
this Court, too numerous to be cited here, must be held to be vague. Therefore on
both the twin grounds, namely, that he was deprived of his right to make a
representation and also because the grounds in themselves were very vague, we must
hold that there was no compliance with the law as laid down in the Jammu and
Kashmir Preventive Detention Act. The result, therefore, is that the detention must
be declared to be unlawful and Chaju must be declared to be entitled to his liberty.
He is ordered to be released. The detenu was questioned by us and he expressed a
desire that he may not be released in Delhi, because he has no means of going back.
He asked to be released in Jammu. We direct therefore that he shall be taken back to
the place where he was in detention in Jammu and released within the shortest
possible time."
8. On perusal of detention record, execution report, whereby detention order was executed by PSI
Akhliesh Khajuria, reveals that detenue was provided detention order, notice of detention, grounds
of detention only on 22.09.2022, but dossier, copies of FIRs, statements of witnesses and other
relevant documents were with held. Respondents have failed to supply the dossier, FIR and other
record of the case, based whereupon the order of detention had been passed to detain the detenue.
The detenue has thus, been prevented from making an effective and meaningful representation in
accordance with law and his rights under Article Page |8 22 of the Constitution of India, again
lending substance to the challenge to the detention order.
9. So far as the contours of this requirement and sufficient compliance thereof is concerned, reliance
can be placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as'AIR 1999 SC 3051 Sophia Gulam
Mohd. Bham, vs. State of Maharashtra'. Paras12, 13, and 14 of the same read as under :
"12. The detenu was thus informed that he has a right not only to make a
representation to the Detaining Authority against the order of detention but also to
the State Government and the Central Government.
13. Now, an effective representation can be made against the order of detention only
when copies of the material documents which were considered and relied upon by the
Detaining Authority in forming his opinion that the detention of Bham Faisal Gulam
Mohammed was necessary, were supplied to him. It is only when he has looked into
those documents, read and understood their contents that it can be said that the
detenu can make an effective representation to the Detaining Authority, State or
Central Government, as laid down in Article 22 (5) of the Constitution which provides
as under :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 4
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
"When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under any law
providing for preventive detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon as
may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made
and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the
order."
14. The above will show that when a person is detained in pursuance of an order made for preventive
detention, he has to be provided the grounds on which the order was made. He has also to be
afforded the earliest opportunity of making a representation against that order. Both the
requirements have to be complied with by the Page |9 authorities making the order of detention.
These are the rights guaranteed to the person detained by this clause of Article 22 and if any of the
rights is violated, in the sense that either the grounds are not communicated or opportunity of
making a representation is not afforded at the earliest, the detention order would become bad. The
use of the words "as soon as may be" indicate a positive action on the part of the Detaining Authority
in supplying the grounds of detention. There should not be any delay in supplying the grounds on
which the order of detention was based to the detenu. The use of the words "earliest opportunity"
also carry the same philosophy that there should not be any delay in affording an adequate
opportunity to the detenu of making a representation against the order of detention. The right to be
communicated the grounds of detention flows from Article 22(5) while the right to be supplied all
the material on which the grounds are based flows from the right given to the detenu to make a
representation against the order of detention. A representation can be made and the order of
detention can be assailed only when all the grounds on which the order is based are communicated
the detenu and the material on which those grounds are based are also disclosed and copies thereof
are supplied to the person detained, in his own language."
10. Reproducing the dossier prepared by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Udhampur the order
of detention, almost word by word; non furnishing of the whole of the material on which detention
order was based; furnishing the material in English and not the language of the detenue; and not
informing detenue of the time limit in which detenue could make representation before the
Detaining Authority or the Government, all reflect that the Detaining Authority has not applied its
mind to draw the subjective satisfaction to detain the detenue. The detenue, as such, has been
deprived of his fundamental right to P a g e | 10 make effective and meaningful representation
against the detention order to the Detaining Authority and the government rendering the same as
illegal and unsustainable.
11. Admittedly, as is evident from the copy of representation dated 12.10.2022 which has been sent
to the respondent detaining authority on 20.10.2022 through registered post, the detenu had filed
the representation against his detention and the same was not considered by the respondent(s) till
date, inasmuch as, there is no mention with regard to the said representation in the counter affidavit
filed by the respondents. In these circumstances, this Court is left with no option, but to accept the
stand of the petitioner that he has moved representations against his detention, but the same has
not been considered.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 5
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
12. Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, casts legal obligation on the Government to consider
the detenue's representation as early as possible. It is the bounden duty of the detaining Authority or
the Government, as the case may be, to consider the representation of the detenu and pass
appropriate orders thereon. There should be no slackness, indifference and callous attitude in
consideration of the representation of the persons who are detained. Any unexplained delay would
be breach of constitutional imperative and it would render the continued detention of the detenu as
illegal. Every day delay in dealing with the representation has to be explained and the explanation
offered must be reasonably indicating that there was no slackness or indifference.
P a g e | 11
13. In Tara Chand vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., 1980 (2) SCC 321, Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
that any inordinate and unexplained delay on the part of the Government in considering the
representation renders the very detention illegal. The Supreme Court in another case Rahmatullah
vs State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 2069 has held that clause (5) of Article 22 by necessary implication
guarantees the constitutional right to a proper consideration of the representation. The obligation of
the Government to afford to the detenu an opportunity to make representation is distinct from the
Government's obligation to refer the case of the detenu along with representation to the Advisory
Board to enable it to form its opinion and send a report to the Government. Therefore, it is implicit
in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22 that the Government, while discharging its duty to consider the
representation, cannot depend upon the views of the Board on such representation. It has to
consider the representation on its own without being influenced by any such view of the Board. The
Supreme Court in the case of Kundanbhai Dulabhai Sheikh vs. District Magistrate Ahmedabad &
Ors. 1996 Crl.L.J 1981 quashed the detention order only on the ground of delay in disposing of the
representation. Having gone through the observations of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases,
this court is of the considered view that the said decisions with all fours are applicable to the instant
case. Therefore, the detention order is liable to be quashed.
14. Detention has been based on registration of four cases one each in the years 2016 and 2018 and
two in the year 2021. These P a g e | 12 cases and the detention order have no proximate link so as to
act upon to order preventive detention. On this count also the impugned detention order is not
sustainable.
15. In view of the legal position, as stated hereinabove, and in particular having regard to the fact of
non-furnishing of whole of the material, on which the detention order has been based, to the
detenue has made him disabled to make an effective and meaningful representation against the
detention order, vitiates the same which is not sustainable. The impugned order is, therefore, liable
to be quashed on these counts alone.
16. Resultantly, this petition is allowed. The impugned Detention Order bearing No. PITNDPS 13 of
2022 dated 17.09.2022, is quashed. The detenue namely Umar Jan S/O Late Aman Din R/O
Housing Colony, Udhampur Tehsil and District Udhampur, is directed to be released forthwith, if
not required in any other case(s). Detention record, as produced, be returned back to learned Dy.
AG
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 6
Umar Jan vs Union Territory Of J&K & Anr on 28 February, 2023
17. Disposed of accordingly.
Jammu
28.02.2023
Mujtaba (M A CHOWDHARY)
JUDGE
Whether the order is reportable: Yes / No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60214140/ 7
