Umesh Aggarwal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Umesh Aggarwal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on
30 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:67392
Court No. - 87
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 33449 of 2024
Applicant :- Umesh Aggarwal And 2 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Abhishek Tripathi,Mohd. Asim Zulfiquar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Prashant Kumar,J.
1. Heard Sri Abhishek Tripathi, learned counsel for the applicants, Sri S.D. Pandey, learned A.G.A.
for the State-O.P. no.1 and perused the record.
2. The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by the applicants praying for
quashing summoning order dated 29.04.2024 as well as entire proceedings of Complaint Case
no.25437 of 2023 (Smt. Anjana Saxena vs. Arun Bansal and others) u/s 406 IPC, P.S. Majhaula,
District-Moradabad pending in the Court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.6,
Moradabad.
3. Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that a complaint was lodged by O.P. no.2 claiming
himself as super stockist of Dwarika Food Products. He further submitted that applicant no.1 is
RSM, applicant no.2 is Managing Director and applicant no.3 is General Manager of the accused
company. He next submitted that as per allegations of the complaint, husband of complainant/O.P.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32358466/ 1
Umesh Aggarwal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
no.2 had purchased goods worth ?3,78,759/- on 13.11.2021 from the Dwarika Food Products. He
was diagnosed with cancer, so he requested the applicants for payment for the goods. It is further
alleged that the applicants requested the husband of O.P. no.2 to transfer the remaining goods to
A.P. Agencies on his behalf. On the behest of the applicants goods worth ?1,98,000/- were delivered
to A.P. Agencies, however, payment of only ?60,000/- has been made by the proprietor of the said
Agency and the rest amount is still outstanding. He further submitted that husband of O.P. no.2 has
passed away. Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that the outstanding amount is due with
proprietor of A.P. Agencies and the applicants has nothing to do with the said Agency. He submitted
that the applicants have never committed any offence as alleged against them. Further submission is
that in the instant matter dispute between the parties is purely civil in nature, which has been given
criminal colour by O.P. no.2, which is pure abuse of process of law and the same is liable to the set
aside.
4. Per contra, learned A.G.A. vehemently opposed the application and contended that it is only at
the instance of the applicants that the goods was transferred to A.P. Agencies and the applicants has
denied payment of money to O.P. no.2, who is a widow lady and in dire need of money. The
applicants are trying to shift the blame/liability to another company to whom the product was
passed on, on the behest of the applicants, and as such they have committed an offence u/s 406 IPC.
It is further submitted that the Court below has rightly summoned the applicants and no
interference is required by this Court in the impugned order as well as the on going proceedings.
5. From the perusal of material on record and looking into the facts of the case at this stage it cannot
be said that no offence is made out against the applicants. All the submissions made at the bar
relates to the disputed question of fact, which cannot be adjudicated upon by this Court under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. At this stage only prima facie case is to be seen in the light of the law laid down
by Supreme Court.
6. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335
has laid down the guidelines under which circumstances the Court should, in its inherent power,
entertain an application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. The guidelines are as follows:-
"(i) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(ii) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(iii) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32358466/ 2
Umesh Aggarwal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
(iv) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(v) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(vi) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the Act concerned (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the Act concerned, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
(vii) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fides and/or
where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
7. Further, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of M/s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs.
State of Maharashtra, AIR 2021 SC 1918, R.P. Kapur Vs. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 866, State
of Bihar Vs. P.P.Sharma, 1992 SCC (Cr.) 192, and lastly, Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. Vs.
Mohd. Saraful Haq and another (Para-10) 2005 SCC (Cr.) 283 has held that only those cases in
which no prima facie case is made out can be considered in an application under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
8. The instant application does not fall under the guidelines laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the judgments mentioned above, and followed in a number of matters. Moreover, the facts
as alleged cannot be said that, prima facie, no offence is made out against the applicants. It is only
after the evidence and trial, it can be seen as to whether the offence, as alleged, has been committed
or not.
9. Hence, the instant application filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. cannot be entertained and is,
accordingly, dismissed.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 Manish Himwan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32358466/ 3
