Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16
August, 2023
Bench: Tashi Rabstan, Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) No. 2103/2023
Caveat No. 1080/2023
Date of order: 16.08.2023
1. Union Territory of J&K through
Commissioner Secretary to Govt.,
Home Department, J&K, Srinagar.
2. Director General of Police, J&K, Srinagar.
3. Commandant IRP-15th Bn. Jammu
(Indian Reserve Police), Gulshan Ground,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu.
.....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG.
Vs
Smt. Reeta Dhar, Age 53 years,
Widow of Late Kuldeep Dhar,
R/o H. No. 79, Gole Sharika
Nagar, Near Peer Baba Sunder
Nagar, Talab Tillo, Jammu.
..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. H. L. Koul, Advocate for the
caveator/respondent.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE TASHI RABSTAN, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
16.08.2023 Per: Rahul Bharti-J
01. This writ petition bears an issue as to whether the government and its authorities should have a
ritualistic or a realistic mindset in the matter of medical reimbursement claims of a government
employee suffering from life threatening ailment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 1
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
02. The respondent's husband - Kuldeep Dhar was a government employee serving as
Pharmacist/Medical Assistant in the J&K Police Department who came to be diagnosed as suffering
from lung cancer which resulted in his initial treatment in the Police Hospital, Jammu, then in the
Govt. Medical College, Jammu, followed by treatment in Chest Diseases Hospital, Jammu and
finally referred to PGI, Chandigarh. The respondent's husband's life came to be consumed by the
lung cancer ailment as he came to breath his last on 13.08.2018 while in a state of hospitalization in
Mumbai.
03. In the treatment of her husband, it is claimed by the respondent that an amount of Rs.
19,00,000/- (nineteen lacs) was incurred. The respondent came to register an immediate claim for
reimbursement of an amount of Rs. 3,21,545/- in relation to the medical expenses attending the
treatment of her husband. This claim was registered by the respondent with the Commandant, IRP-
15th Bn, Jammu, the establishment in which the respondent's husband was posted.
04. Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu came to pass an Order no. Acctt/IR-15th/19/11978 dated
18.07.2019 qua the claim of reimbursement of an amount of Rs. 3,21,545/-, when an amount of Rs.
61,302/- came to be reimbursed whereas rest of the amount of Rs. 2,60,243/- was not entertained
by the Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu on the pretext that the said amount pertains to the
medical expenses incurred prior to the issuance of "Life Consuming Disease Certificate" issued in
favour of the respondent's husband and further that the said expenses were incurred in connection
with the treatment of the respondent's husband in a private hospital in Mumbai for which there was
no referral from the Govt. Chest Diseases Hospital, Jammu.
05. Suffering the denial of said reimbursement for an amount of Rs. 2,60,243/- at the end of the
Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu, the respondent came to approach this Court with a writ
petition being WP(C) no. 3322/2019 thereby seeking to declare Order no. Acctt/IR-15th/19/11978
dated 18.07.2019 passed by the Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu to the extent of rejecting
medical reimbursement claim of the respondent qua her husband as illegal and in violation of
Medical-cum-Allowance Rules of 1990 (in short "Rules of 1990"). This writ petition came to be
answered by the writ respondents which included the Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu.
06. During the pendency of this writ petition, J&K Reorganization Act, 2019 came to intervene as a
consequence whereof the jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) came to be
extended in the service matters of the employees in the J&K State Service and, as such, all the
service related matters pending in the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh came to be
transferred by Notification no. G.S.R. 317(E) dated 28.05.2020 issued by the Govt. of India thereby
directing transfer of all pending service related cases from the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and
Ladakh to the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench which resulted in transfer of
the writ petition being WP(C) no. 3322/2019 to the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu
Bench where it came to be diarized as case TA no. 1812/2020.
07. This transfer petition being TA no. 1812/2020 came to be allowed by the Central Administrative
Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench vide its judgment dated 08.09.2021 thereby directing the TA-
respondents (the petitioners herein), to release the withheld amount of Rs.2,60,243/- to the writ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 2
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
petitioner (respondent herein) within a period of 15 days with a further liberty to the TA-petitioner
(respondent herein) to prefer her claim for reimbursement of an amount of Rs. 19,02,800/- to the
TA-respondents (now the petitioners herein) by enclosing the original bills for enabling its
settlement in accordance with law, rules and guidelines on the subject.
08. It is this judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench which has been
assailed by the petitioners through the medium of the present writ petition before us.
09. Before we embark upon the examination of the legality and validity of the judgment passed by
the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench directing reimbursement of medical
claim of the respondent for an amount of Rs. 2,60,243/- and with a further liberty to the
TA-petitioner (the respondent herein) to prefer claim for an amount of Rs. 19,02,800/- supported
with original bills for the consideration of the TA-respondents (the petitioners herein) in accordance
with law, rules and guidelines on the subject, we would like to take stock of the legal position, as to
what is the nature of entitlement of a sick/ailing government employee for medical reimbursement
and how the same is to be viewed and considered. In this regard, we refer ourselves to the following
judgments to have a better clarity and understanding on the subject.
10. In the case of "Consumer Education & Research Centre and Ors Vs Union of India and Ors."
(1995) 3 SCC 42, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in para 25 has recognized right of a worker
while in service or post-retirement in the context of health and medical aid to be a fundamental
right. Para 25 is self-stating the position in this regard and, as such, reproduced as under:-
"25. Therefore, we hold that right to health, medical aid to protect the health and
vigour to a worker while in service or post-retirement is a fundamental right under
Article 21, read with Articles 39(e), 41, 43, 48- A and all related articles and
fundamental human rights to make the life of the workman meaningful and
purposeful with dignity of person."
11. In the context of availing treatment by an ailing government employee in a hospital other than
the one approved for availing medical facility with assurance of medical reimbursement, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the case of "Surjit Singh Vs State of Punjab and Ors." (1996) 2 SCC 336
has expounded nuances with which to view the cases and claims of Govt. employee for medical
reimbursement. In this regard, paras 11 & 12 commend themselves to be drawn out from the said
judgment so as to be reproduced for the sake of appreciating the perspective provided therein:-
"11. It is otherwise important to bear in mind that self-
preservation of one's life is the necessary concomitant of the right to life enshrined in
Article 21 of the Constitution of India, fundamental in nature, sacred, precious and
inviolable. The importance and validity of the duty and right to self-preservation has
a species in the right of self-defence in criminal law. Centuries ago thinkers of this
great land conceived of such right and recognized it. Attention can usefully be drawn
to Verses 17, 18, 20 and 22 in Chapter 16 of the Garuda Purana (A dialogue suggested
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 3
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
between the Divine and Garuda, the bird) in the works of the Divine:
17. Vinaa dehena kasyaap canpurushaartho na vidyate Tasmaaddeham dhanam
rakshetpunyakarmaani saadhayet Without the body how can one obtain the objects
of human life? Therefore protecting the body which is the wealth, one should perform
the deeds of merit.
18. Rakshayetsarvadaatmaanamaatmaa sarvasya bhaajanam Rakshane
yatnamaatishthejje vanbhaadraani pashyati One should protect his body which is
responsible for everything. He who protects himself by all efforts, will see many
auspicious occasions in life.
20. Sharirarakshanopaayaah kriyante sarvadaa budhaih Necchanti cha
punastyaagamapi kushthaadiroginah The wise always undertake the protective
measures for the body. Even the persons suffering from leprosy and other diseases do
not wish to get rid of the body.
22. Aatmaiva yadi naatmaanamahitebhyo nivarrayet Konsyo
hitakarastasmaadaatmaanam taarayishyati.
If one does not prevent what is unpleasant to himself, who else will do it? Therefore one should do
what is good to himself."
12. The appellant therefore had the right to take steps in self preservation. He did not have to stand
in queue before the Medical Board the manning and assembling of which, bare- facedly, makes its
meetings difficult to happen. The appellant also did not have to stand in queue in the government
hospital of AIIMS and could go elsewhere to an alternative hospital as per policy. When the State
itself has brought the Escorts on the recognised list, it is futile for it to contend that the appellant
could in no event have gone to the Escorts and his claim cannot on that basis be allowed, on
suppositions. We think to the contrary. In the facts and circumstances, had the appellant remained
in India, he could have gone to the Escorts like many others did, to save his life. But instead he has
done that in London incurring considerable expense. The doctors causing his operation they are
presumed to have done so as one essential and timely. On that hypothesis, it is fair and just that the
respondents pay to the appellant the rates admissible as per Escorts. The claim of the appellant
having been found valid, the question posed at the outset is answered in the affirmative. Of course
the sum of Rs.40,000/- already paid to the appellant would have to be adjusted in computation.
Since the appellant did not have his claim dealt with in the High Court in the manner it has been
projected now in this Court, we do not grant him any interest for the intervening period, even
though prayed for. Let the difference be paid to the appellant within two months positively. The
appeal is accordingly allowed. There need be no order as to costs.
12. In the case of "State of Punjab and Ors Vs Ram Lubhaya Bagga and Ors." (1998) 4 SCC 117, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has explored the field of state policy pertaining to the cases of
medical treatment of and reimbursement of government employee/s and pondered to justify the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 4
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
balance between the financial resources of the State as against the expenses involved in medical
treatment of govt. employee. However, the underlying spirit of the judgment urges to see that an
ailing or suffering government employee gets reimbursement even if treated in a private hospital
involving higher expenses but nevertheless equalization of expenses can be carried out but not
leaving it to the public authorities/officials to fuss about the fact of ailing/suffering government
employee having got treatment in a private hospital and asking for medical reimbursement. Para 17
in this regard is reproduced as under:-
"17. We find two significant points in the said policy, one the procedural and the
other nominating few designated hospitals other than government hospital for
treatment. The procedure laid down under this was very onerous, some times not
workable, specially in emergency cases. Under it if one needs medical treatment
either outside India or in any hospital other than the Hospital of Government of
Punjab, an application seeking approval for such treatment in such hospital has to be
made to the Director of Health and Family Welfare two months in advance duly
recommended by CMO/Medical Superintendent indicating that the treatment for
such disease is not available in the hospital of the Government of Punjab. In cases of
emergency such application is to the authenticated by CMO/MS to be made fifteen
days in advance. It is this procedure which deprived persons from getting prompt and
better treatment at other places. Some of the serious diseases do not knock or warn
through bell giving them time. Emergency cases require immediate treatment and if
with a view to comply with procedure one has to wait then it could be fatal. One may
not in such cases live, if such a procedure is strictly followed. It seems keeping this in
light, the Government in 1991 modified its policies by including Escorts Heart
Institute, New Delhi; Christian Medical College, Ludhiana and Appollo Hospital,
Madras, in case of Open heart Surgery as the designated hospitals for treatment of
such permissible diseases. Government in its 1991 policy, also reserved its right to
revise the list in future. The listing of the aforesaid designated hospitals was with the
approval of the Finance Department. Thereafter on 9th September, 1994 on the
advice of the Finance Department the aforesaid 1991 policy was again modified by
withdrawing the clarification dated 8th October, 1991 wherein private hospitals in the
State and outside were recognised for treatment. Hence the benefit of the designated
hospitals was no longer available to an employee for being reimbursed towards his
medical expenses. It is in this background present that the new policy dated 5th
October, 1995 has come in to force........."
13. In the case of "State of Punjab and Ors. Vs Mohan Lal Jindal" (2001) 9 SCC 217, the medical
claim for reimbursement of an employee having got treatment in a hospital other than AIIMS for
by-pass surgery was directed to be considered sympathetically.
14. In the case of "Suman Rakheja Vs. State of Haryana and Anr." (2004) 13 SCC 562, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India came to recognize the medical emergency requiring the treatment in a
non-listed medical centre/hospital not a situation to disentitle govt. employee from claiming the
medical reimbursement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 5
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
15. In the case of "State of Rajasthan Vs Mahesh Kumar Sharma" (2011) 4 SCC 257, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India emphasized the fact of playing by the rules in the case of reimbursement of
medical expenses following the spirit of the letters of the rules.
16. In the case of "Shiva Kant Jha Vs Union of India" (2018) 16 SCC 187, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India, in para 17, has dealt with actuality of situation in which the family of ailing/suffering
government employee is led to seek medical treatment in a hospital other than the recommended
one. Para 17 in this regard is reproduced as under:-
"17. It is a settled legal position that the Government employee during his life time or after his
retirement is entitled to get the benefit of the medical facilities and no fetters can be placed on his
rights. It is acceptable to common sense, that ultimate decision as to how a patient should be treated
vests only with the Doctor, who is well versed and expert both on academic qualification and
experience gained. Very little scope is left to the patient or his relative to decide as to the manner in
which the ailment should be treated.
Speciality Hospitals are established for treatment of specified ailments and services of Doctors
specialized in a discipline are availed by patients only to ensure proper, required and safe treatment.
Can it be said that taking treatment in Speciality Hospital by itself would deprive a person to claim
reimbursement solely on the ground that the said Hospital is not included in the Government Order.
The right to medical claim cannot be denied merely because the name of the hospital is not included
in the Government Order. The real test must be the factum of treatment. Before any medical claim is
honoured, the authorities are bound to ensure as to whether the claimant had actually taken
treatment and the factum of treatment is supported by records duly certified by Doctors/Hospitals
concerned. Once, it is established, the claim cannot be denied on technical grounds. Clearly, in the
present case, by taking a very inhuman approach, the officials of the CGHS have denied the grant of
medical reimbursement in full to the petitioner forcing him to approach this Court."
17. Our High Court in the cases of "State of J&K Vs Sakhi Willayat (Dr.)" 2004 (3) JKJ 412 and in
OWP no. 1697/2015 titled - "Mohd. Azam Vs. State of J&K and Anr." has also dealt with the similar
issues following the prudence principle.
18. Now, when we come to the examination of the facts and judgment under challenge in the present
case, we find that this fact is not under dispute that the respondent's husband was suffering from life
threatening ailment of lung cancer and medical treatment within the then State of Jammu and
Kashmir was not available which warranted his referral for specialized treatment outside the State
of Jammu and Kashmir.
19. The controversy in the case came into scene on two aspects. First being that referral of the
respondent's husband was made to PGI, Chandigarh for his treatment and not to any other place
much less the one where the respondent had taken her husband for treatment which is private
hospital, namely, S. L. Raheja Hospital in Mumbai. Second that the medical expenses incurred by
the respondent in connection with her husband's medical treatment, for which the reimbursement
was being claimed but was declined, had been incurred before issuance of Life Consuming Disease
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 6
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
Certificate dated 31.05.2018 issued by the Principal & Dean of Govt. Medical College, Jammu.
20. The respondent from her end sought to meet first objection about actual status of the referral
dated 06.11.2017 to PGI, Chandigarh by saying that in the said referral there is a reference made by
HOD Pulmonary Medicines, Govt. Chest Disease Hospital, Jammu that the respondent's husband is
being referred to PGI, Chandigarh or anywhere, whereas on the other hand the Commandant,
IRP-15th Bn, Jammu, as being the employer, claimed that the said referral has been tampered with
by insertion of word "anywhere". It is in this state of claim and counter claim that the respondent
had come to suffer denial of reimbursement of medical expenses to the amount of (cid:128)2,60,243/-.
21. The Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench has held that while a total amount of
(cid:128)19,02,800/- had been incurred on the treatment of the respondent's husband but claim for medical
reimbursement was made for (cid:128)3,21,545/- out of which only (cid:128)61,302/- came to credited to the
respondent thereby leaving an amount of (cid:128)2,60,243/- not paid in reimbursement. The Central
Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench came to hold that from the records it is borne out
that the medical treatment was taken in an emergent condition and that the withholding of
reimbursement of an amount of (cid:128)2,60,243/- was wrong.
22. When we examine the facts and circumstances of the case in the light of the consideration
accorded by the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench in directing the
Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu to release an amount of (cid:128)2,60,243/- to the respondent, we find
that the Commandant, IRP-15th Bn, Jammu or for that matter the Govt. of UT of Jammu and
Kashmir did not act with a mindset of a model employer and rather showed lack of sensitivity to the
state of things which the respondent and her ailing husband had gone through in which the only
inevitable was sooner or later untimely end of life of the respondent's husband. In this state of
dilemma confronting the respondent and her ailing husband as to which place to go for comfort of
medical care and attention nobody can be allowed to find any fault with the option exercised by the
respondent to take her husband to the private hospital, namely, S. L. Raheja Hospital in Mumbai
knowing very well that it was the race against the time. If this much solace of option could not be
extended to the respondent in connection with the treatment of her ailing husband in the context of
reimbursement of medical expenses that too of an amount of (cid:128)2,60,243/- then it literally means a
message to the respondent that she should have let her husband suffer from physical and mental
pain and agony in the home and hospital in Jammu itself by accepting the inevitability of fate that
her husband was to succumb to the ailment without chance of any recovery there from. This is
nothing but being ritualistic in the matter of dealing with a case rather than by realistic with the
case.
23. The essence of Civil Services (Medical Attendance-cum- Allowance) Rules, 1990 framed vide
SRO-203 dated 14.06.1990 by the Govt. of Jammu and Kashmir in exercise of its constitutional
power is not mechanically oriented in the light of how the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India reckons
the entitlement of a government employee to medical care and treatment in the need of hour more
particularly when life threatening disease/ailment comes to confront a government employee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 7
Union Territory Of J&K Through vs Smt. Reeta Dhar on 16 August, 2023
24. In the light of the aforesaid, we do not find any infirmity/illegality attending the judgment of the
Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Jammu Bench, so as to upset it at the call of the petitioner
riding on the abovesaid two mechanically oriented objections and, therefore, dismiss this writ
petition.
(Rahul Bharti) (Tashi Rabstan)
Judge Judge
Jammu
16.08.2023
Bunty
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163787867/ 8
