Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905
AT SRINAGAR
...
MA no.86/2018
Reserved on: 16.07.2025
Pronounced on: 29.07.2025
Union of India
.......Petitioner(s)
Through: Ms Masooda Jan, Sr. Panel Counsel
Versus
State of J&K and others
......Respondent(s)
Through: Mr S. N. Ratanpuri, Advocate with
Ms. Fiza Khursheed, Advocate for private respondents
Mr. Aijaz Ahmad Chisti, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. It had been by virtue of order dated 1st November 2021, that this Court observed that fifty-five
(55) respondents had died after the year 2000 during pendency of the appeal (MA no.86/2018) but
no steps had been taken by appellant to bring on record their legal representatives, albeit sufficient
opportunities had been granted to appellant. This Court also observed that since most of the
respondents had died more than six months back, therefore, appeal abated and consigned it to
records and interim directions vacated. This Court also directed that the amount, if any, deposited
before this Court be remitted to the court of District Judge, Budgam, who may pass orders for its
disbursement in accordance with rules and as per entitlement after proper verification by counsel
for respondents.
Page 1
2. Appellant preferred a Review Petition, being RP no.23/2022, seeking 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905
review of aforesaid Order dated 1st November 2021. This Court vide Order dated 8th April 2022
dismissed it.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 1
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
3. Aggrieved, appellant preferred Special Leave Petition (Civil) Diary No.37352/2022 before the
Supreme Court. On consideration, the Supreme Court passed following order:
"Delay condoned.
It is the contention on behalf of the petitioner-Union of India that, in case of death of
some of the respondents, the entire proceedings could not have been dismissed as
having been abated. It is submitted that, at the most, the proceedings before the High
Court could have been dismissed as having been abated qua only those persons, who
died.
There is some substance in what Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, learned ASG, has
submitted.
It will open for the petitioner to move the High Court for the aforesaid and as and
when such review applications are filed, the same be considered in accordance with
law and o their own merits. Even otherwise, in case of the persons who died and qua
them the proceedings are abated, it will always be open for the petitioner to submit
an appropriate application/ applications for setting aside abatement by moving
appropriate applications for bringing the legal heirs on record.
The present Special Leave Petition stands disposed of with the above liberty."
4. As a consequence of directions of the Supreme Court, appellant moved an application, being CM
no.600/2023, which vide order dated 4th June 2025, came to be allowed and order dated 1 st
October 2011 in MA no.86/2018 and order dated 1st November 2021 came to be recalled qua
surviving respondents. Hence, appeal is being taken up here.
5. The case set up by appellant is that DIG, BSF, Srinagar vide letter no.OL-10/Land/TC/89/55
dated 9th June 1989 placed an indent for acquisition of land measuring 2000 kanals
(approximately) for establishment of BSF Subsidiary Training Centre, Humhama, District Budgam,
J&K. The land proposed to be acquired by authorities was Page 2 also identified by them on spot.
Tehsildar, Budgam, was directed vide 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 letter no.55/M/423/LAC dated 17th
June 1989 to furnish the Shajra and Khasra and other revenue documents of the land identified by
the indenting department. In the first phase, Tehsildar, Budgam, furnished Shajra and Khasra for
land measuring 1739 Kanals 15 Marlas, comprising of Khasra nos.800 to 1425/808, 810, 811, 813 to
925, 955, 956 and 960 to 963 situated in Estate Humhama Tehsil and District Budgam. Shajra and
Khasra furnished by Tehsildar was got duly authenticated by Revenue Agency as well as by the
representatives of the indenting department as a token of having selected the proposed site. It is
being also stated by appellant that acquisition papers were submitted by Collector, Land
Acquisition, Budgam, to Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir, for obtaining no objection certificate
from the Home Department, which was accordingly received by them on 6th October 1989.
Subsequently Notification under Section 4(1) of J&K Land Acquisition Act 1990 Svt 1990 (1934
A.D.) (for short "Act of 1990") vide No.56/DC/794-803/ LAC dated 23rd October 1989 was issued
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 2
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
calling upon interested persons to file objections, if any, to proposed acquisition of land as envisaged
under Section 5 of the Act. Some of the interested persons filed objections in which they demanded
that reasonable rate of compensation might be given to them but they did not file any objection to
proposed acquisition. On expiry of stipulated period, Notification nos.95/RD/ of 1990 and 96/RD of
1990 were issued. Subsequently, Collector Land Acquisition, Budgam, issued a Notification dated
28th May 1990, under Section 9 and 9A of the Act, calling upon interested persons/indenting
department to file Page 3 their respective claims/ objections. In response to this notification,
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 some of the interested persons filed objections demanding that
compensation for Maidani land and Bagh-i-Khushki land be paid to them @ more than Rs.1.00
Lakh and Rs.1.50 Lakhs respectively per Kanal. During spot inspection, there was some difference in
area of certain Khasra numbers. Accordingly, amended Notification was issued by Revenue
Department vide no.Rev.(LAK) 2/90 dated 1 st March 1991, and missing Khasra numbers were
included. Thus, total area under proposed acquisition was 1798 kanals 12 Marlas instead of 1739
Kanals 15 Marlas. The land was taken over by BSF on 27 th August 1990 from Tehsildar, Budgam.
An award was issued by Collector @ Rs.70,000/- plus 15% Jabrana per Kanal and compensation to
the tune of Rs.15.00 Crores was received by Collector. 80% compensation was paid to landowners in
the year 1990 when possession of land was handed over to indenting department. Remaining 20%
compensation along with interest @ 6% for the first year for 8/90 to 1991 and @ 10% for remaining
year was paid by Collector to interested persons on receipt from indenting department. It is being
stated by appellant that BSF has paid the amount in full on 15th April 1997 vide Bank Draft
no.826127 dated 12th April 1997, including compensation of trees to the tune of Rs.3.42 Crores and
nothing remained unpaid on the part of department as per record. It is also averred by appellant
that the case was actually filed by landowners, and the Collector and appellant were made party to
the reference. Since appellant is holding the land and is an indenting department contested the case
before the Reference Court. As per apportionment statement of the land available in the file with
Page 4 final award issued by Collector on 21 st July 1995, the list of 142 land
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 owners to whom 1798 Kanals 12 Marlas of land pertains to, has been given.
But some of the land owners were single and some were more than one. There were 114 reference
applications filed by 277 inhabitants of Humhama. In some of the reference applications, the
claimant was single whereas in some applications it comprised even 13 landowners. The reference
under Section 18 of the Act was made to Reference Court on 11th September 2000, which was
disposed of on 30th November 2017. The land acquired by appellant was without any accessibility
from all quarters and appellant was forced to purchase another piece of land which was later used as
approach road and for ingress and egress to the land acquired.
6. The grounds on which impugned Award/order passed by Reference Court is being challenged are
that Reference Court has failed to appreciate the fact that burden of proof is on claimants as to the
fact that the applications to the Collector were made within timeframe provided by the Act of 1990
under Section 18 and that there is no evidence on record to suggest that applications under Section
18 of the Act were made within mandatory timeframe; that Reference Court has failed to appreciate
the fact that the burden of proof is on the claimant to prove that what the willing buyer would have
offered to the willing seller and that there is no evidence on record on the contents of the award
relied upon by Reference Court, neither there is any evidence as to proximity, accessibility and
nearness to the road of the land acquired by the award dated 4th July 1994; that Reference Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 3
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
has failed to appreciate the fact that there was another award of 1990, whereby land Page 5 was
acquired by CRPF in estate Humhama and the land has proximity 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 to the
land acquired by appellant and notification for acquiring the same was issued in the same year, i.e.,
1990; that Reference Court has altogether discarded evidence led by appellant before it under
Section 18 of the Act; that Reference Court has failed to appreciate the fact of accessibility of land
acquired and the fact that approach land was later acquired by appellant; that Reference Court has
erred while placing reliance on the award dated 4th July 1994 which was issued post notification
under Section 4(1) of the Act of 1990 in the present case; that Reference Court has failed to
appreciate relevant factors to determine market value, nature of land, equality of land, market
conditions prevailing as on date of acquisition. The area of Humhama was under -developed at the
time of acquisition and land acquired by appellant was inaccessible and it was only after the land
was acquired that the area was developed; that claimants have neither brought any documentary
evidence nor any oral evidence on which Reference Court could have relied upon in the present case
with regard to the genuine sale of land within vicinity, either adjacent or nearby to the land acquired
to prove enhanced rate of compensation per kanal prevalent at the time of issuance of notification;
that land acquired through award relied upon by Reference Court while enhancing amount of
compensation in the present case, there is no evidence or record as to location of land and its
approach and accessibility.
7. The first ground of challenge taken by appellant is that there is no evidence on record to suggest
that applications under Section 18 of the Page 6 J&K Land Acquisition Act, Svt 1990, were made
within prescribed 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 time limit.
8. In the case in hand, provisions of the Act of 1990, when land in question was acquired and award
passed, were in vogue and applicable. Section 3(1) of he Act of 1990 says the expression "land"
includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to
anything attached to the earth. Insofar as the expression "person interested" is concerned, it is
mentioned in Section 2(d) that person interested includes all persons claiming an interest in
compensation to be made on account of the acquisition of land under the Act of 1990 and a person
shall be deemed to be interested in land if he is interested in an easement affecting the land.
9. Whenever land in any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for any public purpose, Collector
is required to notify it by making publication of preliminary notification under Section 4 of the Act
of 1990 through a public notice to be affixed at convenient places in the said locality and is also to be
caused to be known by beat of drum and through local Panchayats and Patwaries. Notification
under Section 4 is also to be notified/published in Government Gazette and in two daily newspapers
having largest circulation in the said locality of which at least one shall be in the regional language.
It is only after issuance of Notice under Section 4(1) that any officer authorized by Government and
for his servant and workmen to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality.
However, proviso to Subsection (2) of Section 4 says that no person shall enter into any building or
upon any enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling house unless with Page 7 the consent of
occupier thereof without previously giving such occupier 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 at least ten days'
notice in writing of his intention to do so. Section 5 of the Act of 1990 provides that the officer so
authorized shall at the time of such entry pay or tender payment for all necessary damages to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 4
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
done and in case of any dispute about sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered, he shall at once
refer the dispute to the Provincial Revenue authority within thirty days of its being pronounced
whereupon the decision of that officer shall be final. Section 5-A of the Act of 1990 says that any
person in any land which has been notified under Section 4 (1) may within fifteen days after such
land is notified, object to acquisition of land or any land in the locality as the case may be. Every
objection shall be made to Collector in writing, who shall give objector an opportunity of being
heard either in person or by pleader or by person authorized by him and shall after hearing all such
objections and after making such further inquiry, if any, submit the case for decision of the
Government, together with record of proceedings held by him and report containing his
recommendations on the objections. When the Government would be satisfied after considering the
report of Collector, if any, made under Section 5-A, subsection (2) that any particular land is needed
for public purpose, a declaration shall be made under Section 6 to that effect. However, proviso to
Section 6(1) envisages that no such declaration shall be made unless compensation to be awarded
for such property is to be paid wholly or partly out of public revenues or some fund controlled or
managed by a local authority. Subsection (2) of Section 6 provides that declaration shall be
published in official gazette and shall state the district or other territorial Page 8 division in which
land is situate, the purpose for which land is needed 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 its approximate areas
and where a plan shall have been made of the land, the place where such plan may be inspected. The
said declaration shall be conclusive evidence that land is needed for public purpose. Whenever any
land is declared to be needed for public purpose, in terms of Section 7 of the Act of 1990 Collector is
directed to take order for acquisition of land. Thereupon, Collector is to mark out land unless
already marked out under Section 4 and he shall also measure it and make a plan thereof.
Thereafter, notice is to be given at convenient places or near the land to be taken. In the said notice
it should be mentioned that the Government intends to take possession of the land and that the
claims of compensation for all interests in such land be made before Collector. Such a notice should
give particulars of land so needed and should inform all persons interested to appear personally or
by agent before Collector at a time and place mentioned in the notice. The persons interested are
required to show interest in the land and the amount and particulars of their claims of
compensation for such interests and their objections, if any, to the measurements made under
section 8. The Collector is required to make such statements in writing and signed by party or his
agent. The Collector is also required to serve notice to the same effect on occupier, if any, of such
land and on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein or to be entitled to act for
persons so interested, as reside, or have agents authorized to receive service on their behalf within
the revenue district in which the land is situate. It is not as if a person interested is not residing in
such locality and/or in such district, he is not to be served, but such a person Page 9 is to be served a
notice at his last known residence, address of place2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 of business in
accordance with the Postal rules in force. The name of every person possessing any interest in the
land or any part thereof as co- proprietor, sub-proprietor, mortgagee, tenant or otherwise and of the
nature of such interest and of the rents and profit, if any, received or receivable on account thereof
for three years next preceding the date, is to be obtained by the Collector by way of a statement
under and in terms of Section 10 of the Act.
10.Section 11 of the Act of 1990 provides that on the day so fixed or on any other day to which
enquiry has been adjourned, Collector shall proceed to enquire into objections, if any, which any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 5
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
person interested has stated pursuant to a notice given under Section 9 to the measurements made
under Section 8 and into the value of land at the date of publication of notification under Subsection
(1) of Section 4 and into respective interest of persons claiming compensation and which the Head
of Department or his nominee has stated pursuant to a notice given under Section 9-A and shall
tentatively assess compensation which in his opinion should be allowed for the land. If
compensation amount tentatively assessed exceeds the amount specified by Government by
notification, then Collector is to refer the record of the case along with statement of tentative
assessment of compensation for approval of Revenue Minister or an officer specially empowered by
him in this behalf. In a case referred by Collector, the proper value of property is communicated and
the value so determined forms basis for compensation to be allowed for the land, the Collector shall
make an award.
Page 10
11.Subsection (7) of Section 11 of the Act of 1990 in clear cut terms 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 provides
that determination of compensation for any land under Subsection (6) of section 11 shall not in any
way affect the determination of compensation in respect of other lands in the same locality or
elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
12.Section 12 of the Act says that such award shall be filed in the Collector's office and shall, except
as hereinafter provided, be final and conclusive evidence, as between the Collector and the persons
interested, whether they have respectively appeared before the Collector or not, of the true area and
the value of the land, and the apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested.
Subsection (2) of Section 12 mandates that Collector shall give immediate notice of his award to
such of the persons interested as are not present personally or by their representatives when the
award is made.
13.Section 18 of the Act of 1990, concerning making reference to the Court, is reproduced
hereunder:
"18. Reference to Court. --
(1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may, by written
application to the Collector require that the matter be referred by the Collector for the
determination of the Court, whether his objection be to the measurement of the land,
the amount of the compensation, the persons to whom it is payable or the
apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested.
(2) The application shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken:
Provided that every such application shall be made.--
(a) if the person making it was present or represented before the Collector at the time
when he made his award within six weeks from the date of the Collector's award;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 6
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
(b) in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector
under section 12, sub-section (2) or within six months from the date of the Collector's
award, whichever period shall first expire."
Page 11 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905
14.From the provisions of Section 18 of the Act, it is evident that when an award is made by
Collector, if a person interested does not accept the award, he can make an application but to
Collector and, therefore, it is only the Collector, who, on receipt of application from an interested
person, can make reference to the court concerned (Reference Court). An interested person cannot
on his own approach Reference Court seeking modification or alteration of award of Collector. It is
only the Collector, who has authority, power and responsibility to make reference to the Court
concerned. The application made should give grounds on which objection to the award is made.
However, proviso (a) to Subsection (2) of Section 18 of the Act provides that if a person, making an
application, is present or is represented before Collector when Collector makes an award, such an
application is to be made within six weeks from the date of the Collector's award. On the contrary,
proviso (b) envisages that in other cases, within six weeks from the date of receipt of notice from the
Collector under Section 12 (2) of the Act, or within six months from the date of the Collector's
award.
15. It is worthwhile to mention here that proviso (b) to Section 18(2) refers to Section 12(2) of the
Act. Section 12 relates to the Award of Collector when to be final. Section 12 reads thus:
"12. Award of Collector when to be final. -- (1) Such award shall be filed in the
Collector's office and shall, except as hereinafter provided, be final and conclusive
evidence, as between the Collector and the persons interested, whether they have
respectively appeared before the Collector or not, of the true area and the value of the
land, and the apportionment of the compensation among the persons interested. (2)
The Collector shall give immediate notice of his award to such of the persons
interested as are not present personally or by their representatives when the award is
made.
Page 12 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905
16. Subsection (2) of Section 12 of the Act, thus, says that Collector shall give immediate notice of his
Award to such of the persons interested as are not present personally or by their representatives
when the award is made. So, it is a duty cast upon Collector that when he issues an Award, he is
required to serve notice upon interested person about issuance of the award. It is pertinent to
mention here that in the event notice is not served upon interested person about issuance of the
Award by the Collector, then in such situation, time limit as prescribed under Subsection (2) of
Section 18 will not apply inasmuch as serving of notice upon interested person is imperative so that
interested person would have knowledge about his land having been acquired and award passed by
Collector, and if he is not satisfied with the award, he may seek reference of the award to the
concerned court. Therefore, Section 12(2) mandates that the Collector shall give immediate notice of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 7
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
his award to persons interested who are not present or represented at the time the award is made.
17.Section 19 commands Collector to make statement for information of Reference Court in writing:
the situation and extent of the land with particulars of any trees, buildings or standing crops in the
land to be acquired; the names of the persons whom he has reason to think interested in such land;
the amount awarded for damages and paid or tendered under sections 5 and 17 or either of them,
and the amount of compensation awarded under Section 11; the amount paid or deposited under
Section 17-A of the Act; if the objection be to the amount of compensation, the grounds on which the
amount of compensation was Page 13 determined; the name of persons out of those interested in
such land 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 who have accepted the award. Under Section 19(2) with the
statement the Collector shall attach a schedule, giving the particulars of the notices served upon and
shall also attach the statements in writing made or delivered by the parties interested respectively.
18. Insofar as case in hand is concerned, as said above, the first ground of challenge on behalf of
appellant is that there is no evidence on record to suggest that applications under Section 18 of the
J&K Land Acquisition Act, Svt 1990, were made within prescribed time limit. It had been contention
of appellant before Reference Court that applications made by respondents/interested persons were
time barred and that the then Collector had not even marked applications inasmuch as applications
seemed to have been marked by some person other than the Collector.
19. It is evident from perusal of impugned judgement/order that statement of all the witnesses has
been reproduced by Reference Court in impugned judgement/order. Reference Court, prior to
deliberating upon merits of the case set up by claimants/respondents before it, took up the
preliminary objection raised by appellant qua reference having not been made within prescribed
period of limitation and that those applications had been marked by some unknown person and had
been backdated in order to benefit respondents.
20. The Reference Court has rightly and correctly found and said that mandatory provisions of
Section 12(2) of the Act had not been followed and complied with by Collector, which was otherwise
his bounden responsibility.
Page 14
21.Section 12 of the Act has already been reproduced herein-supra.
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 Subsection (2) thereof casts duty upon Collector to give immediate notice
of his award to persons interested, who are not present personally or by their representatives when
award is made.
22.The Collector and for that matter appellant herein, in the present case, have miserably failed to
establish serving of notice upon interested persons/respondents herein as to making of award. This
illegality cannot be cured by any ways or means.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 8
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
23. It has also been found by Reference Court that even appellant herein has failed to establish that
applications for making reference were not made by claimants/respondents before Collector within
a period of six weeks. Appellant has not even placed on record any document by which it could be
deduced that applications for making reference were not made by claimants/respondents within
prescribed time.
24.Reference Court perused the record before it and found that maximum of application had been
filed on 26th August 1995 and some of applications had been filed on 31st August 1995 and few of
applications had ben filed on 2nd September and 5th September 1995 and it had been up to 7th
September 1995 that further applications were received. Thus, it has been proved beyond any
shadow of doubt before Reference Court that applications had been filed by claimants well within
time.
25.There is an allegation that the then Collector, namely, Shri Janak Singh, had not marked the
applications. This contention of appellant has been attended to by Reference Court. Shri Janak
Singh, the then Collector, Land Acquisition, had been transferred in the year 1995 immediately after
issuance of award. The Reference Court has referred to the Page 15 statement of Shri Janak Singh,
deposing therein that he had made only 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 tentative award and final award
was not issued by him. However, from the record it has been found by Reference Court that Final
Award has also been issued under the signature of Shri Janak Singh. And, as such, the Reference
Court has rightly said that applications had been made within time.
26.It is pertinent to mention here that the Supreme Court in Harish Chandra Raj Singh v. Land
Acquisition Officer, AIR 1961 SC 1500, was called upon to decide whether the expression "date of
award" is to be interpreted in regard to the time when the award is signed by the Collector or from
the date the affected party comes to know about the same and held as under: -
"Therefore, if the award made by the Collector is in law no more than an offer made
on behalf of the Government to the owner of the property then the making of the
award as properly understood must involve the communication of the offer to the
party concerned. That is the normal requirement under the contract law and its
applicability to cases of award made under the Act cannot be reasonably excluded.
Thus considered the date of the award cannot be determined solely by reference to
the time when the award is signed by the Collector or delivered by him in his office; it
must involve the consideration of the question as to when it was known to the party
concerned either actually or constructively. If that be the true position then the literal
and mechanical construction of the words the date of the award occurring in the
relevant section would not be appropriate. There is yet another point which leads to
the same conclusion. If the award is treated as an administrative decision taken by
the Collector in the matter of the valuation of the property sought to be acquired it is
clear that the said decision ultimately affects the rights of the owner of the property
and in that sense, like all decisions which affect persons, it is essentially fair and just
that the said decision should be communicated to the said party. The knowledge of
the party affected by such a decision, either actual or constructive, is an essential
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 9
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
element which must be satisfied before the decision can be brought into force.
Thus considered the making of the award cannot consist merely in the physical act of
writing the award or signing it or even filing it in the Office of the Collector; it must
involve the communication of the said award to the party concerned either actually or
constructively. If the award is pronounced in the Page 16 presence of the party whose
rights are affected by it can be said2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 to be made when
pronounced. If the date for the pronouncement of the award is communicated to the
party and it is accordingly pronounced on the date previously announced the award is
said to be communicated to the said party even if the said party is not actually
present on the date of its pronouncement. Similarly if without notice of the date of its
pronouncement an award is pronounced and a party is not present the award can be
said to be made when it is communicated to the party later. The knowledge of the
party affected by the award, either actual or constructive, being an essential
requirement of fair play and natural justice the expression the date of the award used
in the proviso must mean the date when the award is either communicated to the
party or is known by him either actually or constructively. In our opinion, therefore,
it would be unreasonable to construe the words from the date of the Collector's award
used in the proviso to Section 18 in a literal or mechanical way."
27. It has been observed by the Supreme Court that award made by Collector in law is no more than
an offer made on behalf of the Government to owner of property, so making of award as properly
understood must involve communication of offer to the party concerned, which is the normal
requirement under contract law and its applicability to cases of award made under the Act cannot be
reasonably excluded. Therefore, the "date of the award" cannot be determined solely by reference to
the time when award is signed by Collector or delivered by him in his office. It must involve
consideration of question as to when it was known to party concerned either actually or
constructively. If that be the true position, then literal and mechanical construction of the words the
"date of the award" occurring in the relevant section would not be appropriate. It has also been said
by the Supreme Court that if an award is treated as an administrative decision taken by Collector in
the matter of valuation of property sought to be acquired, it is clear that the said decision ultimately
affects rights of owner of property and in that event, like all decisions which affect Page 17 persons,
it is essentially fair and just that the said decision should2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 be communicated
to the said party. The knowledge of the party affected by such a decision, either actual or
constructive, is an essential element which must be satisfied before the decision can be brought into
force.
In the present case it is not coming forth as to whether interested persons/respondents had been
informed about issuance of award or not. Even appellant has not been able to establish when the
award was communicated to respondents.
28.Making of award cannot consist merely in physical act of writing award or signing it or even
filing it in the office of Collector. It must involve its communication to interested party either
actually or constructively. If award is pronounced in presence of the party whose rights are affected
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 10
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
by it, can be said to be made when pronounced. If the date for pronouncement of award is
communicated to the party and it is accordingly pronounced on the date previously announced, the
award is said to be communicated to the affected party even if the said party is not actually present
on the date of its pronouncement.
In the case in hand, no such exercise has been undertaken and/or comes to fore from the record to
show or suggest that such exercise has been undertaken by Collector to inform and intimate
interested persons/ respondents as regards issuance of award.
29.If without notice of the date of its pronouncement an award is pronounced and a party is not
present the award can be said to be made when it is communicated to the party later. The knowledge
of the party affected by the award, either actual or constructive, being an essential requirement of
fair play and natural justice. The expression the "date of Page 18 the award" used in the proviso
must mean the date when the award2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 is either communicated to the party or
is known by him either actually or constructively. Thus, it is arbitrary, perverse and irrational to say
that interested persons have knowledge from the date the Collector issued award.
Insofar as the instant is concerned, appellant and/or Collector has failed to establish that interested
persons/respondents had knowledge of award on the date the Collector issued it and that all the
interested persons/respondents were present when award was issued by Collector and/or they were
duly informed and intimated about issuance of award. Therefore, the words from the date of
Collector's award used in proviso to Subsection (2) of Section 18 of the Act is to be meant as the date
when the award is either communicated to the party or is known by him either actually or
constructively. Resultantly, in the case in hand, respondents had been well within time in making
applications and as a corollary thereof, applications had been referred to Reference Court in
accordance with provisions of Section 18 or for that matter any of the provisions of the Act.
30.The case of Vijay Mahadeorao Kubade v. State Of Maharashtra through the Collector, AIR 2018
SC 356 : 2018 (8) SCC 266, adjudicated by the Supreme Court of India, marks a significant and
binding precedent in the realm of land acquisition and compensation laws. The said case delves into
procedural intricacies surrounding issuance of notice/s under the Land Acquisition Act, particularly
scrutinizing adequacy of notification in the context of compensation awards. The crux of the dispute
revolved around validity of notice served to landowners/ Page 19 interested persons concerning
compensation award for acquired land, 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 and whether
landowners/interested persons' subsequent reference for enhancement of compensation was time
limit compliant. In the said case, appellant challenged judgement of the High Court of Bombay,
which had dismissed reference for enhancing compensation on the grounds of limitation. The
Supreme Court examined whether appellant had received an effective notice of the award as
mandated by Section 12(2) of the Land Acquisition Act. The key issue was whether absence of
certified copy of the award in the initial notice rendered the compensation award notice ineffective,
thereby not triggering the limitation period.
If the present case is looked into stricto sensu in the context of law laid down by the Supreme Court,
as aforesaid, there is no denial to the fact that respondents had not been communicated the award
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 11
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
muhcless communicating certified copy of award.
31.The Supreme Court, relying on the precedent set by Premji Nathu v. State of Gujarat AIR 2012 SC
1624 : 2012 (5) SCC 250 , has observed that effective notice requires recipient to have access to
details of award at the time of issuance. In that case, since appellant did not receive certified copy of
award along with the notice, the claim that limitation period had expired was said to be an
unfounded ground. Consequently, the Supreme Court set-aside the High Court's order and
remanded the case for fresh consideration on the merits, including the quantum of compensation.
The judgment extensively referenced the seminal case of Premji Nath (supra). The Supreme Court
elucidated the requirements for an effective notice under Section 12(2) of the Land Acquisition Act.
Page 20 The Supreme Court emphasized that for a notice to be effective, it must
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 convey all pertinent details of the award, enabling the affected party to
exercise their rights within the stipulated limitation period. This precedent was pivotal in shaping
the Supreme Court's approach in the present case, reinforcing the necessity of comprehensive and
clear communication of compensation awards to landowners.
32.The legal reasoning of the Supreme Courts hinged on the principles of natural justice and
procedural fairness. The Supreme Court underscored that an effective notice is not merely a
formalistic requirement but a substantive guarantee that interested/affected parties are adequately
informed and can exercise their legal rights without prejudice.
By determining that interested/affected party did not receive certified copy of the award alongside
the notice, the Supreme Court concluded that requisite information was not available to affected/
interested party at the time the notice was served. This lack of essential information means that
affected party could not have been expected to act within the limitation period, thereby nullifying
the argument that the reference was time-barred. The said judgment of the Supreme Court has,
thus, far-reaching implications for implementation of land acquisition laws in India. It mandates
governmental authorities to ensure that all notices pertaining to compensation awards are
comprehensive and include all relevant documents, thereby safeguarding rights of landowners.
Thus, the Supreme Court has set a precedence for upholding procedural safeguards, ensuring that
administrative actions do not infringe upon the legal rights of individuals. It also emerges from
aforesaid judgement of the Supreme Page 21 Court that effective notice refers to formal
communication of legal 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 actions or decisions to affected parties in a manner
which ensures that they are fully apprised of their rights and any action they need to take. Under the
Land Acquisition Act, an effective notice must include all essential details of the compensation
award, allowing the landowner to respond or appeal within the legal timeframe.
The case in hand is also squarely covered by the aforesaid judgements of the Supreme Court and
vanishes the case set up and grounds taken by appellant in the instant appeal and resultantly
impugned judgement/award of Refence Court does not warrant or call for any interference.
33.Many other grounds for challenge have been taken in the instant appeal and reiterated by
learned counsel for appellant, yet those grounds merge in one ground, that is, market
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 12
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
value/price/rate of land acquired has not been properly fixed by Reference Court.
34.When a reference is made by Collector to Reference Court, notice is to be served upon applicant
and to all persons interested. Every proceeding is to take place in open court. Section 23 relates to
matters to be considered in determining compensation, which reads as under:
"23. Matters to be considered in determining compensation. --
(1) In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded for land acquired
under the Act, the Court shall take into consideration-
first, the market value of the land at the date of the publication of the declaration relating thereto
under section 6; secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested by reason of the taking of
any standing crops or trees which may be on the land at the time of the Collector's taking possession
thereof;
thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested at the time of the Collector's taking
possession of the land by reason of severing such land from his other land;
Page 22 fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 interested, at
the time of the Collector's taking possession of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously
affecting his other property movable or immovable in any other manner, or his earnings;
fifthly, if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the Collector, the person interested is
compelled to change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental
to such change; and sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution of the profits of
the land between the time of the publication of the declaration, under section 6, and the time of the
Collector's taking possession of the land.
(2) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided, the Court shall in every case award
a sum of fifteen per centum on such market value in consideration of the compulsory nature of the
acquisition."
35. Section 23 (1) provides that in determining amount of compensation to be awarded for land
acquired under the Act of 1990, the Reference Court is to take into consideration: (i) market value of
land at the date of publication of the declaration relating thereto under Section 6; (ii) damage
sustained by the person interested by reason of the taking of any standing crops or trees which may
be on the land at the time of Collector's taking possession thereof; (iii) damage, if any, sustained by
person interested at the time of Collector's taking possession of land by reason of severing such land
from his other land; (iv) damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at the time of
Collector's taking possession of land, by reason of acquisition injuriously affecting his other property
movable or immovable in any other manner, or his earnings; (v) if, in consequence of acquisition of
land by Collector, the person interested is compelled to change his residence or place of business,
reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change; and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 13
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
(vi) damage, if any, bona fide resulting from diminution of profits of Page 23 the land between the
time of publication of declaration, under Section 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 6 and the time of
Collector's taking possession of the land.
36. Market value of the land under acquisition is price which the property may fetch in open market
if sold by a willing seller unaffected by special needs of a particular purchase. Where definite
material is not forthcoming either in the shape of sales of similar lands in neighbourhood at or about
the date of declaration or otherwise, other sale instances as well as other evidences have to be
considered. It has been said by the Supreme Court in Shaji Kuriakose and another v. Indian Oil
Corporation Limited and others, AIR 2001 SC 3441, that amount of compensation cannot be
ascertained with mathematical accuracy. A comparable instance has to be identified having regard
to proximity from time angle as well as proximity from situation angle. For determining market
value of land under acquisition, suitable adjustment has to be made having regard to various
positive and negative factors qua land under acquisition by placing two in juxtaposition.
37. Section 15 of the Act of 1990 provides that in determining amount of compensation, Collector
shall be guided by provisions contained in Section 23 and 24. Section 23 of the Act of 1990 contains
matters to be considered in determining amount of compensation whereas Section 23 contains
matters to be neglected in determining compensation.
38.The Supreme Court vide judgement dated 27th March 2025, in a case titled as Civil Appeal
no.3998 of 2024 titled as Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation v. Vincent Daniel and
others reported as 2025 INSC 408 : 2025 Live Law (SC) 364 : 2025 SCC Online SC 666, Page 24 has
said that to compute compensation under Acquisition Act, 1894, 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 the
general threshold applied by the courts is to ascertain the market value of the acquired land. This
also includes its potential value with reference to the conditions prevailing at the time of making a
declaration under Section 4 (1) of the Acquisition Act, 1894. The International Valuation Standards
Council states that the market value of land represents estimated amount that a willing buyer would
pay prudently to a willing seller in an arm's length transaction, without compulsion, on a particular
valuation date. The Supreme Court has also observed that this estimate includes characteristics
unique to the land that would inflate or deflate its price but excludes special concessions or
considerations granted by anyone associated with the sale. The buyer refers to one who is motivated
but is neither overeager nor determined to buy irrespective of the price quoted. Similarly, he is
neither over- eager nor forced. Both parties are assumed to be conducting transaction in keeping
with market realities, rather than terms that are hypothetical or cannot be anticipated to exist.
39.The Supreme Court in Smt. Tribeni Devi and others v. Collector of Ranchi and Vice Versa, (1972)
1 SCC 480 , recognized several methods for ascertaining market value of land, such as: (i) opinion of
experts;
(ii) price paid in bona fide transaction for purchase of adjacent lands possessing similar advantages
and disadvantages; and (iii) capitalization of actual and immediate prospective annual profits from
the land. However, this exercise must take into consideration subjective features and special
circumstances. Land values vary based on their qualitative and quantitative attributes, location,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 14
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
proximity to developed Page 25 land, potential etc. The lack of reliable local sale data, coupled with
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 variable land conditions, undermines accurate assessment. Nevertheless,
framing objective standards can help arrive at an empirical value that most closely reflects the true
market price.
40.The theory of deduction, though not statutorily prescribed, has been applied by courts to
compute the compensation payable under the Acquisition Act, 1894 primarily for two reasons. First,
consideration of the potential value of the land can result in arriving at an enhanced or increased
value, especially for undeveloped lands. Secondly, in acquisitions of large underdeveloped lands, a
significant portion of the land would have to be utilised for making minimum amenities like roads,
drains, sewers, water and electrical lines available. Thus, making the land usable would involve a
substantial expense for the buyer in the form of development charges.
41.The theory of deduction was applied in the case of Tribeni Devi (supra). In Jag Mahender and
Another v. State of Haryana and others, (2017) SCC Online SC 2160 also, the theory of deduction
was applied to arrive at a fair and reasonable market value. This judgment also states that the
prospective prices of smaller developed plots cannot be adopted to determine the value of
underdeveloped tracts of land. Further, the peculiarities of the land - whether the same is plain or
uneven, the soil is soft or hard, whether the land is situated on a hill or is low-lying, etc. are all
relevant factors. A given parcel of land has multiple dimensions
- social, economic, territorial, and environmental. Accordingly, the market value must be computed
through a valuation model based on attribute pricing rather than fixed prices. In some cases, sale
deeds for Page 26 adjoining lands can be an 'exemplar', i.e., lands that are similarly
2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 placed and have comparable attributes. However, computation of the
market value may require calibration, taking into consideration the advantages and disadvantages of
the acquired land relative to the exemplars. The exemplars must be carefully chosen, especially as
lands are often heuristically grouped in localities at the same rate due to a lack of specific data.
42.Perusal of impugned award reveals that two issues had been framed by Reference Court, which
are: whether petitioners (interested persons) have not been paid adequate compensation by
respondents; and if issue no.1 is replied in affirmative what is adequate compensation to which
petitioners (interested person) are entitled to.
43.Perusal of record as also impugned award reveals that claimants/ respondents have produced
certified copies of sale deeds, certified copies of awards as also certified copy of judgement dated 16
th May 2002, passed by Reference Court in a land acquisition matter/reference. These certified
copies cannot be said have no legal sanctity as has been claimed by appellant. Such a claim has
rightly been overruled by Reference Court. After this, the Reference Court went through all three
sale deeds, produced by claimants/respondents and discussed them in detail. In one sale deed
registered on 3 rd August 1989, sale consideration amount had been shown as Rs.1.00 Lakh per
Kanal. In second sale deed, executed on 11th February 1991, sale consideration has been shown as
Rs.2.00 Lakhs per Kanal. In third sale deed registered on 21st February 1991, sale consideration had
been mentioned as Rs.2.00 Lakhs per Kanal. Nevertheless, the Reference Page 27 Court observed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 15
Union Of India vs State Of J&K And Others on 29 July, 2025
that these sale deeds could not be considered2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 as sufficient evidence to
determine fair and adequate compensation and therefore, the said sale instances brought on record
by claimants/ respondents were declared by Reference Court not true determinative factors and
excluded them from consideration.
44.After excluding sale deeds produced by respondents/claimants from the zone of consideration
for computation of compensation, the Reference Court took up and made mention of Awards passed
in other acquisition cases in the estate of Humhama. In one case, Rs.1.30 Lakh per Kanal had been
given and, in another case, Rs.2.50 Lakhs per Kanal had been awarded by Collector. And in third
case, Reference Court had enhanced compensation to Rs.3.00 Lakhs per Kanal. The Reference Court
has found that indenting department in its evidence has not been able to counter evidence brought
on record by claimants/respondents. It has also been found by Reference Court that the land
acquired was being used as orchards. It is worthwhile to mention here that Reference Court has
rightly and correctly made reference to an acquisition matter where land was acquired in the year
1988 and compensation @ Rs.2.50 Lakhs per kanal was assessed. It may not be out of place to
mention here that land in question was just a stone's throw from International Airport, Srinagar.
However, the Reference Court, at the end, has been conservative in computing and granting only
Rs.1.10 Lacs per Kanal as compensation as against the award issued by Collector @ Rs.70,000/- per
kanal, which had been an injustice towards claimants/respondents on the part of Collector. At this
stage, it would not be appropriate to Page 28 change, modify or alter the judgement by raising little
above 2021:JKLHC-SGR:6905 the compensation awarded by the Reference Court.
45.For the reasons discussed above, the instant appeal is dismissed.
46.Registry to transmit the amount, if any, deposited by appellant along with interest to Reference
Court for release in favour of claimants/ respondents after proper verification by their counsel.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 29.07.2025 Ajaz Ahmad, Secretary Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/No. Page 29
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153537796/ 16
