Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj
Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 24.08.2023
Pronounced on : 12.09.2023
LPASW No.137/2010
1. Union of India through Secretary Ministry of Defence,
Govt. of India, New Delhi
2. The Chief of Army Staff,
Sena Bhawan AHQ, New Delhi
3. The Officer in Charge Records,
JAKLI C/o 56 APO
4. The Chief Controller of Defence Accounts(P)
Allahabad U.P.
...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. R.S.Jamwal, CGSC
V/s
1. Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/o Gurdit Singh
Age 47 years, No:9078858 of 3 JAKLI
R/o Village Pargwal Tehsil Akhnoor
District Jammu
...Respondent
Through:- Mr. Jatinder Choudhary, Advocate
2. Brindra Kumar Col. VRC 3 JAKLI
C/o 56 APO
3. S.S.Randhwa (Enquiry Officer) Col.
4. Tehjinder Singh, Major, Officer Commanding
Depot Company JAKLI Centre AFT Chinar, Srinagar
...Proforma-respondent(s)
2
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 1
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. This intra Court appeal under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is directed against a judgment dated
25th March, 2009 passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court ["Writ Court"] in a writ petition
SWP No.2129/2001 titled Ex-Havaldar Angrej Singh v. Union of India and others, whereby the writ
petition filed by respondent No.1 (hereinafter "writ petitioner") has been allowed and the order of
his discharge from the Service passed by the appellants has been quashed. There is a further
direction by the Writ Court to treat the writ petitioner in service for such period as would be
sufficient to entitle him for pensionary and retiral benefits.
2. Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by the learned counsel for the appellants, we
deem it appropriate to take notice of few material facts.
3. Writ petitioner came to be enrolled in Indian Army as Sepoy on 05.09.1972. In the year 1979,
when he was availing 60 days annual leave, the writ petitioner crossed over to Pakistan alongwith
two civilians of his village, namely, Rattan Singh and Mohinder Singh and accepted Rs.100/- as
gratification/remuneration from Pakistanis. This fact of his crossing over to Pakistan was not
disclosed by the writ petitioner to anyone in the Army on rejoining from annual leave. However, it
was later revealed to the Army Authorities by the Intelligence Agencies.
4. Since the writ petitioner had crossed over to Pakistan and had not even disclosed the said fact to
the Army Authorities, he was awarded "severe reprimand" under Section 63 of the Army Act, 1950
["the Army Act"].
5. It seems that the Government of India as also the Army Authorities had been receiving complaints
against some army men, who were crossing over to Pakistan and working against the interests of the
nation and, as such, under the instructions of Government of India, such elements in the Army were
identified and thrown out from service. It also came to the notice of the Army Authorities that the
writ petitioner was also one such element, who was involved in alleged subversive activities
detrimental not only to military discipline but also to the security of the Nation.
6. Accordingly, the Army Authorities invoked Rule 13(3) of the Army Rules, 1954 ["the Army Rules"]
and put the writ petitioner on show cause notice on 07.06.1986. The show cause notice was replied
by the writ petitioner. The writ petitioner virtually accepted the charge but requested that he may be
permitted to continue for some more time so that he completes qualifying service tenure of 15 years
so as to become entitled to pension. The Competent Authority did not accept the request of the writ
petitioner and, accordingly, discharged him from the Service on 11.7.1986. At the time of his
discharge, the writ petitioner was having total 14 years, 2 months and 07 days(cid:128) service in the Army
and, therefore, was held not entitled to any pension. However, all other due retiral benefits like
AFPP Fund Balance, Credit Balance and Service Gratuity etc were released in his favour.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 2
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
7. Feeling aggrieved, the writ petitioner filed the writ petition SWP No.2129/2001, which was
contested by the Army Authorities. The sole plea which was taken by the writ petitioner before the
Writ Court was that he having been reprimanded for the same offence could not have been tried
again and inflicted the punishment of discharge from service. Though, the Writ Court has not said it
in so many words but it clearly comes out from a reading of the judgment that the writ petition filed
by the writ petitioner was allowed on the ground that the writ petitioner could not have been
subjected to two punishments for the same offence. It is this judgment of the Writ Court dated
25.03.2009, which is called in question before us in this appeal.
8. Mr. R.S.Jamwal, learned counsel appearing for the appellants- Army Authorities vehemently
contends that the Writ Court has not appreciated that the nature of power exercised by the Army
Authorities for awarding punishment of „severe reprimand(cid:128) for commission of offence under
Section 63 of the Act and the power exercised subsequently under Rule 13(3) item III(v) of the Rules
discharging the writ petitioner from service were two different powers; one pertains to inflicting of
punishment for an offence committed and the other is an administrative power to discharge a
member of the service on various grounds including that a person is not fit to be retained in service.
He, therefore, argues that the plea of double jeopardy, as was invoked by the writ petitioner before
the Writ Court, was not available. He submits that in the instant case, the writ petitioner was not
subjected to trial for an offence twice or that he was punished twice for the same offence.
9. Per contra, Mr. Jatinder Choudhary, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.1, places
strong reliance on Section 121 of the Act and submits that if a person subject to the Army Act has
been convicted or acquitted for an offence by a Court Martial or by a Criminal Court or has been
dealt with under any of the Sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the
same offence by a Court Martial or dealt with under the said Section. He argues that since the writ
petitioner had been dealt with under Section 80 of the Act and had been convicted for an offence
under Section 63 of the Act, as such, could not have been discharged from service by invoking so
called administrative powers by the Army Authorities. He, therefore, submits that awarding two
punishments for the same act tantamounts to subjecting the writ petitioner to double jeopardy
which is prohibited under Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India.
10. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the judgment passed by the Writ Court is not sustainable in law and,
therefore, deserves to be set aside.
11. The facts in the instant case are not in dispute. The allegation that the writ petitioner had crossed
over to Pakistan and accepted an illegal gratification from Pakistanis was not refuted by the writ
petitioner. It is true that at the relevant point of time i.e. between 06.10.1979 to 04.12.1979 the writ
petitioner was in his village availing annual leave. While on leave, he along with two other civilians
of his village crossed over to Pakistan. This fact came to the knowledge of the Army Authorities
through Intelligence Agencies. It seems that initially the Authorities did not take this act of the writ
petitioner crossing over to Pakistan illegally, along with two civilians while on leave, seriously and,
accordingly, let him off with a punishment of "severe reprimand" on the charge of violation of good
order and discipline punishable under Section 63 of the Act. The procedure adopted by the Army
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 3
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
Authorities was, as laid down in Section 80 of the Act.
12. Before we proceed further, we deem it just and proper to set out Sections 63 and 80 of the Act
herein below:-
"63. Violation of good order and discipline - Any person subject to this Act who is
guilty of any act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to
good order and military discipline shall, on conviction by court-martial, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven year or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned."
........................................ .........................................
80. Punishments of person other than officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers.-
Subject to the provisions of section 81, a commanding officer or such other officer as is, with the
consent of the Central Government specified by the Chief of the Army Staff, may, in the prescribed
manner proceed against a person subject to this Act otherwise than an officer, junior commissioned
officer or warrant officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to
the prescribed, one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,-
(a) imprisonment in military custody up to twenty-eight days;
(b) detention up to twenty-eight days;
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty-eight days;
(d) extra guards or duties;
(e) deprivation of a position of the nature of an appointment or of corps or working
pay, and in the case of non-commissioned officers, also deprivation of acting rank or
reduction to a lower grade of pay;
(f) forfeiture of good service and good conduct pay;
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(h) fine up to fourteen days(cid:128) pay in any one month;
(i) penal deductions under clause (g) of sections 91."
13. From a reading of Section 80 of the Army Act along with Rule 22 of the Army Rules, it becomes
abundantly clear that the Commanding Officer, if after complying with Sub Rule (1) of Rule 22 of the
Army Rules, is of the opinion that the charge ought to be proceeded with, he shall proceed to dispose
of the case under Section 80 of the Act in accordance with the manner and Form in Appendix III.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 4
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
14. From the record, it comes out that the Commanding Officer after having heard the writ
petitioner on the charge under Section 63 of the Army Act was of the opinion that the charge ought
to be proceeded with and, accordingly, disposed of the case under Section 80 of the Act. Section 80
of the Act, reproduced herein above, enumerates nine types of different punishments that can be
awarded, which, inter alia, include the punishment of "severe reprimand or reprimand". As is
provided under Rule 22(3)(a) of the Army Rules, the manner of disposing of the case under Section
80 of the Act is prescribed in Appendix III.
15. Be that as it may, the Commanding Officer followed the relevant provisions of law and,
accordingly, disposed of the charge against the writ petitioner under Section 80 of the Act by
awarding the punishment of "severe reprimand" to the writ petitioner. The writ petitioner continued
in service but did not challenge the order of awarding severe reprimand to him.
16. While everything was going on fine for the writ petitioner, the Army Authorities revisited the
conduct and activities of the writ petitioner and came to the conclusion that the continuous
retention of the writ petitioner in army service would not only be detrimental to military discipline
but also to the security of the Nation. The writ petitioner was issued a show cause notice by the
Commander, 323 Mountain Brigade on 07.06.1986. The show cause notice made a specific reference
to the incident of writ petitioner having crossed over to Pakistan and having received a sum of
Rs.100/- as payment for services rendered by him to Pakistani Intelligence Agencies. The writ
petitioner was informed that the competent authority had framed an opinion that his continuous
retention in service was detrimental to the security of the Nation. The writ petitioner was, therefore,
asked to show cause as to why he should not be discharged from service under Rule 13(3) of the
Rules.
17. The show cause notice was replied by the writ petitioner. He did not dispute his involvement in
subversive activities in the year 1980 but blamed it on his little experience and lesser knowledge of
the consequences of his activities. He even admitted having disclosed the entire secret of having
crossed over to Pakistan before Interrogation personnel. He, however, submitted that since he had
already been punished for such activities, he may be permitted to continue in service for some more
time, so that he could earn his pension, which would be payable to him upon completion of 15 years
of service. The reply to the show cause notice was not accepted by the Commander, who,
accordingly, proceeded to discharge the writ petitioner by exercising the power under Rule
13(3)(III)(v).
18. From the aforesaid sequence of events, it becomes abundantly clear that for commission of
offence under Section 63 i.e. violation of good conduct and discipline exhibited by the writ petitioner
by illegally crossing over the border without informing the Army Authorities, the writ petitioner was
proceeded under Section 80 of the Act and was inflicted the punishment of "severe reprimand".
However, later on, may be after six years of the happening, the authorities having regard to the
intelligence inputs about the activities of the writ petitioner and the factum of his having admitted
his involvement in subversive activities, which included crossing over of border with two civilians
and accepting bribe from Pakistani intelligence agencies for services rendered to them, decided to
get rid of the writ petitioner who, as per the Army Authorities, was not only threat to the discipline
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 5
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
of the Army but was also a threat to the security of the State. Accordingly, acting under Section 22
read with Rule 13, the competent authority decided to discharge the writ petitioner. He was put on
show cause notice, as stated above, and was given an opportunity to tender his explanation. The writ
petitioner fairly conceded the allegations and did not dispute his involvement in subversive
activities. Taking tough stand, the Army Authorities did not even accept the request of the writ
petitioner for allowing him to remain in service for some more months so as to enable him to earn
pension.
19. The writ petitioner was discharged from serving having regard to the fact that the two powers,
one exercisable under Section 80 for awarding punishment for commission of offence under Section
63 of the Act and the other vested in the competent authority to retire, release or discharge from
service any person subject to the Army Act, in the manner prescribed under Rule 13 of the Rules, are
two different powers to be exercised by the authorities to achieve different results. The former is
exercisable to punish delinquent army personnel for commission of an offence. Such person found
guilty is inflicted the punishment prescribed under the Act. If a person is proceeded under Section
80 of the Act then he can be subjected to any of the punishments prescribed in the Section, which
include the punishment of "severe reprimand".
20. The power conferred on the competent authority under Section 22 of the Army Act is of the
nature of Pleasure-Doctrine, whereunder Competent Authority is empowered to retire, release or
discharge a person from service otherwise than by way of punishment. This power is administrative
in nature and is exercisable by the Authorities specified under Rule 13 in the manner laid down
therein. For a quick look, we would like to reproduce Rule 13 of the Rules herein below:-
"13. Authorities empowered to authorize discharge.
(1) Each of the authorities specified in column 3 of the Table below shall be the
competent authority to discharge service person subject to the Act specified in
column 1 thereof on the grounds specified in column 2.
(2) Any power conferred by this rule on any of the aforesaid authorities shall also be
exercisable by any other authority superior to it.
(2A) Where the central Government or the Chief of the Army Staff decides that any
persons subject to the Act should be discharged from service, either unconditionally
or on the fulfillment of certain specified conditions, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in this rule, the Commanding Officer shall also be the competent authority
to discharge from service such person or any person belonging to such class in
accordance with the said decision.
(3) In the table "commanding officer" means the officer commanding the corps or
department to which the person to be discharged belongings except that to the case of
junior commissioned officer and warrant officer of the Special Medical Section of the
Army Medical Corps, the "commanding officer" means the Director of the Medical
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 6
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
Services, Army, and in the case of junior commissioned officer and warrant officers of
Remounts, Veterinary and Farms Corps, the "Commanding officer" means the
Director Remounts, Veterinary and Farms.
Category Grounds of discharge Competent authority Manner of to authorize discharge discharge
Junior I.(i)(a)On completion of the Commanding Officer Commissioned period of service or tenure
officers. specified in the Regulations for his rank or appointment, are on reaching the age limit
whichever is earlier, unless retained on the active list for further specified period with sanction of
the Chief of the Army Staff or on becoming eligible for release under the Regulations.
(b)At his own request on Commanding Officer, transfer to the pension establishment.
(ii)Having been found Commanding Officer.
medically unfit for further To be carried out
service. only on the
recommendatio
n of an Invaliding
Board.
Commanding Officer
(ii-a)Having been found to The individual will
be in permanent low be discharged
medical category SHAPE 2/3 from service on
by a medical board and the
recommendation
when---
of Release
(i) No sheltered Medical Board.
appointment is available in
the unit, or
(ii) Is surplus to be
organization.
(iii) All other classes of
discharge.
(a)In the case of junior If the discharge
commissioned officers is not at the
granted direct request of the
commissions during the Junior
first 12 months service Commissioned
Area/Divisional officer the
Commander competent
authority before sanctioni
Before sanctioning
the discharge shall, if
the circumstances of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 7
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
the case permit, give
the Junior
Commissioned Officer
concerned an
opportunity to show
cause against the
order of discharge.
(b) In the case of
JCOs, not covered by
(a), serving in the Army
or Command the
General Officer
Commanding- in-Chief
of that Army or
command if not below
the rank of Lieutenant
General.
(c) In any other case
the Chief of the Army
Staff.
Warrant
Officer II. (i) (a)On completion of Commanding Officer the period of service or tenure specified in
the Regulations for this rank or appointment, or on reaching the age limit, whichever is earlier,
unless retained on the active list for a further specified period with the sanction of the Brigade/Sub
Area Commander or on becoming eligible to release under the Regulations.
(b)At his own request on Commanding officer the transfer to the pension establishment.
(ii)Having been found Commanding Officer To be carried out only
medically unfit for further on the
service. recommendation of an
Invaliding Board.
(ii) (a) Having been found to be Commanding Officer The individual will be in permanent low
medical discharged from service category SHAPE 2/3 by a on the recommendations medical board
and when---
of Release Medical Board.
(i) No sheltered appointment is available in the unit, or
(ii) Is surplus to the organization.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 8
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
(iii)All other classes of If the discharge is not
discharge Warrant officer Class-I
at the request of the
the General Officer
warrant officer the
Commanding-in-Chief of
competent authority
the Command in which
before sanctioning the
the warrant officer
discharge shall, if the
serving. Other warrant
circumstances of the
officer,Divisional Area of
case permit give the
Independent Brigade/Sub
warrant officer an
Area Commanders.
opportunity to show
cause against the order
of the discharge.
Personnel III. (i)On fulfilling the Commanding officer and,
enrolled under conditions of his enrolment or in the case of a person of
the Act having rechecked the stage at the rank of havildar (or
who Have been which discharged may be equivalent rank) where
attested enforced. such person is to be
discharge. Otherwise
than at his own request
and whether the
commanding
officer below the rank of
Lieutenant Colonel, the
brigade or sub Area
Commander.
(ii)On completion of a Commanding officer Applicable to person
period of army service (in the case of persons enrolled for both
only, there being no unwilling to extend their Army service and
Army Service).
vacancy in the Reserve. Reserve.(A person
who has the right to
extend his Army
Service and wishes
to exercise that right
cannot be discharge
under this head).
(iii) Having been Found Commanding Officer To be carried out
medically unfit for further only on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 9
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
service. recommendation of
an invaliding Board.
(iii) (a) Having been found to Commanding Officer be in permanent low medical The individual will
be category SHAPE 2/3 by a discharged from medical board and when--- service on the
(i) No sheltered recommendations of appointment is available in Release Medical the unit, or Board.
(ii) Is surplus to the
organization. .
The Commanding
(iv)At his own request before Commanding Officer officer will exercise fulfilling the conditions of his
enrolment the power only when he is satisfied as to the desirability of sanctioning application and
the strength of the unit will not thereby be unduly reduced.
(v)All other classes of Brigade/Sub Area The Brigade or Sub
discharge Commander Area Commander
before ordering the
discharge shall, if
the circumstances of
the case permit give
to the person whose
discharge is is
contemplated an
opportunity to
show cause against
the contemplated
discharge
In the case of persons
Persons IV. All classes of discharge Commanding officer or requesting to be
enrolled officer Commanding discharged before
under the Recruit reception fulfilling the
Act but not Camp, or a Recruiting. conditions of their
attested Technical Recruiting or enrolment, the
Deputy Technical commanding officers
Recruiting officer. will exercise this
poser only where he
is satisfied as to the
desirability of
sanctioning the
application that the
strength of the unit
will not thereby be
unduly reduced.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 10
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
Recruits who are
considered unlikely to
become efficient
soldiers will be dealt
with under this item.
21. From a glance of Rule 13 of the Army Rules, it would transpire that after Sub Rule (3) of Rule 13
there is a table prescribed which has four columns. Column (1) denotes category; Column (2) lays
down grounds of discharge; Column (3) prescribes competent authority to authorize discharge; and
Column (4) deals with manner of discharge. The persons enrolled under the Army Act other than
Warrant Officer and Junior Commissioned Officer have been provided to be discharged by the
Commanding Officer on various grounds indicated in Clause (I) to (IV). So far as other classes of
discharge are concerned, Brigade/Sub Area Commander would be competent to discharge.
22. In the instant case, the writ petitioner was discharged on the grounds enumerated in clauses (I)
to (IV) and, therefore, Brigade/Sub Area Commander was competent authority to discharge the writ
petitioner. In any case, competence of the Authority passing the order of discharge was not subject
matter of challenge in the writ petition nor is assailed by the writ petitioner even before us. Since the
nature of powers exercised while awarding punishment of severe reprimand to the writ petitioner
and order of discharge issued by the Brigade/Sub Area Commander in the exercise of power
conferred upon him under Section 22 read with Rule 13 are different, as such, neither the provisions
of Article 20(2) of the Constitution of India nor Section 121 of the Army Act are applicable and
attracted. The writ petitioner, who was convicted for an offence under Section 63 of the Act by the
Commander by proceeding under Section 80 has not been tried again for the same offence either by
the Court Martial or by proceeding under Section 80, 83, 84 and 85 of the Act.
23. Before we close the discussion, we deem it appropriate to reproduce Section 121 of the Act as
well, which reads as follows:-
"121. Prohibition of second trial.-----When any person subject to this Act has been
acquitted or convicted of an offence by a court-martial or by a criminal court, or has
been dealt with under any of the Sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, he shall not be liable to
be tried again for the same offence by a court-martial or dealt with under the said
sections."
24. The Writ Court has not clearly appreciated the distinction between the two powers exercised by
the Army Authorities in respect of the writ petitioner and has erroneously concluded that the Army
Authorities could not have punished the writ petitioner for the same offence twice. The writ
petitioner was punished for commission of offence under Section 63 by the Army Authorities only
once when he was dealt with under Section 80 and administered severe reprimand. Second time, he
was discharged from service in the exercise of different power, which is administrative in nature and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 11
Union Of India Through Secretary ... vs Ex. Havaldar Angraj Singh S/O Gurdit ... on 12 September, 2023
more or less akin to the pleasure doctrine available to the competent authorities enumerated under
Rule 13 of the Army Rules.
25. For the foregoing reasons, we find merit in this appeal and the same is, accordingly, allowed.
Judgment of the Writ Court, impugned in this appeal, is set aside and as a result the writ petition
filed by the writ petitioner is dismissed.
(Rahul Bharti) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU
12.09.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/141965670/ 12
