Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
A n i m p Crl.R.C.No.1043 of 2021 l i IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS c a t
DATED : 23.12.2021 i o CORAM:
n THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA o f Criminal Revision
Case No.1043 of 2021 and t Crl.M.P.No.13646 of 2021 h e R.Prabakaran ... Petitioner
..Vs..
s e r
1. State rep by i The Inspector of Police, o Kilkodungalore Police Station, u Crime
No.95/2015.
s
2. A.Vanathaiyan ... Respondents n a t PRAYER: Criminal Revision Case filed under
Section 397 and 401 of u r Cr.P.C to call for records relating to order dated
19.04.2021 passed in e Crl.M.P.No.803 of 2021 in C.C.No.296 of 2017 on the file of
the Judicial o Magistrate Court, Vandavasi, Tiruvannamalai District, set aside the
same.
f For Petitioner : Mr.P.Mani c For Respondents : Mr.S.Sugendran for R1 r i Government Advocate
(Crl. Side) m i ORDER n a This revision has been filed against the order dated 19.04.2021 made l p o
c e https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis e d in Crl.M.P.No.803 of 2021 in C.C.No.296 of 2017 by the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Vandavasi,Tiruvannamalai District, dismissing the petition filed under
Section 239 of Cr.P.C. to discharge the petitioner/accused No.3.
2.The case of the prosecution is that on 02.05.2015, at about 20.30 hours with respect of a dispute
regarding the Government poramboke land opposite to the house of the defacto complainant, the
accused had formed into an unlawful assembly and had abused the defacto complainant with filthy
language and that A1, A2 and A4 have assaulted the defacto complainant with wooden log on the
head and on the chest and A3, A5, A6 have assaulted the defacto complainant with an iron rod on
the back side and on the private part and the accused A1 to A6 have also assaulted the wife of the
defacto complainant and criminally intimidated them. On the complaint given by the defacto
complainant, the respondent registered a case against the petitioner/accused for the offence under
Sections 147, 148, 294(b), 324 and 506(i) I.P.C. and after completion of the investigation, filed the
final report against the accused on 20.06.2015 and the final report was taken on file in C.C.No.296
of 2017 for the offences under Sections 147, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 148, 294(b), 324 and
506(i) I.P.C. The respondent had cited 10 witnesses and 7 documents. The petitioner, who is the
third accused in this case had filed a discharge application on the ground stating that he is not
involved in the above said occurrence. The petitioner has submitted that he was not present at the
scene of occurrence during the relevant time and that he was in Chennai pursuing his law course in
School of Excellence and that during the particular time, on 02.05.2015, he was attending marriage
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 1
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
of his friend viz., one Praveen Babu at RJ Resideny, T.Nagar and that his mother was the president
of Salavedu Panchayat during the period of the alleged offence and that there was a civil dispute
between the parties thereby he was falsely implicated in this case on account of enmity. The trial
court finding that the defense of alibi and the documents relied on by the petitioner/accused for
proof of alibi cannot be taken into consideration at the time of deciding the discharge application,
had dismissed the same and against which, the present revision has been filed.
3.Learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that the petitioner was undergoing law course at
the School of Excellence during the relevant https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis time and he was
staying at Chennai in a Mansion and during the period between 29.04.2015 and 14.05.2015, the
final semester examination for the petitioner was going on and thereby, he was not present at the
scene of occurrence. The petitioner's mother is the president of Salavedu Panchayat during the
occurrence. The defacto complainant/second respondent had trespassed and encroached certain
parts of Government poramboke land in Survey No.479/1 and Survey No.465 and 456 and there was
a proposal by the Panchayat for passing a resolution based on the petition given by a general public
for erection of Dr.Ambedkar statute in the place where there was encroachment by the second
respondent and there was enmity between the defacto complainant and the petitioner and thereby
he was falsely implicated in this case. Learned counsel would further submit that the statement
recorded from the witnesses and the medical records produced by the respondent would only
disclose for the offences punishable under section 323 I.P.C. whereas the final report has been filed
for the offence under Section 324 I.P.C.
4.Per contra, the learned Government Advocate appearing for the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
respondent would submit that the petitioner in this case had taken the defence of alibi and he had
also produced the documents before the Trial Court. Though the Trial Court is not at all required to
look into the documents at the time of deciding the discharge petition, it had looked into the same,
however it had not believed the documents and rejected the same. The trial court had found that the
materials relied on by the prosecution disclosed the commission of offence and had dismissed the
application. He would further submit that if the petitioner raises the defence of alibi, it can be raised
only during the time of trial by letting in evidence and the admissibility of the documents relied on
the petitioner can be tested at the relevant stage during trial. He would submit that the Trial Court
had rightly dismissed the discharge petition.
5. Heard the learned counsels on either side and perused the materials available on record.
6.In this case on hand, while deciding the discharging petition, though the trial court is not required
to look into the documents produced by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the accused, it had looked
into those documents and had stated that the ground of alibi can be only taken at the time of trial
and further the Trial Court has also not believed some of the documents produced by the petitioner.
Further, the trial court has found that there are prima facie materials for framing charges against
the petitioner. Further, the trial court had also found that the petitioner had earlier approached this
Court by filing Crl.O.P.No.26817 of 2019 and the same was disposed of on 30.10.2019 with a
direction to complete the trial within a period of 6 months from the date of receipt of a copy of the
order. Ultimately, the trial court dismissed the discharge petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 2
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
7.It is trite that at the stage of deciding a discharge petition, the trial court cannot conduct a roving
enquiry or is not permitted to conduct a mini trial. The trial court has to look into whether there are
sufficient materials for framing of charges against the accused.
8. The Honourable Supreme Court in various decisions has held that no mini trial is contemplated
at the stage of framing of charges or at the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis stage of considering the
validity of such charges framed. For this proposition, it is relevant to refer to 2014 11 SCC 709 (State
of Tamil Nadu Vs. N.Suresh Rajan and others), wherein it has been held thus:
29. .... True it is that at the time of consideration of the applications for discharge, the
Court cannot act as a mouthpiece of the prosecution or act as a post office and may
sift evidence in order to find out whether or not the allegations made are groundless
so as to pass an order of discharge. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an
application for discharge, the Court has to proceed with an assumption that the
materials brought on record by the prosecution are true and evaluate the said
materials and documents with a view to find out whether the facts emerging
therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. At this stage, probative value of the materials has to
be gone into and the Court is not expected to go deep into the matter and hold that
the materials would not warrant a conviction. In our opinion, what needs to be
considered is whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence has been
committed and not whether a ground for convicting the accused has been made out.
To put it differently, if the Court thinks that the accused might have committed the
offence on the basis of the materials on record on its probative value, it can frame the
charge; though for conviction, the Court has to come to the conclusion that the
accused has committed the offence. The law does not permit a mini trial at this stage.
......32. While passing the impugned orders, the Court has not sifted the materials for the purpose of
finding out whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused but whether
that would warrant a conviction. We are of the opinion that this was not the stage where the Court
should https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis have appraised the evidence and discharged the accused as
if it was passing an order of acquittal. Further, defect in investigation itself cannot be a ground for
discharge. In our opinion, the order impugned suffers from grave error and calls for rectification.?
9. If there is a strong suspicion, which leads the Court to think that there is ground for presuming
that the accused has committed an offence, then it is not open to the Court to say that there is no
sufficient ground for proceeding against the the accused. The presumption of the guilt of the accused
which is to be drawn at the initial stage is only for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the
Court should proceed with the trial or not, as has been held in 2015 2 SCC 417 (State Vs. A.Arun
Kumar).
10. Further in 2018 13 SCC 455 (State by the Inspector of Police, Chennai Vs. S.Selvi and another),
the Honourable Supreme Court has relied on its various decisions, regarding the scope of powers of
revision, and has held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 3
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
“...6 It is well settled by this Court in a catena of judgments including Union of India
v. Prafulla Kumar Samal [Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal, (1979) 3 SCC 4 :
1 9 7 9 S C C ( C r i ) 6 0 9 ] , D i l a w a r B a l u K u r a n e v . S t a t e o f
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Maharashtra[Dilawar Balu Kurane v. State of
Maharashtra, (2002) 2 SCC 135 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 310] , Sajjan Kumar v. CBI [Sajjan
Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1371] , State v. A. Arun Kumar
[State v. A. Arun Kumar, (2015) 2 SCC 417 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 96 : (2015) 1 SCC
(L&S) 505] , Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta[Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta, (2015) 3
SCC 424 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 265] , State of Orissa v.
Debendra Nath Padhi [State of Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi, (2003) 2 SCC 711 : 2003 SCC (Cri)
688] , Niranjan Singh Karam Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya [Niranjan Singh Karam
Singh Punjabi v. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya, (1990) 4 SCC 76 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 47] and Supt. &
Remembrancer of Legal Affairsv. Anil Kumar Bhunja [Supt. & Remembrancer of Legal Affairs v.
Anil Kumar Bhunja, (1979) 4 SCC 274 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 1038] that the Judge while considering the
question of framing charge under Section 227 of the Code in sessions cases (which is akin to Section
239 CrPC pertaining to warrant cases) has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out; where the material placed before the court discloses grave suspicion against the accused
which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully justified in framing the charge; by and
large if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before
him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully
within his rights to discharge the accused. The Judge cannot act merely as a post office or a
mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total
effect of the statements and the documents produced before the court, any basic infirmities
appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean that the Judge should make a roving
enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the materials as if he was conducting a trial.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
7. In Sajjan Kumar v. CBI [Sajjan Kumar v. CBI, (2010) 9 SCC 368 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1371] , this
Court on consideration of the various decisions about the scope of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code,
laid down the following principles:
(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under Section
227 CrPC has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited
purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out. The test to determine prima facie case would depend upon the facts of each
case.
(ii) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 4
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution
but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence
and the documents produced before the court, any basic infirmities, etc. However, at
this stage, there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it can frame the charge, though for conviction
the conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has
committed the offence.
(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the material on
record cannot be gone into but before framing a charge the court must apply its
judicial mind on the material placed on record and must be satisfied that the
commission of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis offence by the accused was possible.
(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the court is required to evaluate the
material and documents on record with a view to find out if the facts emerging
therefrom taken at their face value disclose the existence of all the ingredients
constituting the alleged offence. For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it
cannot be expected even at that initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states
as gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad probabilities of the
case.
(vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion only, as
distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered to discharge
the accused and at this stage, he is not to see whether the trial will end in conviction
or acquittal.?
8. This Court in State v. A. Arun Kumar [State v. A. Arun Kumar, (2015) 2 SCC 417 : (2015) 2 SCC
(Cri) 96 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 505] , Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta [Sonu Gupta v. Deepak Gupta,
(2015) 3 SCC 424 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 265] , State of Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi [State of Orissa
v. Debendra Nath Padhi, (2003) 2 SCC 711 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 688] and State of T.N. v. N. Suresh
Rajan[State of T.N. v. N. Suresh Rajan, (2014) 11 SCC 709 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 529 :
(2014) 2 SCC (L&S) 721] has reiterated almost the aforementioned principles.
However, in State of Haryana v.
Bhajan Lal [State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 426] , relied
upon by the counsel for Respondent 1 is not applicable to the facts of the case inasmuch as the said
matter arose out of the judgement of the High Court quashing the entire criminal proceedings
inclusive of the registration of first information report. The said matter was not concerned with the
discharge of the accused. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis .....10. If on the basis of the material on
record, the Court would form prima facie opinion that the accused might have committed the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 5
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
offence, it can frame charge, though for conviction it is required to be proved beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused has committed the offence. At the time of framing of charges, the probative
value of the material on record has to be gone into and the Court is not expected to go deep into the
matter and hold that the materials would not warrant conviction. The Court is required to evaluate
the material on record at the stage of Sections 227 or 239 of the Code, as the case may be, only with
a view to find out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at the face value discloses the existence of all
the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. It is trite that at the stage of consideration of an
application for discharge, the Court has to proceed with the presumption that materials brought on
record by the prosecution are true and evaluate such material with a view to find out whether the
facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose existence of the ingredients of the
offence. “
11. In State by Karnataka Lokayukta,Police Station, Bengaluru Vs M.R.Hiremath, (2019) 7 SCC 515 ,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:
“...25. The High Court ought to have been cognizant of the fact that the trial court was
dealing with an application for discharge under the provisions of Section 239 CrPC.
The parameters which govern the exercise of this jurisdiction have found expression
in several decisions of this Court. It is a settled priciple of law that at the stage of
considering an application for discharge the court must proceed on the assumption
that the material which has been brought on the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
record by the prosecution is true and evaluate the material in order to determined
whether the fact emerging from the material, taken on its face value, disclose the
existence of the ingredient necessary to constitute the offence. In State of T.N. Vs .
N.Suresh Rajan, adverting to the earlier decision on the subject, this Court held: (SCC
pp.721-22,para 29) “...29...At this Stage, probative value of the materials has to be
gone into and the court is not expected to go deep into the matter and hold that the
materials would not warrant a conviction. In our opinion, what needs to be
considered is whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence has been
committed and not whether a ground for convicting the accused has been made out.
To put it differently, if the court thinks that the accused might have committed the
offence on the basis of the materials on record on its probative value, it can frame the
charge; though for conviction, the court has to come to the conclusion that the
accused has committed the offence. The law does not permit a mini trial at this
stage.”
12. Further in State of Orissa vs Debendra Nath Padhi, (2005) 1 SCC 568, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held at the stage of deciding the discharge application, the Court can consider only the
material produced by the prosecution. No provision in Cr.P.C grants right to the accused to file any
material or document at the stage of discharge. Further, it has also held that the necessity or
desirability of the documents can be considered only at the stage of trial.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 6
Unknown vs S on 23 December, 2021
13. Applying the law enunciated by various Judgment referred above in consonance with the fact of
the case on hand, in this case, the petitioner had claimed that during the relevant time of
occurrence, he was not present in the village and that he was undergoing law course in Chennai and
attending marriage at that time. He had also filed certain documents to substantiate his claim of
alibi. Though the Trial Court is not required to look into the documents produced and relied on by
the accused, the Trial Court had considered the same and rejected it. In the opinion of this Court, at
the stage of discharge, the Trial Court cannot appreciate the records and it is not required to conduct
a roving enquiry or mini trial. The Court can only look into see whether the material placed by the
prosecution before the Court made out prima facie case against the accused. In this case, the Trial
Court found that there are materials available for framing charges against the accused and
dismissed the petition. This Court does not find any infirmity or illegality in the impugned order. In
the result, this Criminal Revision Case stands dismissed.
14. Further, it is made clear that what has been observed by this Court
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis is only for the purpose of disposal of the discharge petition and
any observations made, shall not be prejudiced the rights of the parties during the course of trial and
the Trial Court may also not be influenced/ inhibited by the observations made by this Court and
shall proceed with the trial independently in accordance with law. Further, this Court while
dismissing the quash petition of the petitioner in Crl.O.P.No.26817 of 2019 by order dated
30.10.2019, had directed the Trial Court to complete the Trial within a period of six months from
the date of receipt of the copy of the order. The Trial Court shall complete the trial in compliance
with the order passed by this Court.
23.12.2021 vri/shk A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA, J., vri/shk https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To
1. Judicial Magistrate Court, Vandavasi, Tiruvannamalai District
2. The Inspector of Police, Kilkodungalore Police Station, Crime No.95/2015.
3.The Public Prosecutor (Crl side), High Court, Madras.
23.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169891443/ 7
