Urikhimbam Nobokishore Singh vs State Of Manipur & 3 Ors on 4 April, 2024
Urikhimbam Nobokishore Singh vs State Of Manipur & 3 Ors on
4 April, 2024
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Item No. 82
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 431 of 2022
Urikhimbam Nobokishore Singh ... Petitioner/s
Vs.
State of Manipur & 3 ors. ... Respondent/s
B E F O R E HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 04-04-2024 Heard Mr. O.
Kiranjit, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Niranjan Sanasam, learned GA
appearing for the respondents.
[2] The main grievance raised by the petitioner in the present writ petition is that the authorities are
not registering FIRs or taking up appropriate and adequate investigation in connection with the FIR
No. 133(7)2019 SJM PS, u/s 307/506/34-IPC and 25 (1-B) Arms Act and the petitioner has made a
prayer for directing the concerned authorities for proper investigation in respect of the said FIR. [3]
The petitioner also made another prayer for directing the respondents to take necessary measures
for assuring the security and safety of the petitioner and his family members. [4] At the outset, Mr.
Niranjan Sanasam, learned GA appearing for the respondents submitted that the present petition is
not maintainable in view of the principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
following cases :-
WP(C) No. 431 of 2022 Page 1
(i) 2008(2) SCC 409 "Sakiri Vasu -Vrs.- State of U.P"
wherein it has been laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under:-
"25. We have elaborated on the above matter because we often find that when
someone has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered at the police station
and/or a proper investigation is not being done by the police, he rushes to the High
Court to file a writ petition or a petition under Section 482 CrPC. We are of the
opinion that the High Court should not encourage this practice and should ordinarily
refuse to interfere in such matters and relegate the petitioner to his alternating
remedy, first under Section 154(3) and Section 36 CrPC before the police officers
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182352867/ 1
Urikhimbam Nobokishore Singh vs State Of Manipur & 3 Ors on 4 April, 2024
concerned, and if that is of no avail, by approaching the Magistrate concerned under
Section 156(3).
"26. If a person has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered by the police
station his first remedy is to approach the Superintendent of Police under Section
154(3) CrPC or other police officer referred to in Section 36 CrPC. If despite
approaching the Superintendent of Police or the officer referred to in Section 36 his
grievance still persists, then he can approach a Magistrate under Section 156(3) CrPC
instead of rushing to the High Court by way of a writ petition or a petition under
Section 482 CrPC. Moreover, he has a further remedy of filing a criminal complaint
under Section 200 CrPC. Why then should writ petitions or Section 482 petitions be
entertained when there are so many alternative remedies?
"27. As we have already observed above, the Magistrate has very wide powers to
direct registration of an FIR and to ensure a proper investigation and for this purpose
he can monitor the investigation to ensure that the investigation is done properly
(though he cannot investigate himself). The High Court should discourage the
practice of filing a writ petition or petition under Section 482 CrPC simply because a
person has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered by the WP(C) No. 431 of
2022 Page 2 police, or after being registered, proper investigation has not been done
by the police. For this grievance, the remedy lies under Sections 36 and 154(3) before
the police officers concerned, and if that is of no avail, under Section 156(3) CrPC
before the Magistrate or by filing a criminal complaint under Section 200 CrPC and
not by filing a writ petition or a petition under Section 482 CrPC.
"28. It is true that alternative remedy is not an absolute bar to a writ petition, but it is
equally well settled that if there is an alternative remedy the High Court should not
ordinarily interfere."
(ii) 2016(6) SCC 277 "Sudhir Bhaskarrao Tambe -Vrs.- Hemant Yashwant Dhage & ors.", wherein
the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under :-
"2. This Court has held in Sakiri Vasu v. State of U.P, that if a person has a grievance
that his FIR has not been registered by the police, or having been registered, proper
investigation is not being done, then the remedy of the aggrieved person is not to go
to the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, but to approach the
Magistrate concerned under Section 156(3) CrPC. If such an application under
Section 156(3) CrPC is made and the Magistrate is, prima facie, satisfied, he can
direct the FIR to be registered, or if it has already been registered, he can direct
proper investigation to be done which includes in his discretion, if he deems it
necessary, recommending change of the investigating officer, so that a proper
investigation is done in the matter. We have said this in Sakiri Vasu case because
what we have found in this country is that the High Courts have been flooded with
writ petitions praying for registration of the first information report or praying for a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182352867/ 2
Urikhimbam Nobokishore Singh vs State Of Manipur & 3 Ors on 4 April, 2024
proper investigation "3. We are of the opinion that if the High Courts entertain such
writ petitions, then they will be flooded with such writ petitions and will not be able
to do any other work except dealing with such writ petitions.
WP(C) No. 431 of 2022 Page 3 Hence, we have held that the complainant must avail
of his alternate remedy to approach the Magistrate concerned under Section 156(3)
CrPC and if he does so, the Magistrate will ensure, if prima facie he is satisfied,
registration of the first information report and also ensure a proper investigation in
the matter, and he can also monitor the investigation.
"4. In view of the settled position in Sakiri Vasu case, the impugned judgment of the
High Court cannot be sustained and is hereby set aside. The Magistrate concerned is
directed to ensure proper investigation into the alleged offence under Section 156(3)
CrPC and if he deems it necessary, he can also recommend to the SSP/SP concerned
a change of the investigating officer, so that a proper investigation is done. The
Magistrate can also monitor the investigation, though he cannot himself investigate
(as investigation is the job of the police). Parties may produce any material they wish
before the Magistrate concerned. The learned Magistrate shall be uninfluenced by
any observation in the impugned order of the High Court."
[5] Mr. O. Kiranjit, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that in view of the above
quoted Apex Court's judgement, any appropriate order may be passed by this Court as deem fit and
proper. [6] After hearing the submission advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties
and on perusal of the aforesaid judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, this Court is of the considered
view that entertaining the present writ petition will be against the principle of law laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court. Accordingly, this Court is not inclined to entertain the present writ petition. [7]
So far as the prayer made by the petitioner for issuing a direction to the respondents to take
necessary measures for assuring the security and safety of the petitioner and his family members is
concerned, WP(C) No. 431 of 2022 Page 4 as the petitioner did not approach the concerned
authorities with a request for providing security, this Court do not find any ground for issuing such
direction as prayed for by the petitioner. [8] In the result, the present writ petition is hereby
dismissed, however, without any order as to cost.
JUDGE Dhakeshori LAISHRAM Digitally LAISHRAM signed by DHAKESH DHAKESHORI DEVI
Date: 2024.04.05 ORI DEVI 11:47:49 +05'30' WP(C) No. 431 of 2022 Page 5
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182352867/ 3
