Usha Rawat vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
Usha Rawat vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
MCRC-21797-2019
(Smt. Usha Rawat Vs. State of M.P.)
Gwalior, Dated : 26/06/2019
Shri Prashant Sharma, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Kamlesh Koli, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent/State.
Case Diary is perused.
Learned counsel for the rival parties are heard. The applicant has filed this first bail application u/S
439 of Cr.P.C. for grant of bail. The applicant has been arrested on 30/04/2019 by Police Station-
Kotwali, District- Datia in connection with Crime No.523/2018 registered in relation to the offences
punishable under Sections 363, 366 (a), 120-B, 376 and 344 of the IPC.
Prosecution story, in short, is that complainant lodged a report to the effect that his niece had gone
to Pitambra temple from where, co-accused- Ravi Rawat and Ravindra Rawat by enticing the
prosecutrix took her away. On the basis of aforesaid, crime has been registered against the applicant
and co-accused persons.
Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the applicant is a woman who is aged about 40
years and she has been falsely implicated in the present case. It is also submitted by the learned
counsel for the applicant that applicant is not named in the FIR and being a mother of co-accused-
Ravi, the applicant has been implicated in the case. Charge sheet has been filed and no further
custodial interrogation is required in the matter. It is also submitted by the learned counsel for the
applicant that prosecutrix is aged about 17 ½ years and in her statement recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C., she stated that she herself had gone with co-accused- Ravi and thereafter, they solemnized
the marriage by consent to each other. The applicant is in custody since 30/04/2019 without any
substantial reason and she is a permanent resident of Village -Bhashanakala, P.S. Badoni, District-
Datia. There is no likelihood of her absconsion or tampering with the prosecution evidence, if she is
released on bail. The applicant is ready to abide by all the terms and conditions as may be imposed
by this Court. With the aforesaid submissions, he prays for grant of bail.
Learned Public Prosecutor for the respondent/State opposed the application and prayed for its
rejection by contending that on the basis of the allegations and the material available on record, no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131392167/ 1
Usha Rawat vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 26 June, 2019
case for grant of bail is made out.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case coupled with the fact that trial is not likely to
conclude in near future and prolonged pre-trial detention being anathema to the concept of liberty,
this Court is inclined to extend the benefit of bail to the applicant.
Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on merits of the case, this application is allowed and it
is directed that the applicant namely- Smt. Usha Rarwat be released on bail on furnishing a personal
bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand Only) with one solvent surety of the like
amount to the satisfaction of the concerned trial Court/committal Court.
This order will remain operative subject to compliance of the following conditions by the applicant :
1. The applicant will comply with all the terms and conditions of the bond executed
by her;
2. The applicant will cooperate in the investigation/trial, as the case may be;
3. The applicant will not indulge herself in extending inducement, threat or promise
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him/her from
disclosing such facts to the Court or to the Police Officer, as the case may be;
4. The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which she is
accused;
5. The applicant will not seek unnecessary adjournments during the trial; and
6. The applicant will not leave India without previous permission of the trial
Court/Investigating Officer, as the case may be.
A copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned for compliance.
C.c. as per rules.
(S.A. Dharmadhikari) Judge rahul RAHUL SINGH PARIHAR 2019.06.27 16:45:53 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131392167/ 2
