V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2 December, 2021
V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2
December, 2021
Author: V.Bharathidasan
Bench: V.Bharathidasan
Crl.A.No.363 of 2011
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 02.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE V.BHARATHIDASAN
Crl.A.No.363 of 2011
1.V.Arumugam(died)
2.Smt.Thulasimani
3.A.Raghupathy
4.S.Premavathi
(Appellants 2 to 4 in the place of the deceased/
appellant amended as per the order in
Crl.M.P.No.10780 of 2021 in Crl.A.
No.363 of 2011, dated 21.10.2021) ..Appellants
Vs.
State of Tamil Nadu rep.by
The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Erode,
(Crime No.3/Ac/2003) ..Respondent
Prayer: Criminal Appeal has been filed under Section 374(2) of Cr.P.C.,
against the judgment of the learned Special Judge/Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Erode, in Spl.C.No.12 of 2004, dated 15.06.2011.
For Appellants :Mr.A.K.Kumaraswami, Senior Counsel for
Mr.Kaithaimalai Kumaran
For Respondent :Mr.C.E.Pratap,
Government Advocate (Crl.Side)
-----
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/11
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114049437/ 1
V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2 December, 2021
(cid:12) Crl.A.No.363 of 2011
JUDGEMENT
The deceased first appellant is the sole accused, in Spl.C.No.12 of 2004, on the file of the learned
Special Judge / Chief Judicial Magistrate, Erode. He stood charged for offences under Sections 7
and 13(2) r/w Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
By judgment dated 15.06.2011, the trial Court convicted him under Sections 7 and 13(2) r/w Section
13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and sentenced him to undergo simple imprisonment for
one year and to pay a fine of Rs.3,000/-, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
Challenging the said conviction and sentence, the present appeal has been filed. Pending appeal, the
appellant / accused died and his legal representatives were substituted to prosecute the present
appeal.
2. The case of the prosecution in brief is that, the deceased appellant/accused, was working as
Village Administrative Officer in Pazhamangalam Village, Erode district. P.W.2/defacto
complainant approached the accused for transfer of patta in his favour based on a Civil Court
decree. The accused demanded a sum of Rs.2,000/- as illegal gratification for transferring the patta.
However, on persuasion, he agreed for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Rs.1,000/- and directed
P.W.2 to pay it on or before 28.05.2003. Immediately, the P.W.2 approached the respondent police
and filed a complaint. Based on that, the respondent police registered a F.I.R. in Crime
No.3/Ac/2003/ER for offences under Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act and recorded
his statement. Thereafter, P.W.17, the Inspector of Police, sought the assistance of P.W.3, who was
working as a Special Officer in the Weavers Cooperative Society and he prepared the Mahazar and
prepared for the trap. Thereafter, P.W.2 met the accused, where he demanded the money and P.W.2
handed over the same to the accused. Immediately, P.W.17 and other officers rushed there and
recovered the money from his shirt pocket and conducted sodium carbonate test which was proved
positive, then P.W.17 arrested the accused and prepared the mahazar and handed over the
investigation to P.W.18, the Deputy Superintendent of Police. He recorded the statements of all the
witnesses and on completion of investigation filed the final report for offences under Sections 7 and
13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act.
3. Based on the above materials, the trial Court framed appropriate charges. The accused denied the
same. In order to prove the case, on the side of the prosecution, as many as 18 witnesses were
examined, 34 documents https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and 5 material objects were marked.
4. P.W.2 is the defacto complainant, but he turned hostile during cross examination. However, the
Trial Court relying upon the chief examination of P.W.2 and P.W.3 the accompanying witness,
convicted the accused. Now challenging the said conviction, the present appeal has been filed.
5. Mr.A.K.Kumaraswami, learned senior counsel, appearing for the appellants would contend that
the main witness i.e. the defacto complainant/P.W.2 has turned hostile. P.W.4 who is the Village
Assistant, working under the accused Village Administrative Officer has clearly deposed that both
the defacto complainant and the accused belongs to the same village and closely related to each
other, there is a civil dispute between them. That apart the accused as a Village Administrative
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114049437/ 2
V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2 December, 2021
Officer was collecting money for renovation of his village temple and only for that purpose, P.W.2
handed over the money to the accused. P.W.3, the accompanying witness, also did not spoke about
the demand of illegal gratification said to have been made by the accused. In such circumstances, in
the absence of any evidence of demanding illegal gratification, based on
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis mere recovery, the conviction cannot be imposed. According to
the learned senior counsel, the trial Court mainly relied upon the chief examination of P.W.2 and
convicted the accused, which is not maintainable in the eye of law.
6. Per contra, the learned Government Advocate (Crl.side) appearing for the respondent submitted
that,even though P.W.2 turned hostile, in his chief examination, he has clearly stated that the
accused demanded Rs.1,000/- as bribe for transferring the patta and he turned hostile in the cross
examination. That apart, the evidence of P.W.3 also corroborate the evidence of P.W.2 and with
other circumstances the prosecution has clearly proved the demand. That apart, in the trap
conducted by the respondent police, the accused was caught red handed and the Phenolphthalein
test was proved positive and the money was also recovered from the accused. Considering all those
materials, the trial Court rightly convicted the accused and there is no reason to interfere with the
well considered judgement of the trial Court.
7. I have considered the rival submissions and also perused the materials.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
8. P.W.2 is the defacto complainant and he turned hostile during cross examination, further, in his
evidence, P.W.2 has clearly stated that there is previous enmity between the accused and P.W.2, and
the accused in his capacity as Village Administrative Officer was collecting money from the villagers
for renovating the village temple. Making use of the circumstance, in order to wreck vengeance
against the accused, P.W.2 has given a complaint as if the accused demanded illegal gratification.
His evidence has been corroborated by the evidence of P.W.4, a Village Assistant, working under the
accused. In his cross examination, he has clearly stated that P.W.2 has given an application for
transfer of patta and the said application was submitted before the Revenue Inspector's Office
twenty days prior to the date of occurrence. P.W.2, told him that he would wreck vengeance against
the accused before his retirement. He further deposed that the accused was collecting money only
for renovation of a local temple.
9. From the above evidence, it could be seen that there is no demand for illegal gratification by the
accused. Even the evidence of P.W.3, the accompanying witness, has not spoken about the illegal
demand made by the accused, he has spoken only about the recovery of money from the accused.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
10. It is settled law that mere possession and recovery of the currency notes from the accused
without any proof of demand will not bring home the offence under Section 7 of the Act. Demand of
illegal gratification is sine qua non to constitute the said offence. It is also settled that insofar as the
offence under Section 13(1)(d) of the Act, in the absence of any proof of demand for illegal
gratification, the use of corrupt or illegal means or abuse of position as a public servant to obtain
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114049437/ 3
V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2 December, 2021
any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage cannot be held to be established. That apart, it is only on
proof of acceptance of illegal gratification the presumption can be drawn under Section 20 of the
Act, that such gratification was received for doing or forbearing to do any official act, without proof
of demand of illegal gratification, conviction cannot be imposed.
11. It is also equally well settled that the burden of proof placed upon the accused person against
whom the presumption is made under Section 20 of the Act is not akin to that of burden placed on
the prosecution to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt. The initial onus is on prosecution to
prove beyond reasonable doubt, in situation where there is a legal presumption, the onus on the
accused is only to explain on the basis of preponderance of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
probabilities, the initial burden always on the prosecution to prove the demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification only if it is successfully discharged by the prosecution, then the burden of proof
shifts on the accused.
12. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Selvaraj Vs. State of Karnataka reported in (2015) 10 SCC 230 has
observed as follows:
"The allegation of bribe taking should be considered along with other material
circumstances. Demand has to be proved by adducing clinching evidence. Recovery
of tainted money is not sufficient to convict the accused. There has to be
corroboration of the testimony of the complainant regarding the demand of bribe.”
“The prosecution has to prove the charge beyond reasonable doubt like any other
criminal offence and the accused should be considered innocent till it is proved to the
contrary by proper proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification, which is
the vital ingredient to secure the conviction in a bribery case."
13. Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in C.Sukumaran Vs. State of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Kerala reported in (2015) 11 SCC 314 has observed as follows:
"It has been continuously held by this Court in a catena of cases after interpretation
of the provisions of Section 7 and 13(1) (d) of the Act that the demand of illegal
gratification by the accused is the sine qua non for constituting an offence under the
provisions of the Act. Thus, the burden to prove the accusation against the appellant
for the offence punishable under Section 13(1) (d) of the Act with regard to the
acceptance of illegal gratification from the complainant PW2, lies on the
prosecution."
14. In the instant case, the prosecution has failed to discharge its initial burden that there is a
demand for illegal gratification by the accused. From the evidence available on record, it could be
seen that the accused was collecting money only for renovation of a local temple. In the above
circumstances, the presumption under Section 20 of the Act will not arise.
15. Considering all those circumstances, this Court is of the considered view that prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the demand for illegal gratification by the accused and consequently the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114049437/ 4
V.Arumugam(Died) vs State Of Tamil Nadu Rep.By on 2 December, 2021
offence under Sections 7 and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act is not made out
against the accused. Hence, the accused is entitled for acquittal. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. In the result,
(i) The appeal is allowed; the conviction and sentence imposed on the appellant/accused by the
learned Special Judge / Chief Judicial Magistrate, Erode in Spl.C.No.12 of 2004, dated 15.06.2011, is
set aside and the appellant/accused is acquitted.
(ii) The fine amount, if any paid, shall be refunded.
02.12.2021 Index: Yes / No ari/kk To
1. The Special Judge / Chief Judicial Magistrate, Erode.
2. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Erode, (Crime
No.3/Ac/2003)
3. The Public Prosecutor, Madras High Court.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis V.BHARATHIDASAN, J.
ari/kk 02.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114049437/ 5
