V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
Author: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
Bench: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
W.P.No.15403/2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 22.12.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MRS. JUSTICE PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA
W.P.No.15403 of 2020
V.Devan .. Petitioner
Vs.
The Tahsildar,
Office of the Tahsildar,
Solinganallur Taluk,
Chennai. .. Respondent
***
Prayer : Writ Petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for the records
and quash the proceedings of the respondent in O.Mu.No.1405/2020/A2,
dated 29.07.2020 and consequently direct the respondent to issue the
legal heir certificate.
***
For Petitioner : Mr.C.D.Johnson
For Respondent : Mr.P.V.Selvakumar,
Additional Government Pleader
ORDER
Seeking to quash the order of the respondent dated 29.07.2020 made in O.Mu.No.1405/2020/A2
and a consequential direction to the respondent to issue legal heir certificate, the petitioner has
instituted this writ petition.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 1
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
2. It is the case of the petitioner that his father one Varadharajulu and one Jayaraman are brothers.
Jeyaraman and his wife Sulochana had no issues. The petitioner and his four sisters were brought
up by Jayaraman and Sulochana, after the demise of their father Varadharajulu on 06.03.1994. His
paternal uncle Jayaraman passed away on 08.06.1999 leaving behind his wife Sulochana. Sulochana
died on 27.04.2009. In such circumstances, the petitioner filed an application before the respondent
seeking legal heir certificate of Jeyaraman attaching various documents. However, the respondent
passed the impugned order rejecting the said request. The same is questioned in this writ petition.
3. The respondent filed the counter-affidavit seeking to sustain the impugned order on the ground
that the petitioner and his sisters, being "Class II Legal heirs", the revenue officials are not entitled
to issue the legal heirship certificate in terms of the Circular No.9 of 2019 in
Rc.No.RA.5(3)/180/2017, dated 24.09.2019, which is the reason why, they were directed to
approach the competent civil court. The respondent has not disputed the factual position narrated
above.
4. Heard both sides and perused the materials on record.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
5. Before delving further into the factual position, it is relevant to state that this Court in J.Babu V.
The Tahsildar, Tharangampadi Taluk, Nagapattinam District, W.P.No.5940 of 2017, dated
27.07.2020, relied upon the following earlier judgments :
"17. This Court in W.P.(MD)No.15901 of 2018, dated 03.08.2018 (N.R.Raja and
others V. The Tahsildar, Madurai South, Collector Office, Madurai), reproduced the
relevant portions of the earlier orders of this Court on the subject issue and held in
the following manner :
"2.This Court had an earlier occasion to deal with an identical issue in W.P(MD)
No.11721 of 2018, on 31.07.2018, and the relevant portion reads as follows:-
“2. Before analyzing the validity of the impugned order, it would appropriate to trace
the powers of the second respondent in refusing to issue a Legal heirship Certificate
to the Class-II legal heirs. There is no provision under the Registration of Birth and
Deaths Act, 1969, or any other Act or Rules, empowering the Revenue Authorities to
issue a Legal heirship Certificate. In the year 1981, a one man committee in District
Revenue Administration suggested delegation of powers to the Tahsildar/Deputy
Tahsildar for issuance of a Legal heirship Certificate and while accepting the
recommendation, the Revenue Department in G.O (Ms) No.2906, dated 04.11.1981,
had empowered the jurisdictional Tahsildar/Deputy Tahsildar to issue Legal heirship
Certificate. Subsequently, by Letter (Rt) No.1534, dated 28.11.1991 issued by the
Revenue https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Department, certain conditions were
imposed for issuance of Legal heirship Certificate, wherein one of the conditions was
that the Tahsildar should refrain from issuing the Legal heirship Certificate to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 2
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
Class-II legal heirs with a further direction to advise the applicant to approach the
Civil Court seeking for remedy. Certain other guidelines were also appended to the
said letter dated 28.11.1991.
3.It is submitted that in view of the Letter (Rt) No.1534, dated 28.11.1991, the
authorities had been refusing to issue Legal heirs Certificate for Class-II legal heirs
and advising them to approach the Civil Court. The impugned order is one such order
relying upon Letter (Rt) No.1534, dated 28.11.1991.
4. Subsequently, this Court, in various orders passed in writ petitions, have been
deprecating the practice of the Tahsildars in refusing to issue the certificate for
class-II legal heirs. The orders passed in some writ petitions are extracted
hereunder:-
"(i). In M.Arumugam & Others vs. The Tahsildar, Madurai South, Madurai and
another reported in CDJ 2013 MHC 6017, it has been held as follows:-
“9. The petitioners are claiming themselves to be class II heirs. The Tahsildar pleads
his inability to consider the case, as according to him, it would be very difficult to
collect the details of the class II heirs. I am not inclined to accept the said submission.
10.The Revenue Department is having lower level officers, who are familiar with the
people living in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ concerned Village. There are
revenue officers under the Tahsildar. There are also village officers functioning in the
villages and they would be in a position to know the members of the family. The
village Administrative Officer is expected to know each and every family of the
village. He cannot plead ignorance about the relationship. The village Administrative
Officer is the Revenue Co- ordinating Officer of the Revenue Department. The Village
Administrative Officer must keep a close watch on the village and he should update
his information. The problem of issuing a legal heir certificate to class II heirs could
be resolves, in case a workable method is adopted by the revenue authorities. Since
enquiry has to be made, the Tahsildar can direct the parties to produce birth
certificates indicating the relationship. The Tahsildar can also conduct an enquiry in
the village level through the Village Administrative Officer. In case, at a later point of
time, it is turned out to be a false claim, it is open to the Tahsildar to can the
certificate and even criminal action can be taken. The difficulty to identify the
members of the class II heirs cannot be a reason to reject the request for issuance of
legal heir certificates. Therefore I am of the view that the first respondent was not
justified in passing the impugned order. Accordingly, the impugned order is
quashed."
(ii). In W.P.(MD)No.37214 of 2015 (T.S.Renuka Devi, rep by her guardian and next fried
K.Swaminathan vs. The Tahsildar, Mambalam- https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Guindy Taluk,
Chennai-78), it has been observed as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 3
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
“5.Admittedly, Class I heirs of the said G.Parvathi predeceased her. It is not in
dispute that the father of the petitioner is her only surviving legal heir. Therefore, as
per the Schedule appended to the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the petitioner being
Class II legal heir, is entitled to succeed the property left out by the said Parvathi, if
no other direct legal heir is available. In the enquiry, the respondent has also
admitted the same, but he refused to issue a certificate to the petitioner. In my
considered view, the order so passed by the respondent is not sustainable and hence,
the same is liable to be set aside.
6.Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the order dated 05.12.2013 passed by
the respondent is set aside. The petitioner is permitted to submit a fresh application
along with a copy of this order within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt
of a copy of this order. On such submission, the respondent is directed to conduct
enquiry by affording an opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner in
accordance with law, within a period of six weeks thereafter. No costs.
Consequently connected miscellaneous petition is closed."
(iii). In W.P.(MD)No.5586 of 2017 (R.Lokesh Kannan Vs. The District Collector, Madurai District
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ and anothers), it has been held as follows:-
“5. It is the specific case of the petitioner that his brother died as a bachelor and
except the petitioner, there are no legal heirs, since his parents have already passed
away. In the judgment referred by the learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court
has held that if Clause-I heirs are not live, Clause-II heirs are entitled to get the legal
heirship certificate from the Competent Authority. Hence the application of the
petitioner cannot be rejected merely on the ground that there is no direct legal heir of
the deceased.
6.In view of the above facts, this writ petition is disposed of directing the petitioner to
submit a fresh application to the second respondent enclosing this order copy and the
orders passed in the writ petition referred above, within a period of two weeks from
the date of receipt of the copy of this order. On such receipt, the second respondent
shall consider the petitioner's application and pass orders on merits and in
accordance with law, in the light of the orders passed by this Court as stated supra
within a period of six weeks thereafter.
5.Sections 8 and 9 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, stipulate the mode of
succession in expressive terms. As such, the respondents will not be justified in
refusing the issuance of Legal heirship Certificate in favour of Class-II legal heirs, in
the absence of Class-I legal heirs. When the law stipulates the mode of succession, the
second respondent is duty bound to consider the same and conduct proper enquiry,
in line https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ with the order of the descendants, specified
under the Succession Act or any other personal law for that matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 4
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
6.When the law specifies the mode of succession, there is no impediment on the part
of the Tahsildar to issue Legal heirship certificate as prescribed in the mode of
succession. Nevertheless, in cases, where there are serious rival claims for the
heirships, which cannot be considered, on the basis of the statement of the claimants
and which necessarily requires to be established through proper oral and
documentary evidences, it would be appropriate, to refer such parties to the Civil
Court of law. Such an exercise however should be made only when the authority is
satisfied that there is a rival claim for heirships or the relationship of the heirs with
the deceased is disputed.
In all other cases, the authorities are bound to issue Legal heirship Certificate for the Class-II legal
heirs also. It is needless to point out that the certificates thus issued should be preceded by a proper
enquiry by the Revenue Authorities.
7.In the instant case, the respondents are not justified in denying the legal heirship certificate of late
Periyamadasamykonar only on the ground that he did not have direct heirs. It is rather unfortunate
that even inspite of the several orders of this Court directing the Tahsildar/Deputy Tahsildar to issue
Legal heirship Certificate for the Class-II heirs also, the respondents
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ have chosen to rely upon an outdated letter of the year 1991 and
has been rejecting such applications.
8.In the result, the impugned order dated 25.08.2016 is set aside and consequently, the respondents
herein are directed to conduct a proper enquiry and issue Legal heirship Certificate of Late
Periyamadasamykonar to the petitioner, if he is otherwise entitled to. Such an exercise shall be
completed within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order. This Writ
Petition is allowed accordingly. No costs."
3. The above order is self-explanatory. As such, the respondent is not justified in rejecting the
petitioner's application on the sole ground that Late N.R.Santha, does not have any direct legal heir.
4. In the result, the impugned order dated 08.03.2018 passed in O.Mu.No.m2/251/2018, by the
respondent, is set aside and consequently, the respondent is directed to conduct a proper enquiry
and issue Legal heirship Certificate of Late N.R.Santha to the petitioners, if they are otherwise
entitled to. Such an exercise shall be completed within a period of four weeks from the date of
receipt of copy of this order. This Writ Petition is allowed accordingly. No costs."
18. In a recent order dated 03.01.2020 made in W.P.No.35263 of 2019, (Indrani Palaniappan Vs.
The https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Tahsildar, Taluk Office, Ambattur, Chennai – 600 053),
(CVKJ), this Court held as follows :
"3. The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the order of this Court
made in W.P.No.15901 of 2018 dated 03.08.2018 [N.R.Raja and other Vs. The
Thasildar, Madurai South, Madurai] wherein it is stated that, if there is no contesting
legal heir, even if the petitioner is Class-II legal heir, the Tahsildar can conduct an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 5
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
enquiry and issue legal heir certificate notwithstanding to the Circular No.9/2019
R.C.No.RA.5(3)180/2019.
4. The petitioner is the Class-II leagl heir, who is the elder sister of the deceased
K.K.Chandra. The deceased died unmarried on 12.03.2019. The parents have also
died ealier. Therefore in the event of no other leagl heir, the Tahsildar may issue
notice to the petitioner, conduct enquiry and if the facts as stated above are correct,
the petitioner may be issued with the legal heir certificate on or before 28.02.2020.
With the above observation, the writ petition is disposed of."
6. Thus, in the above order dated 27.07.2020, this Court observed that this Court repeatedly held
that the difficulty to identify the members of the Class II heirs by the revenue authorities cannot be
the reason to reject the request for issuance of legal heir certificates. This Court further held as
follows :
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ "22. The CRA is at liberty to make it clear in the
revised circular that the appeal and revision are to be filed before the respective
revenue authorities against the orders of the Tahsildar, as indicated above, in the
subject circular. It is also open to the CRA to include some other modalities and
conditional clauses in the process of issuance of legal heir certificate to have checks
and balances effectively. This Court is of the view that the guidelines of field
verification, etc., are devotedly followed by the field level officers, i.e., VAO, RI and
Tahsildars, in their letter and spirit, the so-called lis and other issues surrounding
Class II legal heirs could well be avoided."
7. Coming to the facts of the case, the respondent never disputed the same, but the reason to reject
the request of the petitioner is that the petitioner and his sisters are Class-II Legal heirs and as per
Circular No.9 of 2019, they have to approach the competent civil Court for redressing their
grievance. When there is no factual dispute, the Village Administrative Officer and the Revenue
Inspector could conduct an enquiry with the relatives and neighbours of the petitioner and find out
the truthfulness in the claim. They cannot negative the claim by relying upon the circular, in view of
the directions issued by this Court.
8. For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of the respondent
dated 29.07.2020 is quashed.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ Consequently, the respondent is directed to issue an order to the
concerned jurisdictional Village Administrative Officer and the Revenue Inspector to conduct an
enquiry with respect of the request of the petitioner and after obtaining a report from them,
consider the same and issue the legal heirship certificate of Late.Jayaraman in favour of the
petitioner and his sisters, after satisfying himself with the enquiry. The said exercise shall be
completed within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. There shall be
no order as to costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 6
V.Devan vs The Tahsildar on 22 December, 2020
22.12.2020 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes gg To The Tahsildar, Solinganallur Taluk, Chennai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/ PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
gg 22.12.2020 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48177136/ 7
