V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13
August, 2020
Author: R.Suresh Kumar
Bench: R.Suresh Kumar
W.P.(MD)No.9216 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 13.08.2020
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE R.SURESH KUMAR
W.P.(MD)No.9216 of 2020
and
W.M.P(MD)No.8402 of 2020
1.V.Fathima Riswana
2.S.Mariappan
3.S.Ajmal Khan ...Petitioners
-Vs-
1.The Chief Educational Officer,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
2.The District Educational Officer,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
3.The Correspondent,
M.N.Abdur Rahman Higher Secondary School,
Kadir Nagar, High Ground,
Tirunelveli – 627 011,
Tirunelveli District. ...Respondents
Prayer: Writ Petition - filed under Article 226 of Constitution of
India, to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling for the
records relating to impugned order in O.Mu.No.205/A5/2019 dated
26.07.2019 of the second respondent herein and quash the same
and consequently direct the respondents 1 and 2 herein to award
annual increments, incentive, surrender leave benefits and other
attended benefits to the petitioners from the date of petitioner's
appointments namely 15.06.2011, 05.03.2012 and 07.06.2017
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 1
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
1/17
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.9216 of 2020
respectively with all attendant benefits including pay fixation and
allowance.
For Petitioner : Mr.T.Pon Ramkumar
For R1 & R2 : Mr.A.Thiyagarajan,
Government Advocate
ORDER
The prayer sought for herein in this writ petition is for a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling
for the records relating to impugned order in O.Mu.No.205/A5/2019 dated 26.07.2019 of the
second respondent herein and quash the same and consequently direct the respondents 1 and 2
herein to award annual increments, incentive, surrender leave benefits and other attended benefits
to the petitioners from the date of petitioner's appointments namely 15.06.2011, 05.03.2012 and
07.06.2017 respectively with all attendant benefits including pay fixation and allowance.
2.Heard Mr.T.Pon Rämkumar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and
Mr.A.Thiyagarajan, learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents.
3. The short facts leading to filing of this writ petition are as follows:-
http://www.judis.nic.in
(i) These three writ petitioners were appointed as Teachers i.e., BT
Assistant(Science), BT Assistant (Tamil) and BT Assistant (History) respectively on
various dates at the third respondent School. It seems that initially their
appointments have not been approved on the ground that these petitioners have not
been qualified with Teachers Eligibility Test. Subsequently, in view of the law having
been declared that in respect of the minority school , such insistment cannot be
made, the appointment of these petitioners have been approved by various
proceedings, which are as follows:-
On 20.07.2011 the first petitioner's appointment has been approved, on 28.06.2012
the second petitioner's appointment has been approved and on 24.11.2017 the third
petitioner's appointment has been approved by the competent authority.
ii) Since all these petitioners having been appointed in the third respondent School
and their appointment proposals also has been accepted and approved by the
proceedings referred to above by the official respondents, there can be no quarrel
that these petitioners are entitled to get salary and other service benefits which are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 2
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
available to the other teachers who are similar to that of the petitioners working in an
aided school.
http://www.judis.nic.in Iii) When that being the position, it seems that their annual increment has
not been given to these petitioners, therefore, all these petitioners seems to have made a request to
the official respondents to release the annual increment. However, their request have been turned
down by rejecting the same through the impugned order, dated 30.07.2019 passed by the second
respondent, which reads thus:-
“jpUney;Ntyp fy;tp khtl;lk;> jpUney;Ntyp i`fpuTz;l; fhjpHefH K.e.mg;JH u`;khd;
Nky;epiyg;gs;spapy; gzpGhpAk; (rpWghd;ikg; gs;sp) gl;ljhhp MrphpaHfs; jFjpj;
NjHtpy; NjHr;rp ngw;wjpdhy; epWj;jp itf;fg;gl;Ls;s Cjpa caHtpid toq;FtJ Fwpj;J
ve;jtpjkhd murhizNah ,af;Fehpd; nray;KiwfNsh ngwg;gltpy;iy vd;gjhy; vdNt murhiz
ngwg;gl;l gpwF ghprPypf;fg;gLk; vd jpUg;gg;gLfpwJ.
khtl;lf;fy;tp mYtyH jpUney;Ntyp”
4. Challenging the aforesaid order, the present writ petition has been filed.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that, the issue as to whether an
approved teacher, even though is not having the qualification of Teachers Eligibility Test, is entitled
to get all service benefits including increment, has already been decided in number of cases.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6. In this context, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has relied upon a judgment of
this Court, where I had an occasion to consider the similar issue, where the very approval itself was
denied for want of Teachers Eligibility Test qualification.
7. In W.P.(MD)Nos.5211 5212 of 2018, in the matter of C.Jeevarani and D.Geetha Felcitta vs. The
District Elementary Educational Officer, Tirunelveli and others, I had passed a detailed order on
06.06.2018 where among other things, the said issue also has been considered and decided. In order
to appreciate the same, the operative portion of the order passed in that writ petition is extracted
hereunder:-
“22.In the result, both the writ petitions are disposed of with the following directions:
(1) the third respondent in both writ petitions, if not already forwarded/re-submitted,
the appointment proposal of the respective petitioners after rectifying the
infirmities/mistakes, if any, pointed out by the official respondents, the same shall be
immediately forwarded with the relevant documents/records to the official
respondents within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this
order;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 3
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
(2) if the proposals have already been forwarded by the third respondent School or if
the proposals are http://www.judis.nic.in forwarded only pursuant to the aforesaid
direction by the third respondent School, the official respondents, especially, the first
respondent (presently re-
designated as District Educational Officer, Tirunelveli) shall consider both the proposals without
insisting upon the requirement of TET qualification from the petitioners and pass orders thereon,
on merits and in accordance with law, with regard to the grant of approval to the petitioners within a
period of six weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order if the proposals were already
forwarded or within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of such proposals if they are
forwarded pursuant to the direction of this Court;
(3) it is made clear that once the appointment proposals of the respective petitioners are approved,
the respective petitioners are entitled to get all service benefits including salary, increment, leave
salary and other benefits as applicable to other approved teachers of that category and such benefits,
by way of arrears, shall be calculated and paid to the petitioners within a period of six weeks
thereafter;
(4) it is further made clear that if the official respondents found any further infirmity/minor or
major mistake in the proposals, other than TET qualification, the same shall immediately be pointed
out to the third respondent School, who, in turn, on receipt of the said communication from the
official respondents, shall immediately rectify and forward/re-submit the rectified proposal to the
official respondents with supporting documents, if any, within a period of two weeks from
http://www.judis.nic.in the date of receipt of such communication and on receipt of such
re-submitted/rectified proposal, if any, the same shall be considered by the official respondents, ie.,
the first respondent herein, as directed above, ie., in Direction No.2, within a period of six weeks
from the date of receipt of such re- submitted/rectified proposal from the third respondent; and (5)
there shall be no order as to costs.”
8. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners relied upon a Division Bench judgment in this
regard, made in W.A. (MD)No.1413 and 1414 of 2019 in the matter of The Chief Educational Officer,
Tirunelveli District and another vs. K.Solomon Jeyaraj and another dated 27.11.2019, where also,
this issue has been considered and decided. The relevant portion of the Division Bench Order reads
thus:-
“6.The learned Special Government Pleader appearing for the respondents 1 and 2
placing reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in TMA Pai
Foundation v. State of Karnataka [2005 (5) CTC 201 (SC)] would submit that the
respondent State being the controlling authority sanctioning aid for the minority
institutions can always prescribe qualifications, salaries as well as experience and
other conditions bearing on the merits of an individual for being appointed as a
teacher of an educational institution. Further, it is submitted by the
http://www.judis.nic.in learned Special Government Pleader that if the contention
advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant is accepted and TET is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 4
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
not made applicable to the minority institutions, then it is a clear discrimination
among the teachers because one set of teachers, who are working in the non-minority
institutions, are under the threat of loosing their jobs for not possessing TET and the
other set of teachers, who do not have TET, who are working at aided minority
institutions, are safe and the same would be in violation of Article 14 of Constitution
of India.
7.In our considered view, various Division Benches have taken consistent stand as
regards the legal position and in doing so reference has been made to the decision of
the Constitutional Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paramati Educational &
Cultural Trust v. Union of India [2014(8) SCC 1], and a decision has been rendered.
This Court does not find any ground to take a different view.
8.It is submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that the learned
Writ Court was of the view that the appellant was not working after the impugned
order dated 14.11.2013. However, the fact remains that since an order of stay was
granted on 29.11.2013, the appellant is continuing to serve in the institution and as
on date the appellant is working in another school of the same Educational Agency at
Surandai. This submission is placed on record.
9.Thus, for the above reasons, the Writ Appeal is allowed and order of the Writ Court
in W.P.(MD) No.19467 of 2013 dated 25.07.2019 is set aside. Consequently, the Writ
Petition is allowed as prayed for. Consequently, connected Civil Miscellaneous
Petition is closed. No costs.” http://www.judis.nic.in
3. There is no distinguishing feature pointed out before us by the appellants as to why
the above such decision should not be applied in the instant case. In the light of the
above, these writ appeals are dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petition are closed.”
9. By relying upon these decisions, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would contend
that the impugned order, for the reasons cited therein, cannot be sustained as these petitioners since
have been approved with their appointment by the third respondent and have been working all
along for several years and getting the salary, now the increment sought for by the petitioner, cannot
be denied.
10. However, the learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents would submit that
admittedly these petitioners did not have the qualification of Teachers Eligibility Test and therefore,
without the qualification of TET, since they have been appointed, unless and until if there is a clear
direction issued by the Government through a Government Order, the District level Educational
Authorities could not decide the said issue and that is the reason why, the said reason has been
stated in the impugned order while rejecting the request of these petitioners for grant of
http://www.judis.nic.in increment. Therefore, the said order requires no interference from this
Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 5
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
11. I have considered the submissions made by both sides and I have perused the materials placed
before this Court.
12. As has been rightly pointed out by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, the issue
raised in this writ petition is no more res- integra. In the judgement referred to above, where, I had
an occasion to consider the similar issue as to whether the teachers appointment without TET
qualification can be questioned by the Educational authorities, if such appointment is made in
minority school in view of the law declared in this regard, that issue has been answered in favour of
the employees/teachers and that is why at sub para (3) of paragraph 22 of my Judgment referred to
above, I have clearly stated that, once appointment is approved, the teachers are entitled to get all
service benefits including salary, increment, leave salary as applicable to other approved teachers of
that category. Therefore, the benefit of increment is one of the benefit to be paid to an approved
teacher, therefore, once appointment is approved, the official respondents cannot deny the
increment for want of any Government Order.
http://www.judis.nic.in
13. More over, when the similar issue came up for consideration before this Court recently in
W.P(MD)No.7772 of 2020, I passed an order on 24.07.2020, where the following direction has been
given to the respondents therein:-
“ 9.The only controversy which arises in this writ petition is, whether the reason cited
in the impugned order that, the petitioner should have qualified with TET
qualification, even though she was appointed on 03.01.2011 and from that date, her
appointment has also been approved by the 3rd respondent for getting the benefit
like the annual increment, is hold good or not.
10.In this context, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon a
decision of the learned Judge of this Court exactly on the same point made in a batch
of writ petitions in W.P(MD).Nos.5626 to 5630 of 2017 etc., dated 08.03.2019 in the
matter of M.Maharani Vs. State of Tamil Nadu rep., by its Secretary, Department of
School Education and others. In the said order, the learned counsel for the petitioner
relied upon para No.10, which reads thus.
“10.However, there is no cut off date specified in the said G.O.Ms.No.181, with regard to acquiring
the qualification of pass TET to continue in service as B.T.Assistants/Secondary Grade Teachers,
who are working as such in the respondent Schools. In this regard, a cursory glance at Clause (5) of
the notification dated 23.08.2010 and its amended notification dated http://www.judis.nic.in
29.07.2011 issued by the NCTE, the contents of which are reproduced at paragraph Nos.8.2 and 8.4
above, would reveal that if the http://www.judis.nic.in process of appointment of teachers was
initiated prior to the date of notification by issuing advertisement, such appointments have to be
made in accordance with NCTE (Determination of Minimum Qualifications for Recruitment of
Teachers in Schools) Regulations 2001, there is no qualification prescribed with regard to
possession of TET certificate, for appointment to the post of B.T.Assistant and Secondary Grade
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 6
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
Teachers. The qualification of passing TET was first introduced by the notification dated 23.08.2010
and it was amended vide notification dated 27.09.2011 and the teachers, who were appointed prior
to that date need not pass TET and even in the case of the teachers who were appointed after that
date, if the advertisement to initiate the process of appointment of teachers was made prior to that
date, then, their appointments also can be in accordance with the NCTE Regulations 2001 and they
need not acquire the TET qualification.“
11.From the reading of the said judgment, it has become clear that the NCTE prescribed the
qualification of TET originally from 23.08.2010 and subsequently from 27.09.2011 by way of
notification. Therefore, the actual date, on which, the said qualification become mandatory is
27.09.2011. Therefore, those teachers, who were appointed prior to 27.09.2011 cannot be put against
the said prescription of the NCTE and this has http://www.judis.nic.in been exactly decided by the
learned Judge in the said judgement, referred to above.
12.In the case of the petitioner, she was appointed on 03.01.2011 in the sanctioned vacancy as
Secondary Grade Teacher at the fifth respondent School and the said appointment, having been
considered, was approved by the third respondent vide his proceedings, dated 28.06.2011, where it
has been specifically stated that, the petitioner was appointed on 03.01.2011 and approval is also
given from 03.01.2011.
13.Therefore, it has become quite clear that, the appointment of the petitioner as on 03.01.2011
having been approved by the third respondent through the said approval order, the applicability of
the prescription made by NCTE to have such qualification, insofar as the petitioner is concerned,
cannot be made or applied. Therefore, the said reason cited in the impugned order by the fourth
respondent, in the considered opinion of this Court, may not hold good. Therefore, on that reason,
the petitioner's service benefit like annual increment cannot be denied.
14.Moreover, once the appointment is approved by the authority and the same still holds good, the
petitioner has been brought under regular time scale of pay. When that being the position, the
annual increment is part and parcel of the time scale of pay system being adopted for permanent
employees/Teachers of the Government is concerned and when such is the position, the fourth
respondent cannot insist upon any Government Order, which cannot be created by the
http://www.judis.nic.in petitioner.
15.More over, if at all, any such request is made by the petitioner for annual increment, that should
have been decided by the respondents by taking into account the relevant Rule position, Service Law
and the Government order, if any available with the respondent, instead, off late, it has become a
practice that some of the officials/authorities would raise a question stating that, in order to get the
benefit sought for by the employees/Teacher/incumbent, whether any Government order is
available in their favour.
16.Whether any Government order is available in their favour or not, whether they are entitled to
have such a benefit or not, can be decided only by the authority and not by the person, who seeks it.
Therefore, that kind of questions being raised by the authorities would show that they abdicate their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 7
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
responsibility on the very employee or Teacher concerned, which kind of practice cannot be
approved by this Court.
17.Therefore, this Court is of the considered view that, the reason cited in the impugned order
cannot be sustained in the eye of law. Hence, it is liable to be interfered with.
18.In the result, the impugned order is quashed and the respondents are directed to reconsider the
request of the petitioner with regard to her plea for grant of annual increment as her appointment
dated 03.01.2011 having been approved by the third respondent vide his proceedings dated
28.06.2011, this Court feels that, there can be no further impediment for http://www.judis.nic.in the
petitioner to get such benefits. Therefore, suitable order to that effect shall be passed by the official
respondents within a period of eight (8) weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
19.With these directions, the Writ Petition is ordered accordingly. No costs. Consequently,
connected Miscellaneous Petitions are closed.”
14. In view of the settled legal position, this Court has no hesitation to hold that the impugned order
cannot be sustainable, therefore, it is liable to be quashed.
15. In the result, the impugned order is quashed and the matter is remitted back to the respondents,
especially, the second respondent, who shall reconsider the issue and pass necessary orders for
sanctioning the annual increment payable to these petitioners/teachers and accordingly calculate
the same and be disbursed the arrears and continue to pay the increment as part of their service
benefits. The aforesaid exercise shall be undertaken by the respondents, especially, by the second
respondent, within a period of eight weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
http://www.judis.nic.in
16. With these directions, the writ petition is disposed of. No costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petition is closed.
Am 13.08.2020
Note:
(i) In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be
utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the correct
copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned.
Index : Yes/No
Internet : Yes/No
To
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 8
V.Fathima Riswana vs The Chief Educational Officer on 13 August, 2020
1.The Chief Educational Officer,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
2.The District Educational Officer,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
http://www.judis.nic.in
R.SURESH KUMAR ,J.
am
Order made in
Dated:
13.08.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135631046/ 9
