V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January,
2020
Author: N.Anand Venkatesh
Bench: N.Anand Venkatesh
W.P.No.33575 of 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED :24.01.2020
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE N.ANAND VENKATESH
W.P.No. 33575 of 2019
and
W.M.P.No. 34034 of 2019
V.Prabu ...Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Director of School Education,
DPI Campus, College Road,
Chennai – 600 006.
2.The Chairman,
Teacher Recruitment Board,
4th Floor, E.V.K.Sampath Maaligai,
DPI Campus, College Road,
Chennai – 600 006. ..Respondents
Prayer:- Writ petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus, directing the Respondents to
declare the Petitioner is eligible for selection to the post of P.G.Assistant
(Commerce) with passing of M.Com, degree prior to cut-off date
prescribed in the Notification issued by the second respondent in
Notification / Advertisement No.10/2019 dated 12.06.2019 and
consequently select and appoint the petitioner to the post of P.G.
Assistant (Commerce) under B.C. and persons studied in Tamil Medium
http://www.judis.nic.in1/14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 1
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
(cid:12) W.P.No.33575 of 2019
(PSTM) category, based on the marks secured by the petitioner and on
merits in the selection.
For Petitioner : Mr.G.Sankaran
For Respondent 1 : Mrs.V.Annalakshmi
Government Advocate
For Respondent 2 : Mr.C.Munusamy
Special Government Pleader
ORDER
This writ petition has been filed for the issuance of Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents to
declare that the petitioner is eligible for the selection to the post of PG Assistant (Commerce).
2. The case of the petitioner is that he has completed M.Com., degree course in Tamil Medium in the
year 2017. He completed the Course in 12.07.2019, when the results were published. The second
respondent vide notification dated 12.06.2019 had invited applications from eligible candidates for
appointment to the post of PG Assistant in various disciplines in Tamil Nadu Higher Secondary
Educational Service for the year 2018-2019. The petitioner who had all the eligibility, applied for the
post and also participated in the on-line examination that was held on 28.09.2019.
http://www.judis.nic.in2/14
3. The name of the petitioner found a place in the provisional list and he was called for certificate
verification and the petitioner was directed to upload all the original documents for verification. The
petitioner was waiting for the call from the respondents and to the shock of the petitioner, the
petitioner was informed that the candidature of the petitioner has been rejected and the name of the
petitioner was shown in the ineligibility list that was published by the Teachers Recruitment Board
in the Official website on 20.11.2019. The reason that was assigned was that the petitioner has
passed the PG after the cut off date. Aggrieved by the same, the present writ petition has been filed
before this Court.
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the basis on which the
respondents have rejected the candidature of the petitioner is factually erroneous. The learned
counsel submitted that even as per the certificate that was issued by the Periyar University, the
petitioner had completed the PG Course, when the results were declared on 12.07.2019. The learned
counsel submitted that as per the notification, the last date for submission of application through
on-line mode was fixed as 15.07.2019. Therefore, according to the petitioner,
http://www.judis.nic.in3/14 the petitioner had already completed the course as on the date when
the application was submitted. The learned counsel therefore concluded his argument by submitting
that the proceedings of the second respondent requires interference and the respondents must be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 2
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
directed to consider the candidature of the petitioner.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in order to substantiate her submissions relied
upon the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in [Food Corporation of India Vs.Rimjhim] in
2019 5 SCC 793. The relevant portions of the Judgment is extracted hereunder :-
11. Now so far as the submission on behalf of the FCI that a candidate must and/or
ought to have produced the experience certificate along with the application is
concerned, at this stage, a decision of this Court in the case of Charles K. Skaria v. Dr.
C. Mathew (1980) 2 SCC 752 and the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of
Dolly Chhanda v. Chairman, Jee and others (2005) 9 SCC 779 are required to be
referred to. In the case of Charles K. Skaria (supra), this Court had an occasion to
consider the distinction between the essential requirements and the proof/mode of
proof. In the aforesaid case, this Court had an occasion to consider the distinction
between a fact and its proof. In the aforesaid case before this Court, a
candidate/student was entitled to extra 10% marks for http://www.judis.nic.in4/14
holders of a diploma and the diploma must be obtained on or before the last date of
the application, not later. In the aforesaid case, a candidate secured diploma before
the final date of application, but did not produce the evidence of diploma along with
the application. Therefore, he was not allowed extra 10% marks and therefore denied
the admission. Dealing with such a situation, this Court observed and held that what
was essential requirement was that a candidate must have obtained the diploma on
or before the last date of application but not later, and that is the primary
requirement and to submit the proof that the diploma is obtained on or before a
particular date as per the essential requirement is secondary. This Court specifically
observed and held that what is essential is the possession of a diploma before the
given date; what is ancillary is the safe mode of proof of the qualification. This Court
specifically observed and held that to confuse between a fact and its proof is blurred
perspicacity. This Court further observed and held that to make mandatory the date
of acquiring the additional qualification before the last date for application makes
sense. But if it is unshakeably shown that the qualification has been acquired before
the relevant date, to invalidate the merit factor because proof, though indubitable,
was adduced a few days later but before the selection or in a manner not mentioned
in the prospectus, but still above board, is to make procedure not the handmaid but
the mistress and form not as subservient to substance but as superior to the
http://www.judis.nic.in5/14 essence. While observing and holding so, in paragraphs
20 & 24, this Court observed and held as under:
20. There is nothing unreasonable or arbitrary in adding 10 marks for holders of a
diploma. But to earn these extra 10 marks, the diploma must be obtained at least on
or before the last date for application, not later. Proof of having obtained a diploma is
different from the factum of having got it. Has the candidate, in fact, secured a
diploma before the final date of application for admission to the degree course? That
is the primary question. It is prudent to produce evidence of the diploma along with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 3
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
the application, but that is secondary. Relaxation of the date on the first is illegal, not
so on the second. Academic excellence, through a diploma for which extra mark is
granted, cannot be denuded because proof is produced only later, yet before the date
of actual selection. The emphasis is on the diploma; the proof thereof sub serves the
factum of possession of the diploma and is not an independent factor..... Mode of
proof is geared to the goal of the qualification in question. It is subversive of sound
interpretation and realistic decoding of the prescription to telescope the two and
make both mandatory in point of time. What is essential is the possession of a
diploma before the given date; what is ancillary is the safe mode of proof of the
qualification. To confuse between a fact and its proof is blurred perspicacity. To make
mandatory the date of acquiring the additional qualification before the last date for
application makes sense. But if it is unshakably shown http://www.judis.nic.in6/14
that the qualification has been acquired before the relevant date, as is the case here,
to invalidate this merit factor because proof, though indubitable, was adduced a few
days later but before the selection or in a manner not mentioned in the prospectus,
but still above?board, is to make procedure not the handmaid but the mistress and
form not as subservient to substance but as superior to the essence.
24. It is notorious that this formalistic, ritualistic, approach is unrealistic and is
unwittingly traumatic, unjust and subversive of the purpose of the exercise. This way
of viewing problems dehumanises the administrative, judicial and even legislative
processes in the wider perspective of law for man and not man for law. Much of
hardship and harassment in administration flows from over?emphasis on the
external rather than the essential. We think the government and the selection
committee rightly treated as directory (not mandatory) the mode of proving the
holding of diplomas and as mandatory the actual possession of the diploma. In actual
life, we know how exasperatingly dilatory it is to get copies of degrees, decrees and
deeds, not to speak of other authenticated documents like mark?lists from
universities, why, even bail orders from courts and Government Orders from public
offices. This frustrating delay was by?passed by the State Government in the present
case by two steps. Government informed the selection committee that even if they got
proof of marks http://www.judis.nic.in7/14 only after the last date for applications
but before the date for selections they could be taken note of and secondly the
Registrars of the Universities informed officially which of the candidates had passed
in the diploma course. The selection committee did not violate any mandatory rule
nor act arbitrarily by accepting and acting upon these steps.
Had there been anything dubious, shady or unfair about the procedure or any mala fide move in the
official exercises we would never have tolerated deviations. But a prospectus is not scripture and
common sense is not inimical to interpreting and applying the guide?lines therein. Once this
position is plain the addition of special marks was basic justice to proficiency measured by marks.
6. The learned counsel further relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in [Dolly
Chhanda Vs.Chairamn, Jee and others] in 2005 9 SCC 779. The relevant portions of the Judgment is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 4
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
extracted hereunder :-
7. The general rule is that while applying for any course of study or a post, a person must possess the
eligibility qualification on the last date fixed for such purpose either in the admission brochure or in
application form, as the case may be, unless there is an express provision to the contrary. There can
be no relaxation in this regard i.e. in the matter of holding the requisite eligibility qualification by
the date fixed. This has to be established by producing the necessary certificates, degrees or mark
sheets. Similarly, in order to avail of the benefit of http://www.judis.nic.in8/14 reservation or
weight age etc. necessary certificates have to be produced. These are documents in the nature of
proof of holding of particular qualification or percentage of marks secured or entitlement for benefit
of reservation. Depending upon the facts of a case, there can be some relaxation in the matter of
submission of proof and it will not be proper to apply any rigid principle as it pertains in the domain
of procedure. Every infraction of the rule relating to submission of proof need not necessarily result
in rejection of candidature.
9. The appellant undoubtedly belonged to reserved MI category. She comes from a very humble
background, her father was only a Naik in the armed forces. He may not have noticed the mistake
which had been committed by the Zilla Sainik Board while issuing the first certificate dated
29.6.2003. But it does not mean that the appellant should be denied her due when she produced a
correct certificate at the stage of second counseling. Those who secured rank lower than the
appellant have already been admitted. The view taken by the authorities in denying admission to the
appellant is wholly unjust and illegal.
10. The appellant had qualified in the JEE-2003 but the said academic year is already over. But for
this situation the fault lies with the respondents, who adopted a highly technical and rigid attitude
and not with the appellant. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the appellant should be given
admission in MBBS course in any of the State http://www.judis.nic.in9/14 medical colleges in the
current academic year.
7. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that even though the
results were declared by the Periyar University, on 12.07.2019, the certificate for the completion of
the PG Course was given much later and therefore, on the date on which the application was
submitted by the petitioner, the petitioner was not in possession of the completion certificate given
by the University and therefore, the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for selection.
8. This Court has carefully considered the submissions made on either side and also perused the
materials available on record.
9. The candidature of the petitioner has been rejected by the Teachers Recruitment Board only on
the ground that the petitioner had passed the Post Graduation course after the cut off date. It is clear
from the certificate issued by the Periyar University that the results for the PG course was published
on 12.07.2019. As per the results published, the petitioner had cleared the Post Graduation. The last
date for the submission of the application to participate in the selection was 15.07.2019. Therefore,
on the date of submission of application, the http://www.judis.nic.in10/14 petitioner had completed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 5
V.Prabu vs The Director Of School Education on 24 January, 2020
the course.
10. The judgments relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner will squarely
apply to the facts of the present case. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, there is a distinction
between fulfilling the initial requirements and proof / mode of proof. The candidate must possess
the essential qualification as on the final date of the submission of the application. This essential
qualification has been fulfilled by the petitioner in the present case. The production of the certificate
at a later point of time will not take away the essential qualification that was possessed by the
petitioner on the date of submission of application.
11. The respondent went wrong in rejecting the candidature of the petitioner on a wrong premise
that the petitioner did not complete the post graduation before the due date. The respondents failed
to note that the certificate which was given later to the petitioner is only the reiteration of the
completion of the course by the petitioner on 14.07.2019. The certificate that was received at a later
point of time cannot be put against the petitioner and in the considered view of this
http://www.judis.nic.in11/14 Court, the ground on which the candidature of the petitioner was
rejected is totally erroneous and the same requires interference of this Court.
12. In the result, second respondent is directed to take into consideration the petitioner's
qualification and the marks obtained by him and proceed further with the process of selection by
treating the petitioner as an eligible candidate.
13. This writ petition is accordingly allowed. No costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous
petition is closed.
24.01.2020 Internet: Yes/No Index: Yes/No bkn http://www.judis.nic.in12/14 To
1.The Director of School Education, DPI Campus, College Road, Chennai – 600 006.
2.The Chairman, Teacher Recruitment Board, 4th Floor, E.V.K.Sampath Maaligai, DPI Campus,
College Road, Chennai – 600 006.
http://www.judis.nic.in13/14 N.ANAND VENKATESH,J., bkn and 24.01.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in14/14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88995497/ 6
