V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.R.C.No.522 of 2017
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 07.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE Ms.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.R.C.No.522 of 2017
V.Rajakumari
... Petitioner
Vs.
The State rep. by
The Inspector of Police,
Chetpet Police Station,
Thiruvannamalai District.
... Respondent
Criminal Revision filed under Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C praying to set
aside the order dated 03.01.2017 in C.A.No.3 of 2009 passed by the Learned
Principal District and Sessions Judge at Thiruvannamalai, confirming the order
of conviction and sentence dated 28.04.2009 passed as against the petitioner by
the Learned Judicial Magistrate, Polur, Thiruvannamalai District in C.C.No.141
of 2007.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Shanmuga Velayutham
Senior Advocate
for M/s.S.Anil Sandeep
For Respondent : Mr.A.Gopinath
Government Advocate (Crl.Side)
***
1/14
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) Crl.R.C.No.522 of 2017
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 1
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
ORDER
This Criminal Revision case has been preferred challenging the judgment of the learned Sessions
Judge, Tiruvannamalai dated 03.01.2017 made in C.A.No.3 of 2009 confirming the judgment of the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Polur dated 28.04.2009 in C.C.No.251 of 2007.
2. Short facts of the prosecution case is as under:
The accused was working as an Assistant Postmaster at Nambedu branch post office;
she was the custodian of the entire cash at the post office; in an audit conducted at
the post office, it was found that the accused had misappropriated a sum of
Rs.6,900/-; the said misappropriation was found on 08.10.2002 when PW2/the then
Inspector of Posts (PW2) inspected the Nambedu branch post office.
3. On the complaint given by PW1/Karunakaran, Inspector of Post office, PW10/Venkatesan,
Inspector of Police, Thimiri police station has given a CSR.No.119 of 2004 and made a formal
enquiry. Thereafter, the case was registered in Crime No.26 of 2007 under Section 409 IPC and he
prepared the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis FIR (Ex.P2). After taking the case for investigation,
he went to the place of occurrence, recovered the relevant registers and enquired the witnesses.
PW11/Arunachalam, Inspector of police, who succeeded PW10 had continued the investigation.
After completing the investigation, he filed the charge sheet against the accused on 30.09.2007
under Section 409 IPC. After the case was taken on file and after complying the legal mandates, the
learned trial Judge framed the charges against the accused under Section 409 IPC and questioned
him. Since the accused denied the charges and claimed to be tried, the trial was conducted.
4. During the course of trial, on the side of the prosecution 11 witnesses were examined as PW1 to
PW11, 18 documents were marked as Exs.P1 to P18. On the side of the defence, no witness was
examined and no document was marked.
5. After completing the trial and on considering the materials available on record, the learned trial
Judge found the accused guilty for the offence under Section 409 IPC and convicted and sentenced
him to undergo three months Simple Imprisonment. The appeal filed by the accused before the
learned Sessions Judge, Tiruvannamalai in C.A.No.3 of 2009 was also dismissed by confirming the
judgment of the trial Court. Aggrieved over that, the present https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
revision has been filed.
6. Heard the learned counsel for the revision petitioner and the learned Government Advocate (Crl.
Side) appearing for the respondent and perused the entire materials available on record.
7. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner/accused submitted that the accused was convicted
solely on the basis of her alleged confession given to PW2 and PW4; the learned Appellate Judge
had failed to appreciate the weakness of the alleged confession; the person to whom the confession
is said to have been given was the enquiry officer and he could have influence on the accused. It is
further submitted by the learned counsel for the revision petitioner that unless an extra judicial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 2
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
confession is found to be voluntary and without any coercion that cannot be accepted and the
accused cannot be convicted on the basis of the said confession. In support of his contentions, he
cited the following decisions:-
(i) Ismail Ibrahim Sayed Vs. State reported in 1975 Crl.L.J 1335
(ii) Jadumani Khanda Vs. State reported in 1993 Crl.L.J.2701
(iii) Gopal Sah Vs. State of Bihar reported in (2008) 17 SCC 128
8. The learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) appearing for the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
respondent submitted that the confession given by the petitioner/accused is an extra-judicial
confession and it was given voluntarily. He further submitted that if the confession itself is found to
be valid and trustworthy and it does not require any corroboration and the accused can be convicted
on the basis of the said confession; the records produced before the Court also prove the criminal act
of the petitioner/accused and hence this revision should be dismissed.
9. Point for consideration:
Whether the conviction and sentence of the first accused for the offence under
Section 409 IPC by the learned Sessions Judge based on the materials available on
record is fair and proper?
10. On perusal of the records, it is seen that one vital piece of evidence, which was instrumental for
the decision of this case is the alleged extra judicial confession given by the accused to PW2. It is
seen from the evidence of PW2 that the petitioner/accused has given confessions on three different
dates to him and the said confessions have been marked as Exs.P7, P9 and P11. The allegation
against the petitioner/accused is that by making use of her official position and taking advantage of
her custody over the registers pertaining to the recurring deposits of the post office, she had
misappropriated a sum of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Rs.6,900/- on various dates. It is
further alleged that by admitting her guilt, the petitioner/accused has repaid the said amount of
Rs.6,900/-.
11. The learned Government Advocate (Crl.side) for the respondent/State relied on the judgment of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Rajasthan Vs. Raja Ram reported in (2003) 8 SCC
180 in support of his contention that extra-judicial confession if found credible, it should be
accepted.
12. Yet another judgment in Gura Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan reported in (2001) 2 SCC 205,
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that only if the extra judicial confession is true and
voluntary, it can be relied upon for convicting the accused. However, it is observed that despite
inherent weakness in extra judicial confession as an item of evidence, it cannot be ignored. The
relevant portion is extracted as below:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 3
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
“6.It is settled position of law that extra-judicial confession, if true and voluntary, it
can be relied upon by the court to convict the accused for the commission of the
crime alleged. Despite inherent weakness of extra judicial confession as an item of
evidence, it cannot be ignored when shown that such confession was made before a
person who has no reason to state falsely and to whom it is made in the
circumstances which tend to support the statement. Relying upon an earlier
judgment in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Vindhya Pradesh [1954 SCR 1098], this Court again in Maghar Singh v. State of
Punjab [AIR 1975 SC 1320] held that the evidence in the form of extra-judicial
confession made by the accused to witnesses cannot be always termed to be a tainted
evidence. Corroboration of such evidence is required only by way of abundant
caution. If the court believes the witness before whom the confession is made and is
satisfied that the confession was true and voluntarily made, then the conviction can
be founded on such evidence alone. In Narayan Singh v. State of M.P. [AIR 1985 SC
1678] this Court cautioned that it is not open to the court trying the criminal case to
start with presumption that extra judicial confession is always a weak type of
evidence. It would depend on the nature of the circumstances, the time when the
confession is made and the credibility of the witnesses who speak for such a
confession. The retraction of extra-judicial confession which is a usual phenomenon
in criminal cases would by itself not weaken the case of the prosecution based upon
such a confession. In Kishore Chand v. State of H.P. [AIR 1990 SC 2140] this Court
held that an unambiguous extra judicial confession possesses high probative value
force as it emanates from the person who committed the crime and is admissible in
evidence provided it is free from suspicion and suggestion of any falsity. However,
before relying on the alleged confession, the court has to be satisfied that it is
voluntary and is not the result of inducement, threat or promise envisaged under
Section 24 of the Evidence Act or was brought about in suspicious circumstances to
circumvent Sections 25 and 26. The Court is required to look into the surrounding
circumstances to find out as to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis whether such
confession is not inspired by any improper or collateral consideration or
circumvention of law suggesting that it may not be true. All relevant circumstances
such as the person to whom the confession is made, the time and place of making it,
the circumstances in which it was made have to be scrutinised. To the same effect is
the judgment in Baldev Raj v. State of Haryana [AIR 1991 SC 37]. After referring to
the judgment in Piara Singh v. State of Punjab [AIR 1977 SC 2274] this Court in
Madan Gopal Kakkad v. Naval Dubey & Anr.[JT 1992 (3) SC 270] held that the extra
judicial confession which is not obtained by coercion, promise of favour or false hope
and is plenary in character and voluntary in nature can be made the basis for
conviction even without corroboration.”
13. It is to be noted that PW2 to whom the alleged confessions (Exs.P7, P9 and P11) were given, is
the enquiry officer, who had conducted the enquiry on these allegations. Hence the
petitioner/accused would have have had fear and insecurity towards PW2. It is seen from the
evidence of PW3 that when PW2 enquired the accused on 18.10.2002, she had given a statement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 4
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
and he had affixed his signature under the same. But unfortunately, the alleged confession dated
18.10.2002 was not marked as a document before the Court.
14. However, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner/accused that in the case on
hand, the confession alleged to have been given by the accused does not meet the parameters set by
the Courts to accept https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the same and act upon it. He has further
submitted that PW2 being the superior officer, the accused would not be in a free state of mind to
give a confession to him. At a time when the enquiry was made and the sword was hanging on her
head, with a fond of getting rid of further action, she could have given the statements. Hence, it
cannot be stated that the elements of voluntariness and freeness are present in the confessions said
to have been given by the accused to her officer.
15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held in Munna Kumar Upadhyaya alias Munna Upadhyaya Vs. State
of A.P. [2012 SCC CRl.L.J.3068], as under:-
“42. Extra-judicial confession must be established to be true and made voluntarily
and in a fit state of mind. The words of the witnesses must be clear, unambiguous and
should clearly convey that the accused is the perpetrator of the crime. The
extra-judicial confession can be accepted and can be the basis of conviction, if it
passes the test of credibility. The extra-judicial confession should inspire confidence
and the court should find out whether there are other cogent circumstances on record
to support it.”
16. If the extra-judicial confession is found to have been obtained from a subordinate staff, by her
officer, the inherent threat cannot be ruled out. No doubt the pending enquiry proceedings against
the accused could have affected https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis her and she would have thought
that the statement before her Enquiry Officer could be the best way out to her. It is appropriate to
refer the judgement held in Satbir Singh and another etc., Vs. State of Punjab [AIR 1977 SC 1294] in
this context. And it reads as under:-
“27. In deciding whether a particular confession attracts the frown of S.24 of the
Evidence Act, the question has to be considered from the point of view of the
confessing accused as to how the inducement, threat or promise proceeding from a
person in authority would operate in his mind.
....................................................................................... the evidence of this witness, we
are unable to hold that the confessions made by the accused before Mr.Kapur on July
19, 1970, were free from the taint of infirmity within the mischief of S.24 of the
Evidence Act. We are, therefore, clearly of opinion that the extra-judicial confessions
by the two accused Shiv Narain and Harbhajan Singh have to be completely excluded
from consideration being hit by S.24 of the Evidence Act.”
17. Canvassing the same point, the learned counsel for the petitioner cited the decision of the Delhi
High Court in the case of Anil Kumar Vs. State reported in 2010 CRL.L.J. 1806, wherein it has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 5
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
observed as under:-
“23. Deposition by witnesses cannot be treated as https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
mathematical formula and broken into sub-components i.e., as in Algebra, complex
equations for resolution thereof, being broken into linear equations. We agree with
the submission made by the learned counsel for the appellant that it appears that the
appellant was made to confess to the crime by the Vice- Principal under threat of
being handed over to the police. The words “proceeding from a person in authority”in
Section 24 of the Evidence Act are broad enough to include any person having
dominion over the accused. A Vice-Principal of a school would be a person in
authority vis-a-vis student. We thus exclude the extra judicial confession made by the
appellant. But, the deposition of the Vice-Principal of the school that when the
appellant was brought before him, he was perplexed and that he became more
perplexed when he told him that the police would be summoned is admissible in
evidence pertaining to the conduct of the accused; admissibility being by virtue of
Section 8 of the Evidence Act.”
18. In totality, the extra judicial confession is not a strong piece of evidence. Before convicting an
accused based on the extra judicial confession, the Court should exercise utmost caution to find out
whether the confession was given out of inducement, threat or any other anxiety of getting out of the
legal proceedings. Admittedly, in the official hierarchy between PW2 and the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis accused, PW2 stood higher and also happened to be the Enquiry
Officer. Any Government servant like the petitioner/accused would have felt the fear and
compulsion for giving statement before the Superior authority. Unless it is proved before the Court
that despite PW2 stood as a superior officer, she did not suffer from fear or anxiety or she was
placed under no compelling circumstances, the accused cannot be convicted solely on the basis of
the confession.
19. It is also shown that except the inspection report, no other complaint has been received from any
depositor that the petitioner/accused had misappropriated the amount deposited in the post office
and because of that the depositors were not able to realise the benefits of their deposit in the post
office. The prosecution has not even established before the Court that the manner in which the
petitioner/accused had misappropriated the amount. Just because the accused reimbursed the loss,
it cannot be presumed that she had committed misappropriation. The Courts below ought to have
appreciated the validity of the extra judicial confession in a right perspective before relying on it.
Since the petitioner/accused was convicted on the basis of the extra-judicial confession which is not
proved to be free and voluntary, I feel that the judgment of the Court below warrants interference.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
20. In the result, this Criminal Revision is allowed and the judgment of the learned Principal
District and Sessions Judge, Thiruvannamalai dated 03.01.2017 made in C.A.No.3 of 2009 is hereby
set aside. The petitioner/accused is acquitted from all charges. Fine amount, if any, paid shall be
refunded. Bail bond, if any executed shall be cancelled.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 6
V.Rajakumari vs The State Rep. By on 7 December, 2021
07.12.2021 Index: Yes Speaking Order kmi To
1.The Principal District and Sessions Judge, Thiruvannamalai.
2.The Judicial Magistrate, Polur, Thiruvannamalai District.
3.The Inspector of Police, Chetpet Police Station, Thiruvannamalai District.
4.The Public Prosecutor, High Court of Madras, Chennai-600 104.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N.MANJULA, J kmi 07.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22624018/ 7
