V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
Author: R.Subramanian
Bench: R.Subramanian
C.R.P.(NPD).No.484 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 24.11.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.SUBRAMANIAN
C.R.P.(PD).No.484 of 2021
V.V.Mohan .. Petitioner
Vs.
M.Jothy .. Respondent
PRAYER: Civil Revision Petition filed under Section 25 of Tamil Nadu
Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1963, praying to set aside the
judgment and decreetal order dated 09.12.2020 passed by the Subordinate
Court at Poonamallee allowing RCA.No.21 of 2015 and consequently
confirm the order and decreetal order dated 29.07.2015 passed by the
Principal District Munsif Court at Poonamallee passed in RCOP.No.2 of
2014.
For Petitioner : Mr.V.V.Giridhar
For Respondent : Mr.M.V.Seshachari
******
1/12
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) C.R.P.(NPD).No.484 of 2021
ORDER
The landlord challenges the order made in RCA.No.21 of 2015 made by the appellate authority in an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71542750/ 1
V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
appeal under Section 23 of Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, reversing the order
of eviction passed by the Controller in RCOP.No.2 of 2014, a petition filed under Section 14(1)(b) of
the said Act seeking eviction for the purpose of demolition and re-construction.
2. The landlord sought for eviction under Section 14(1)(b) of the Act. In the petition filed, the
landlord had stated that he has already taken steps to construct a new building by demolishing the
building in the 'B' schedule property. However, the landlord has not specifically set out the
undertaking as required under Section 14(2)(b) of the Act, to the effect that he will commence
demolition within a period of 1 month and complete it within a period of 3 months. This absence of
the undertaking as required under Section 14(2)(b) was projected as defence by the tenant. The Rent
Controller however rejected the claim of the tenant and allowed the application and ordered
eviction. The tenant filed appeal.
3. Pending appeal, the landlord filed an affidavit of undertaking on
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 25.02.2020 complying with the requirements of Section 14(2)(b)
of the Act. The appellate Authority, however, concluded that non-compliance with Section 14(2)(b)
even at the time of filing of Original Petition is fatal to the claim of the landlord and on the said
conclusion, allowed the appeal and dismissed the eviction petition. It will be pertinent to point out
at this juncture, that the Appellate Authority concurred with the conclusion of the Rent Controller
that the landlord made out a case for eviction under Section 14(1)(b) of Act.
4. I have heard Mr.V.V.Giridhar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner/landlord and
Mr.M.V.Seshachari, learned counsel appearing for the respondent/tenant.
5. Mr.V.V.Giridhar would submit that the Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Court had in various
decisions pointed out that non-filing of undertaking as required under Section 14(2)(b) of the Act
cannot be held to be fatal to the claim of the landlord. He would also point out that an affidavit of
undertaking was filed pending appeal and therefore, the defect https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
stood cured. Hence, according to him, the Appellate Authority was not justified in allowing the
appeal and setting aside the eviction order passed by the Controller on the technical ground.
6. Per contra, Mr.M.V.Seshachari, learned counsel appearing for the tenant would submit that
though the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Harrington House School Vs. S.M.Ispahani
and others reported in (2002) 3 MLJ 130 (SC) is being taken as a lead case for the proposition that
non-filing of undertaking is not fatal and it could be filed at any time. The said judgment did not in
fact laid down such law. He would also rely upon the judgmnet of single Judge of this Court in
M.Abu Tahir Vs. M.Rahamathulla reported in (2005) 4 MLJ 628, Where, Hon'ble Mr.Justice
M.Thanikachalam had pointed out that the judgment in Harrington House School Vs. S.M.Ispahani
and others referred to supra cannot be taken as a precedent for the proposition that an undertaking
as required under Section 14(2)(b) of the Act can be given at any time.
7. No doubt Hon'ble Mr.Justice M.Thanikachalam in M.Abu Tahir https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Vs. M.Rahamathulla referred to supra, has observed that the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Harrington House School Vs. S.M.Ispahani and others referred to supra cannot be taken as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71542750/ 2
V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
a precedent laying down the proposition that undertaking can be furnished at any time.
8. He would also draw my attention to the judgment of this Court in Alamelu Vs.Visalakshi reported
in 1978 (91) LW 423, wherein, this Court had pointed out that if the landlord has not been favoured
with eviction order by the Controller, in the appeal filed by him, he can cure the defect by filing such
affidavit of undertaking. But, a landlord who has been favoured with order of eviction, cannot in the
tenant's appeal file an undertaking and cure the defect. This position of law as stated in Alamelu
Vs.Visalakshi was referred upon by Hon'ble Mr.Justice M.Thanikachalam to conclude that the
undertaking can be before order of eviction and not after order of eviction.
9. The said position of law turns out on a strict interpretation of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis provisions of the Act. But, subsequently this Court in various
judgments had applied the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Harrington House School Vs.
S.M.Ispahani and others referred to supra as one laying down law that the undertaking can be given
at any point of time before taking possession.
10. In some cases, this Court has gone to the extent of holding that an undertaking as required under
14(2)(b) can be filed even along with the Execution Petition. Even prior to Alamelu Vs.Visalakshi
referred to supra, this Court had in B.C.Dioceses of Madurai Vs. Ganapathy Iyer and othres reported
in 1976 (89) LW 584, taken a view that an undertaking given pursuant to the direction by the Rent
Controller, after eviction order can be taken as a sufficient compliance with the provision of Section
14(2)(b) of the Act. The Hon'ble Mr.Jusitice Gokulakrishnan, while doing so, has observed as
follows:-
8. In view of the fact that the undertaking given by the petitioners subsequent to the
eviction order passed by the Rent Controller giving them one week's time to file such
an undertaking can be taken as sufficient compliance with the provisions
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of S 14(2)(b), the orders passed by the Appellate
Authority are set aside and the cases are remanded to the file of the Appellate
Authority for disposal afresh only on the question of bona fides of the requirements
by the petitioners herein.
11. In S.P.Kasi Viswanathan Chettiar Vs. S.Kalyanaraman reported in 2001 AIHC 336, Hon'ble
Mr.Justice K.P.Sivasubramaniam had held that the undertaking can be given after the order of
eviction. The learned Judge had considered the judgment of this Court in Alamelu Vs.Visalakshi
referred to supra as well as the judgment in Radhakrishnan Vs. Rajasekaran reported in (1990) 2
Mad LJ 319. In R.V.E.Venkatachala Gounder Vs. Venkatesha Gupta and others reported in AIR
2002 Supreme Court 1733, a similar question arose before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:-
13. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that the High Court ought not to
have interfered with the decision of the appellate authority. The appeals are allowed.
Judgment of the High Court is set aside and that of the appellate
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis authority restored. However, in view of the time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71542750/ 3
V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
that has already been lost in the litigation and to protect the interest of the tenants
and certainly to allay their fears,it is directed that the executing Court shall, before
directing the tenants to be evicted and possession being given to the landlord, direct
the landlord to file plans of proposed construction, duly approved by the local
authority, and give an undertaking in terms of S.14(2)(b) of the Act. No order as to
costs.
12. Same view was reiterated by this Court in Lakshmi Vs. M.V.Balamurali and another reported in
2007 (2) CTC 518, Harikrishnan Daga Vs. Loknath Rao reported in 2013 (4) LW 107, PL.L.Rajamani
Achi Vs. M.Govindaraj and another reported in 2017 SCC OnLine Mad 6568 and S.Sundararajan
Vs.A.Mary Josephine reported in 2019 SCC OnLine Mad 10227.
13. No doubt, the language of Section 14(2)(b) requires the landlord to undertake to demolish the
building within a particular time, to commence demolition and complete it within a particular time
and such undertaking is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to be furnished prior to the order of
eviction. But, the object of the requirement is only to ensure that the landlord does not take an order
of eviction under Section 14(1)(b) and retains the building as it is.
14. The power of re-entry is also given to the tenant, in the event the building is not demolished as
undertaken, de horse the point on time at which the undertaking is given. The right of the tenant is
protected. Therefore, I do not think it will be proper, while considering the beneficial legislation, to
project an interpretation that it would render the right redundant. The very purpose of the
enactment is to protect the tenant from unreasonable eviction. The said enactment cannot be used
to unleash unreasonableness on the landlord. However, in view of the preponderance of judicial
opinion, which is in favour of the landlord to the effect that the undertaking can be given at any
point of time and considering the fact that the landlord has given such undertaking pending appeal,
I do not think that the Appellate Authority was right in concluding that the landlord is not entitled
to an order of eviction for his failure to furnish an undertaking before the Rent Controller.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. The rights of the tenant stand perfectly protected. Hence, I do not think that the order of the
Appellate Authority can be sustained. The revision is therefore allowed. The order of the Appellate
Authority is set aside and the order of the Rent Controller is restored. No costs.
16. Considering the fact that the tenant is carrying on business in the premises, he is given a years
time to vacate and handover possession. The tenant shall file an affidavit undertaking to vacate and
handover vacant possession by 30.11.2022, such an affidavit shall be filed into this Court by 10th
December 2021. If the affidavit is not filed by the said date, the landlord will be entitled to seek
execution of order of eviction, as if, no time has been granted by this Court.
24.11.2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71542750/ 4
V.V.Mohan vs M.Jothy on 24 November, 2021
dsa
Index : Yes
Internet : Yes
Speaking order
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
To
1. The Subordinate Judge, Poonamallee.
2. ThePrincipal District Munsif, Poonamallee.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.SUBRAMANIAN, J.
dsa 24.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71542750/ 5
