Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December,
2021
Author: R.Pongiappan
Bench: R. Pongiappan
Crl.A.(MD) No.9 of 2016
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
Reserved on : 25.08.2021
Pronounced on : 01.12.2021
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE R. PONGIAPPAN
Criminal Appeal (MD) No.9 of 2016
Vaithiyanathan M ... Appellant/ Sole Accused
-vs-
The State of Tamil Nadu
Rep. by the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Vigilance and Anti Corruption,
Tirunelveli District.
(Crime No.3 of 2001) ... Respondent/Complainant
Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374 (2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, to set aside the conviction and sentence passed by the learned
learned Special Judge for Trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases,
Tirunelveli, dated 18.12.2015 in S.C.No.2 of 2014.
For Appellant : Mr.I.Subramanian, Sr. Counsel
for Mr.R.Anand
For Respondent : Mr.E.Antony Sahaya Prabahar
Government Advocate (Crl.Side)
1/30
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 1
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) Crl.A.(MD) No.9 of 2016
JUDGMENT
The present appeal has been filed by the appellant against the judgment passed in S.C.No.2 of 2014
dated 18.12.2015, on the file of the learned Special Judge for Trial of Prevention of Corruption Act
Cases, Tirunelveli.
2. The appellant is the accused in Special Case No.2 of 2014 on the file of the learned Special Judge
for Trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases, Tirunelveli. He stood charged for the offence
punishable under Sections 7 and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The trial
Court by judgment dated 18.02.2015, came to the conclusion that the appellant is guilty under
sections 7 and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Accordingly, he was
convicted under Section 7 of the Act, and sentenced to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for three
years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default to undergo simple imprisonment for five months.
Further, he has been convicted under Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the Act, and sentenced to
undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for three years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default to
undergo simple imprisonment for five months. Challenging the said
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis conviction and sentence, the appellant has come out with the
present Criminal Appeal.
3. The case of the prosecution in brief is as follows:
(i) PW2-Poovendran is the resident of Pannayangurichi Village.
PW9-Murugan is his relative, residing in the same village. Apart from the regular work, PW9
indulged in some social work wherein, he helped the poor and needy people. In the year 1998, the
people residing in Pannayangurichi, who belonged to Pallar and Arunthathiyar community
presented a petition before the Tahsildar, wherein they prayed to issue patta. Thinking that the
women residing in the village are having the priority, PW2, through his wife PW18-Kamala
submitted an application under Ex.P23, wherein also he prayed for issuance of patta.
(ii) The applications presented by those people were dealt with appellant's pre-predecessors viz.
Jesuraj [PW8] and Subramanian [PW21]. After the appellant took charge as Harijan Welfare
Tahsildhar, PW2 and PW9 approached the appellant and Head Clerk Alagiri and requested to take
action, but no action was taken on their applications. On 14.02.2001, at
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis about 12.30pm when PW2 and PW9 came to the office of the
Special Tahsildar, Adi Dravidar Welfare, Cheranmadevi, met the Head Clerk Alagiri @ Alagirisamy
and informed that no action was taken on the applications submitted for free house site patta. In
this regard, the said Alagiri demanded to give Rs.1000/- for taking further action.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 2
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
(iii) Therefore, PW2 and PW9 met the appellant and informed him about what Alagiri said. To this,
the appellant also told to PW2 and PW9 that without giving money, steps cannot be taken for giving
free house site patta, further, the appellant demands the PW2 and PW9 to give Rs.1,000/- to him.
(iv) Again on 26.02.2001, at about 11.15am PW2 and PW9 went to the Special Tahsildar Office,
Cheranmahadevi, wherein the said Alarigi was not available. Hence, they met the appellant and after
informing him that the applicants are poor, pleaded to issue free house site patta. At that time also
the appellant/accused demanded Rs.1000/- as illegal gratification and directed to settle Rs.500/- to
Head Clerk Alagiri and asked them to come tomorrow with the demanded money. Afterwards PW2
lodged a complaint https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis under Ex.P2 before PW10, Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption and thereupon PW10 registered a case in
Cr.No.3 of 2001 and the printed copy of the FIR was marked as Ex.P28.
(v) After registering the FIR, trap was arranged by PW10. Two Government servants viz.,
Sankaranarayanan [PW3] and Kandasamy [PW7] were called to stand as witnesses. The trap laying
officer introduced PW3 and PW7, who are witnesses to the complainants PW2 and PW9. During
such time, PW10 prepared the Entrustment Mahazar, under Ex.P3. Further the same has been
prepared in his office and after preparing the entrustment Mahazar, the trap procedure was clearly
explained by the PW10 to the witnesses PW2, PW3, PW7 and PW9. Afterwards, four Fifty Rupees
currency notes and thirteen Hundred Rupees currency notes with their respective numbers were
handed over to PW2 after smearing with phenolphthalein powder. Thereafter, on the same day after
the instructions of the Trap Laying Officer, PW2, PW3, PW7, PW9 and PW10 along with police party
went near the office of the Special Tahsildar, Cheranmahadevi. At about 10.20am PW10 instructed
PW2, PW3 and PW9 to go to the office of the appellant and act according to the instructions given
by him. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Thereafter, PW2, PW3 and PW9 went into the office of the
appellant/accused at 10.30 or 10.45am and came out of the office of the appellant at about 11.00am
and signalled PW7 and PW10 that the appellant/accused had demanded and accepted the illegal
gratification and later PW2 identified the accused to PW10.
(vi) After identifying the appellant/accused, PW10 introduced himself, to the appellant. He also
introduced PW3 and PW7 and other police officers. After the said introduction, he conducted
phenolphthalein test on the hands of the appellant and proved positive. PW10 questioned about the
money received from PW2, for which the appellant with his right hand took 10 x 100 and placed it
over the table which was verified with entrustment mahazar in the presence of PW3 and PW7 and
phenolphthalein test was also conducted with the appellant's front shirt pocket, which also proved
positive.
(vii) PW10 seized the currency notes, 3 bottles with tested solutions and shirt of the appellant. Apart
from the above seizure, PW10 also seized https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Rs.17/- from the shirt
outer pocket and Rs.1510/- from his inner shirt pocket, five more appellant's personal records and
eight office records. Afterwards, PW22-Joseph and PW23-S.S.Manickarao continued the
investigation, examined the witnesses and obtained a sanction. PW23 filed the final report holding
that the accused is liable to be convicted under Sections 7 and Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 3
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
4. Based on the above materials, the trial Court framed the appropriate charges as detailed in the
2nd paragraph of this judgment. When the appellant was questioned in respect of the charges, he
pleaded innocence. In order to prove the charges, the prosecution examined as many as 24
witnesses [PW1 to PW24] and 28 documents were exhibited [Ex.P1 to Ex.P28], besides 5 material
objects [M.O.1 to M.O.5].
5. Out of the said witnesses, PW1-Sunil Paliwal, is the District Collector, Tirunelveli, spoken about
the issuance of sanction order. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(ii) PW2-S.Poovendran is the de facto complainant, speaks about the demand as well as acceptance
of illegal gratification and about the trap proceedings.
(iii) PW3-R.Shankaranarayanan, who is the shadow witness and one of the two trap witnesses, had
spoken about the receipt of bribe.
(iv) PW4-Balakrishnan, is the then Revenue Inspector at the office of the Special Tahsildar, Adi
Dravidar Welfare, Cheranmahadevi between May 1998 and 01.07.1999. He had spoken about the
closing of file in Ex.P9 on 23.11.1999 and about PW2's wife, who is ineligible for getting free house
site patta.
(v) PW5-P.Selvin and PW6-N.Suyambulingam, are the Village Administrative Officers, had given
evidence that no decision was taken about the land to be given to the beneficiaries.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(vi) PW7-A.Kandasmay, one of the two shadow witnesses, spoken about the occurrence as during
the time of trap, he was near to the appellant's office, along with the trap laying party.
(vii) PW8-S.Jesuraj, the then Special Tahsildar, Adi-Dravidar Welfare, Cheranmahadevi, has given
evidence that the file relates to the land acquisition, was closed on 23.11.1999.
(viii) PW9-V.Murugan, who is the cousin brother of PW2, gave evidence in respect to the trap.
(ix) PW10-R.Perumalsamy, Deputy Superintendent of Police/Trap Laying Officer, spoken about the
registration of the crime and about the trap proceedings.
(x) PW11-Ganesasubramanian, is the Revenue Inspector, working in the office of the appellant. He
did not give any evidence in support of the case of the prosecution.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(xi) PW12 – S.Arjunan, worked as Revenue Sub Inspector at the office of the Special Tahsildar,
Adi-Dravidar Welfare, Cheranmahadevi, between 04.01.1999 and 31.07.2001, speaks about the
closing of file and also about the proposed beneficiaries themselves not wanting the lands in a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 4
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
certain survey number.
(xii) PW13-Narambu, working as Junior Assistant in the office of the appellant gave evidence as that
when at the time the alleged trap was conducted, the appellant was in other duties.
(xiii) PW14-R.Karupasamy, working as Office Assistant at the office of the Special Tahsildar, Adi
Dravidar Welfare, Cheranmahadevi, has also not supported the case of the prosecution.
(xiv) PW15-Parvathy, PW16-Mallika, PW17-Mariammal and PW18- P.Kamala are the applicants,
sought free patta, spoken about the presentation of applications for free house site patta.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(xv) PW19-A.Natarajan, the Court staff speaks about the requisition given by the investigation
officer and about the sending of Material Objects for chemical examination.
(xvi) PW20-Kasturibai, is the Assistant Director of Forensic Science Department, spoken about the
examination conducted on the material object which were recovered during the time of
investigation.
(xvii) PW21-Subramanian, was working as Special Tahsildar, Adi Dravidar Welfare,
Cheranmahadevi for the period between 07.01.1999 and 13.04.2000 speaks about the closing of the
file, which pertains to the land acquisition, relates to the land required by PW2 and others.
(xviii) PW22-A.Joseph, is the investigation officer, who took over the investigation in Crime No.3 of
2001 on 27.02.2001, spoken about the investigation conducted.
(xvix) PW23-S.S.Manicka Rao, is the investigation officer, spoken about the examination of
witnesses and about the filing of final report. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (xx)
PW24-A.Ramachandran, the retired Revenue Divisional Officer, gave evidence in respect of free
house site patta in issue.
6. When the trial Court examined the appellant under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
in respect of the incriminating evidences available against him, he denied the same as false.
However, he did not chose to examine any witnesses nor exhibited any documents on his side.
7. However, the appellant filed a statement wherein he has stated that on the alleged day, he is not
present in the office and he did not know PW2 and PW9. He has further stated that no such
application seeking issuance of free house site patta is pending with him. While at the time he is
prepared to go to the District Revenue Officer's office, PW2 entered into his chamber and inserted
the recovered amount in his pocket and at the same time the police officials came and arrested him.
According to him, he did not receive the tainted money and he did not handover the same to the
police.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 5
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
8. Having considered all the above materials, the trial Court came to the conclusion that the
appellant is guilty under Sections 7 and 13(2) r/w https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 13(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act and convicted and sentenced him as stated in paragraph No.2 of the
judgment. That is how, the appellant is now before this Court with this Criminal Appeal.
9. I have heard Mr.I.Subramanian, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and
Mr.E.Antony Sahaya Prabahar, the learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side), appearing for the
respondent and also perused the records carefully.
10. The first and foremost submission made by the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant is that PW1 who is the competent authority granting sanction to prosecute the appellant,
during the time of granting sanction, without applying his mind and without clarifying the details of
the other accused viz., Alagiri, mechanically acted upon the requisition given by the prosecution
authority and the same is sufficient to disbelieve the case of the prosecution.
11. In this regard, the learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) appearing for the respondent police
would contend that though in the First https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Information Report, one
Alagiri was added as 2nd appellant, requisition was submitted to PW1 only in respect to the present
appellant and that therefore, including the said Alagiri as accused or not is the discretion of the
investigation officer and therefore, it cannot be said that PW1, being the sanctioning authority,
without applying his mind, granted sanction to prosecute the present appellant.
12. Now, considering the either side submission with relevant records, it is true that in Ex.P28-FIR,
one Alagiri was added as 2 nd accused along with the present appellant. Further, the said FIR has
been registered against him for the offence under sections 7 and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act. In otherwise, after concluding the investigation, final report has been filed only
against the present appellant and not against the said Alagiri. In respect of the deletion of the said
Alagiri, no reason has been assigned in the final report. However, it is the general rule, under
chapter XII, Code of Criminal Procedure, only the investigation officer is having the power to decide
the issue as to whether a particular person was involved in the alleged occurrence or not. In this
regard, this Court while at the time of disposing Crl.O.P.No.9727 of 2020
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis on 14.09.2020, (T.Kumaran Vs. State and Ors, reported in
MANU/TN/5883/2020) observed as follows:
“ 5.An enquiry into a non cognizable offence or a cognizable offence is the unfettered
powers of the Investigation Officers so long as the power to investigate/enquire into
these offences are legitimately exercised within the frame work of Chapter XII of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. Though the Code of Criminal Procedure empowers the
Magistrate to be a guardian in all the stages of the police investigation, there is no
power envisaging him to interfere with the actual investigation or the mode of
investigation.”
13. Therefore, I am of the view that non mentioning of the reason for not adding the said Alagiri as
accused, in no way would affect the order of sanction. Further, while at the time of submitting the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 6
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
application for sanction, the investigation officer supplied the materials only in respect to the
present appellant and not against the Alagiri. Apart from that, the sanctioning authority while at the
time of giving evidence as PW1, given evidence as the requisition was given only in respect to the
present appellant, further, he specifically stated before the trial Court that only after the subjective
satisfaction, he granted a sanction. Therefore, the first submission made by the appellant counsel
would not falsify the case of the prosecution in any way.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
14. Secondly, the learned counsel for the appellant would contend that in respect to the alleged
demand dated 14.02.2001 and 26.02.2001, PW2 and PW9, gave false evidence that they met the
appellant in the morning hours. On the other hand in respect to the presence of the appellant in his
office, PW13 gave evidence as on 14.02.2001, the appellant had gone to Tirunelveli to meet the
District Revenue Officer and returned only in the afternoon. Further, as regards 26.02.2001, he gave
evidence as the appellant had gone to meet the Government Advocate at Ambasamudram Sub Court
at 10.00am and returned only by 3.00pm. Therefore, the evidence given by PW2 and PW9 in respect
to the presence of the appellant in his office is entirely a false one and as such, we have to decide that
no demand was made on 14.02.2001 and 26.02.2001.
15. In this regard, the learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) would submit that though PW13
gave evidence as above, the entries made in the register will prove the fact that the appellant was
present in his office as stated by PW2 and PW9.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. Now, on considering the said submission with relevant records, it is true, PW13 in his chief
examination gave evidence as stated by the appellant's counsel, on the other hand, he held that the
register maintained in the appellant's office reflects that the appellant came to the office at 11.00am
on 14.02.2001. Therefore, in respect to the presence of appellant on 14.02.2001, the evidence given
by PW13 is found against the entries made in the register maintained in regular course. Therefore,
the said evidence given by the said PW13, cannot be accepted.
17. In respect to the presence of appellant on 26.02.2001, PW13 given evidence that on 26.02.2001,
the appellant has returned to his office only at 3.00pm. On the other hand, both PW2 and PW9
falsely claim that they met the appellant at 11.15am and therefore, in respect to the presence of
appellant in his office on 26.02.2001, there was a contradictory evidence available in the case of the
prosecution. However, being the reason that the present case has been tried before the trial Court
upon the evidence given in respect to the trap proceedings, further for the reason that evidence
discloses the fact that PW3 and PW7 were present at the time of trap proceedings, this
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Court cannot come to the conclusion that the accused is not
present in his office as alleged by the defence. Accordingly, the second submission made by the
appellant also went against the appellant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 7
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
18. The next submission of the appellant would be that the purpose for which the alleged bribe was
demanded was improbable. According to him, the file pertaining to free house site patta was closed
long before the alleged demand was made and only due to the reason that since the file was closed
much earlier, PW2 and PW9 who are all ineligible person for obtaining patta pressurized the
appellant to initiate proceedings for land acquisition and since the same was refused by the
appellant, they lodged a false case against the appellant and in view of the same, they gave a false
evidence as the appellant demanded to pay Rs.1000/- as bribe.
19. Per contra, the learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) would submit that since the evidence
pertains to the trap proceedings are all in favour of the prosecution, it cannot be said that no
demand has been made by the appellant. He would further submit that though the file relating to
the Free House site patta was closed in 1999, the same was reopened and kept
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis pending, which is evident through the evidence of
PW24–A.Ramachandran, a retired District Revenue Officer.
20. Now, on considering the said submissions, first we should decide whether PW2 is having enmity
over the appellant. In this regard, it is the case of the prosecution that PW2, gave an application
through his wife, wherein he prayed the appellant to issue a free house site patta. In otherwise, PW2
in his cross examination admitted that he was already granted a free house site patta, wherein he
constructed a house i.e., Door No.7/112 and only in the said house his family was residing. In
otherwise, in respect to the eligibility, PW1, who is the Collector of the District, gave evidence in his
cross examination that in the event, either the husband or the wife are having any land or otherwise,
if they are already provided with the free house site patta, then they are not eligible for getting the
free house site patta. Accordingly, the said evidence given by PW2 and PW1 narrates the fact that
PW2 is an ineligible person for availing the free house site patta.
21. After knowing the same, PW2 submitted another application through his wife wherein also he
prayed to issue one another patta, which is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis against the rules
contemplated. Therefore, in the said circumstances if the appellant has refused to recommend his
name, automatically PW2 would develop enemity against the appellant.
22. Now, on going through the evidence in respect of the closing of the file, PW13-Narambu, who is
the Junior Assistant working in the appellant's office gave evidence in his cross examination as
follows:
“K:K:/97-98 1650-99 Mfpa nfhg;g[fs; Kiwna
24/11/99. 25/01/2001 Mfpa njjpfspy; nfhg;g[fs;
Kof;fg;gl;Ls;sd/ ,e;j nfhg;g[fs; jhd;
gidad;Fwpr;rpia nru;e;j g{nte;jpud;. KUfd; kw;Wk;
gadhspfSf;F Mjp jpuhtplu;fSf;F ,ytr tPlL
;
kid gl;lh tH';FtJ rk;ge;jkhf nfhg;g[fshFk;/
14/02/01ypUe;J 26/02/01 tiu gidad;Fwpr;rp
fpuhkj;ij nru;e;j g{nte;jpud;. KUfd;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 8
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
rk;ge;jgl;l ,ytr kid gl;l tH';f nfl;l
kDf;fs; ml';fpa nfhg;g[fs; vJt[k;
epYitapy; ,y;iy/”
23. Further, in respect to the closing of the file, PW8–Jesuraj, who is the then Tahsildar, Adi
Dravidar Welfare gave evidence as on 23.11.1999 itself the file Mu.Mu.97/98 was closed and the
same was reflected in Ex.P9. More than that, PW15-Parvathy, one of the applicant, who submitted
an https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis application for free house site patta, has admitted in her cross
examination as application submitted by PW2 was closed by one Tahsildar viz., Subramanian on
23.11.1999 itself.
24. Further, PW21-Subramanian, the Tahsildhar, who closed the file gave evidence as in 1999 itself,
the file relates to the land which was required by PW2 and PW9 was closed and kept in the record
room.
25. Therefore the said evidences given by PW8, PW13, and PW15, would reveal the fact that on the
day of occurrence, no such file relating to the applications given by PW2 and PW9 was maintained
in the appellant's office and therefore, it cannot be said that the appellant made demand for issuing
free house site patta.
26. Though, PW24-A.Ramachandran, who is the retired District Revenue Officer, gave evidence in
respect to the case of the prosecution, the said evidence is in respect to Ex.P10 alone and not in
respect of Ex.P9. Here it is a case, PW2 and PW9, who are the sufferers gave evidence as when at the
time application was presented before the Collector, the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Collector
informed them that the present officer i.e. the appellant would take necessary steps for acquiring the
land. After giving evidence as such, in order to substantiate the same, no material has been
exhibited by the investigation officer as the file was reopened. At most the endorsement made by the
Collector for reopening the land acquisition proceedings are not produced. Accordingly, in this
aspect the evidence put forth by the prosecution creates a doubt whether the alleged demand was
made for complying with the request.
27. At the outset, I should say as rightly pointed out by the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant, in a case of this nature, where punishment is so stringent, the proof should be very strict.
Keeping in mind its fundamental principle, let us now look into the evidence let in.
28. The term 'remuneration' as defined in the Act, would mean that something done in
consideration. If only the accused had been in a position to do some favour and for doing such
favour, if the accused had received the amount, it will amount to remuneration and such a
remuneration might have to be termed as 'illegal gratification'. Here it is a case, the evidence given
by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis PW8, PW13 and PW15 would probabilise, the fact that though
the appellant received bribe from PW2, he is not in a position to do any consideration in favour of
the applicants. Accordingly, the evidence given by the prosecution creates a doubt whether the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 9
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
present case has been registered for the instance narrated by PW2.
29. One another important aspect which has to be decided in this case is that as per the case of the
prosecution, while at the time of giving bribe, PW2, PW3 and PW9, all jointly entered into the office
of the appellant.
30. In this regard, the categorical evidence given by PW2 is that, after the receipt of the amount, the
appellant asked PW2 about the PW3 as “ who is he?” In such a situation, though PW3 was treated as
a hostile witness, before treating him as a hostile witness, he gave evidence as previous to the
occurrence he had met the appellant for some other official purpose. If such evidence is a true one,
the question of asking the whereabouts of PW3 does not arise to the accused. Further, PW3, in his
cross examination admitted as while at the time PW2 gave the bribe to the appellant, he was outside
only. The said stand itself evaluate the fact that whether the alleged trap had
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis happened as per the evidence given by PW2 and PW9 or not.
31. Yet another aspect, which is necessary to be decided in this case is that after the trap
proceedings, the Trap Laying Officer has to examine the accused immediately and record the
statement. If such practice is not followed, the same is sufficient to disbelieve the case of the
prosecution. In this regard, in a judgment in P.Palraj Vs. State, rep. By Inspector of Police, Vigilance
and Anti-Corruption Wing, Thoothukudi, reported in 2012 (3) MWN (Cr.) 380 this Court has held
as follows:
“13. It is the bounden duty of the Trap Laying Officer to examine the accused
immediately after the arrest at the place of trap and failure in following the rule
would vitiate the procedures. P.W.7, the Trap Laying Officer did not examine the
appellant after the arrest as to his explanation for the possession of money. The
tainted money was not recovered from the possession of the appellant, but from
P.W.5. In this context, it is advantageous to extract the provision available under
Rule 47 of DVAC Manual which reads as follows:
"47. Questioning of Accused Officer (1) Questioning of the Accused Officer and
recovery of the bribe money should be after the phenolphthalein test. If the test
proves positive, arrest of the Accused Officer may be made and recovery of notes
effected on the basis of Accused Officer's statement, if any. In this event, the
provisions of Section 27 the Indian Evidence Act would be available to the
prosecution.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (2) Immediately after recovery and seizure of the
bribe money or article, the Accused Officer must be further interrogated and his
detailed statement separately recorded in the case diary under Section 162 the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. If there is any need to examine him still further in the
light of any fresh evidence that might come up later during the investigation of the
case, the same can be done at a later stage and further statement of the Accused
Officer recorded. [DVAC Circular Memo No.33979/VAC-4/76, dated 10th December,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 10
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
1976]"
The failure on the part of the Trap Laying Officer to record statement from the accused immediately
after the arrest would vitiate the entire proceedings.”
32. In the said occasion, in respect to the following of the said procedure, PW10, R.Perumalsamy,
who is the Trap Laying Officer gave evidence as no such statement has been recorded under Section
47 of DAVC Manual. On the other hand, PW22-Joseph, who is also one of the investigation officer in
this case has given evidence as he had seen the statement given by the accused in CD file. He gave
further evidence as on 26.02.2001 itself PW10-Perumalsamy recorded the statement from the
accused, but the same has not been forwarded to the Court.
33. The said evidence is a crucial area to turn the case of the prosecution as
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis whether the story put forth by the accused is true or not. If really
the case of the prosecution is on the true fact, it is not necessary for the prosecuting agency to
suppress the said statement.
34. In the said circumstances, while at the time of examining the accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C.,
he gave a statement as, before the trap, PW2 entered into his chamber and inserted the bribe money
in his pocket and immediately thereafter, PW10 Perumalsamy came into the chambers.
35. Now, on considering the said statement with the contradiction found in the evidence given by
the investigation officer, it shows some materials were suppressed by the prosecution, which create
a doubt over the case of the prosecution. Thus great prejudice has been caused to the appellant as it
is a version that the tainted money was trusted into his shirt pocket by PW2.
36. At this juncture, its is useful to see the judgment in V.Sejappa Vs. State by Police Inspector
Lokayukta, Chitradurga, reported in (2016) 12 SCC 150, wherein our Hon'ble Apex Court in
paragraph Nos.19 to 21, held as follows:
19. After referring to Surajmal v. State (Delhi Administration) (1979) 4 SCC 725, in
C.M. Girish Babu v. CBI, Cochin, High Court of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Kerala (2009) 3 SCC 779, it was held as under:-
"18. In Suraj Mal v. State (Delhi Admn.) (1979) 4 SCC 725, this Court took the view
that (at SCC p. 727, para 2) mere recovery of tainted money divorced from the
circumstances under which it is paid is not sufficient to convict the accused when the
substantive evidence in the case is not reliable. The mere recovery by itself cannot
prove the charge of the prosecution against the accused, in the absence of any
evidence to prove payment of bribe or to show that the accused voluntarily accepted
the money knowing it to be bribe."
20. In State of Kerala and Anr. v. C.P. Rao (2011) 6 SCC 450, it was held that mere recovery of
tainted money is not sufficient to convict the accused and there has to be corroboration of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 11
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
testimony of the complainant regarding the demand of bribe.
21. While dealing with the contention that it is not enough that some currency notes were handed
over to the public servant to make it illegal gratification and that the prosecution has a further duty
to prove that what was paid was an illegal gratification, reference can be made to following
observation in Mukut Bihari and Anr. v. State of Rajasthan (2012) 11 SCC 642, wherein it was held
as under:-
"11. The law on the issue is well settled that demand of illegal gratification is sine qua
non for constituting an offence under the 1988 Act. Mere recovery of tainted money
is not sufficient to convict the accused, when the substantive evidence in the case is
not reliable, unless there is evidence to prove payment of bribe or to show that the
money was taken voluntarily as bribe.
Mere receipt of amount by the accused is not sufficient to fasten the guilt, in the
absence of any evidence with regard to demand and acceptance of the amount as
illegal gratification, but https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the burden rests on the
accused to displace the statutory presumption raised under Section 20 of the 1988
Act, by bringing on record evidence, either direct or circumstantial, to establish with
reasonable probability, that the money was accepted by him, other than as a motive
or reward as referred to in Section 7 of the 1988 Act.
While invoking the provisions of Section 20 of the Act, the court is required to
consider the explanation offered by the accused, if any, only on the touchstone of
preponderance of probability and not on the touchstone of proof beyond all
reasonable doubt. However, before the accused is called upon to explain as to how
the amount in question was found in his possession, the foundational facts must be
established by the prosecution. The complainant is an interested and partisan witness
concerned with the success of the trap and his evidence must be tested in the same
way as that of any other interested witness and in a proper case the court may look
for independent corroboration before convicting the accused person."
37. Accordingly, by applying the ratio laid down in the above referred judgment to the case in hand,
herein also before the trial Court, the prosecution agency did not create a circumstance for
considering the explanation offered by the accused by recording the statement from him. Therefore,
the inconsistency arisen in the evidence given by the prosecution in respect to the presence of
accused in his office on 26.02.2001, the evidence given by the PW3 and non producing the
statement given by the accused immediately after the trap, are all the issues which would create a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis doubt and the same necessarily goes in favour of the accused and
therefore, I am of the opinion that the prosecution has not proved the case beyond reasonable doubt
and hence, the accused is entitled for acquittal.
38. Accordingly, the Criminal Appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence imposed upon the
accused, by the learned Special Judge for trial of Prevention of Corruption Act Cases, Tirunelveli, in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 12
Vaithiyanathan M vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 1 December, 2021
S.C.No.2 of 2014 dated 18.12.2015, is set aside. The accused is acquitted of all charges. Bail bond
executed, if any, shall stand terminated. Fine amount paid, if any, is directed to be refunded to the
accused.
01.12.2021 Speaking/Non-speaking order Index: Yes / No ars https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
R.PONGIAPPAN, J.
ars To
1. The Special Judge, Special Court under Prevention of Corruption Act, Tirunelveli.
2. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance and Anti Corruption, Tirunelveli District.
3. The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
01.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188986371/ 13
