Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29
November, 2021
Author: C.V.Karthikeyan
Bench: C.V.Karthikeyan
W.P.(MD)No.20082 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
RESERVED ON : 23.11.2021
PRONOUNCED ON : 29.11.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE C.V.KARTHIKEYAN
W.P.(MD)No.20082 of 2021
and
W.M.P.(MD)No.16782 of 2021
Valarmathi ... Petitioner
vs.
1.The District Collector/Inspector of Panchayats,
Office of the District Collector,
Dindigul, Dindigul District.
2.The Block Development Officer (Village Panchayat),
Athur Union Office, Dindigul District.
3.The Zonal Deputy Block Development Officer,
Athur Union Office, Dindigul District. ... Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India for issuance of Writ of Certiorari, to call for the records pertaining
to the impugned order in Na.Ka.No.2987/2021/A4, dated 28.10.2021
passed by the first respondent and quash the same.
1/29
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.20082 of 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 1
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
For Petitioner :Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai
for Mr.S.M.A.Jinnah
For Respondents :Mr.Veerakkathiravan
Additional Advocate General
assisted by Mr.A.K.Manickam
*****
ORDER
This Writ Petition has been filed in the nature of Certiorari, seeking interference with the impugned
order in Na.Ka.No. 2987/2021/A4, dated 28.10.2021, passed by the first respondent/District
Collector/Inspector of Panchayats, Dindigul and to set aside the same.
2.The petitioner hails from Scheduled Caste community and had been elected as Village Panchayat
President of Sitharevu Village, in the year 2019. Allegations have been raised by her against the
Panchayat Clerk, who incidentally, is a son-in-law of the previous Panchayat President. The said
Panchayat Clerk was transferred to Ayyankottai Village Panchayat, but, he was re-transferred to
Sitharevu Village Panchayat.
3.It had been claimed that an anonymous complaint had been sent against the petitioner. On
02.10.2021, a Gramasabha meeting was held. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis The husband of the
petitioner participated along with other village people. It is the claim of the petitioner that her
husband never interfered with her official work. It is also claimed that the said Panchayat Clerk,
with mala fide intention, had induced other Panchayat members to send complaints against the
petitioner. The impugned order then came to be passed on 28.10.2021, in which, it was stated that
the petitioner had failed to discharge her duty for providing basic amenities and further, between
01.04.2021 and 30.09.2021, it was also found by the Deputy Director (Panchayat) that expenditure
had been sanctioned and spent without following rules and regulations. It had been claimed by the
respondents that there had been revenue loss of Rs.4,43,820/-.
4.The petitioner claimed that under the impugned order, her power of signing the cheques had been
divested and the same had been vested with the second and third respondents/Block Development
Officer (Village Panchayat), Athur Union Office and Zonal Block Development Officer, Athur Union,
by invoking Section 203 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994. The petitioner claimed that she
had sent a detailed representation on 01.11.2021 to cancel the said order, but, since there
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis was no response, the present Writ Petition has been filed seeking
to set aside the impugned order. It is claimed that no notice had been issued prior to the passing of
the impugned order.
5.A counter had been filed on behalf of the second respondent/Block Development Officer, Athur
Union, stating that complaint had not been levied against the Panchayat Secretary by the petitioner.
It was also stated that the MGNREGS work was implemented through the Village Panchayat and the
President alone issued job card and was allotting work, as Executive Officer. The work orders were
issued to successful contractors. The entire process was only under the control of the President and
the Secretary had no role in the tender process.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 2
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
6.It was also stated that the Government had ordered to conduct Gramasabha on 02.10.2021 and
accordingly, the Gramasabha was also conducted in Sitharevu Panchayat. The first agenda was to
approve the expenditure upto 30.09.2021 made by the Village Panchayat. When the agenda was
read out, the general public opposed the expenditure. More https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis over,
12 Ward Members, out of the 15 Ward Members, boycotted the Gramasabha. The public also alleged
that the husband of the petitioner, who was a former Union Chairman of Athur, interfered with
official work and was actually working on behalf of the petitioner herein. It was also stated that even
in the Gramasabha meeting, the petitioner's husband had replied to the various queries raised by
the public.
7.Thereafter, the District Collector, Dindigul, had directed the second respondent to conduct an
enquiry and submit a report. A report was also submitted to the District Collector. An inspection
was also done by the Assistant Director (Panchayat) on the basis of the report of the Block
Development Officer, Athur and it is stated that there were some financial irregularities, which
caused revenue loss to a sum of Rs.4,43,820/-.
8.It was also alleged that the petitioner had failed to conduct the Panchayat meeting in regular
intervals. It was further stated that the District Collector, on the basis of the report and enquiry,
issued the impugned order, taking away the cheque signing power of the petitioner
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis on a temporary basis in order to prevent further loss of public
money. Reliance was also placed on Section 203 of Tamil Nadu Panchayts Act, 1994, to justify the
impugned order.
9.It was also stated that the Chief Secretary of the Government had issued a circular that relatives,
sons or husbands of the women elected representatives should not interfere with the Panchayat
administration. It was specifically stated that in this case, the husband of the petitioner actually
interfered with official work. Various other allegations were levied as against the petitioner herein. It
was also stated that when financial misdeeds are alleged, the cheque signing power can be
transferred from the Village Panchayat President to the Block Development Officer, in cases of
emergency. It was, therefore, stated that the impugned order did not suffer for want of authority and
should be upheld by this Court.
10.Heard Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai, learned Counsel for Mr.S.M.A.Jinnah, learned Counsel for the
petitioner and Mr.Veerakkathiravan, learned Additional Advocate General assisted by
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Mr.A.K.Manickam, learned Counsel for the respondents.
11.Both sides had also filed documents. The petitioner filed a copy of the transfer order of the Village
Panchayat Assistant and the representation given her subsequent to the impugned order being
passed. An additional typed set was also filed by the petitioner giving the proceedings of the second
respondent along with a report of the Zonal Deputy Block Development Officer, dated 01.10.2020
and also the monthly Accounts Form and Certificate and work orders. The second respondent filed
notices issued by the second respondent to the petitioner with respect to the removal of a particular
encroachment and the proceedings of the District Collector and copies of the complaints given
against the petitioner and also a series of photographs, wherein, it has claimed the husband of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 3
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
petitioner actually participated in the Panchayat works.
12.Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner drew attention to
the impugned order and stated that it is very obvious that notice had not been issued to the
petitioner before the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis order had been passed withdrawing the
cheque signing power from the petitioner. The learned Counsel lamented that principles of natural
justice were not followed, were actually ignored and had been done so deliberately. The learned
Counsel for the petitioner stated that the said panchayat was originally meant for general category
and thereafter, was categorised as a reserved constituency and more particularly for woman and the
petitioner herein had won the elections in 2019. He stated that due dignity was not shown to the
petitioner herein. He also stated that the Panchayat Clerk, who had been transferred by the
petitioner herein, some how was able to come back by getting a re-transfer order and was the cause
for levelling unsubstantiated complaints against the petitioner. The learned Counsel stated that even
if there are charges against the petitioner, it was only appropriate that the said charges are put to the
petitioner and her explanations invited and examined.
13.The learned Counsel for the petitioner also stated that when Section 188(3) of the Tamil Nadu
Panchayats Act, 1994, is available and could have been invoked, taking recourse to Section 203 of
the Tamil Nadu Panchayts Act, is illegal, quite apart from invoking the said
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis provision without issuing notice.
14.The learned Counsel also relied on a judgment of this Court reported in 2011 (2) CTC 381, in the
case of P.Suganthi vs The District Collector cum Inspector of Panchayat and another, wherein, a
Division Bench of this Court had very clearly stated that an order passed without notice and without
seeking explanation has to be struck down by the Court. The learned Counsel, therefore, stated that
the petitioner's right of cheque signing power must be restored and the Writ Petition should be
allowed.
15.Mr.Veerakkathiravan, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the respondents,
however, pointed out the provisions of Section 203 of Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 and stated
that under emergency circumstances, the District Collector had every authority, since he is also the
Inspector of Panchayat, to withdraw the cheque signing power of the President. In this case, the
learned Additional Advocate General pointed out the reasons given in the impugned order, namely,
that owing to the non co-operation of the petitioner herein, even https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
salary could not be paid and contractual obligations could not be satisfied and therefore, the
situation warranted that cheque signing power should be withdrawn from the petitioner herein and
handed over to a responsible Officer, which is only an interim arrangement.
16.The learned Additional Advocate General further stated that when further proceedings under
Section 205 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, are initiated, the petitioner would certainly be
put on notice and explanation would be invited and examined. The learned Additional Advocate
General also stated that the judgment relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner dealt
with a situation, where, both Sections 203 and 205 of the Act were invoked and therefore, in that
case, it was held that notice was imperative. In the instance case, the procedure under Section 205 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 4
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
the Act had not yet been initiated and therefore, at this stage, under Section 203 of the Act, the
question of issuing notice is never contemplated in any of the provisions.
17.The learned Additional Advocate General also pointed out that the petitioner, though elected as a
President, was only a letter pad https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis President and it was her husband,
who continuously interfered with her official duty. He also participated in the Gramasabha meeting
and this had naturally, forced other members to give a complaint against the petitioner herein. It is
an unfortunate situation, wherein, the petitioner was not allowed to work independently by her
husband. Documents, in the nature of photographs, were also pointed out by the learned Additional
Advocate General. It was further pointed that a preliminary enquiry had been conducted, a report
had been obtained stating that there had been misappropriation of public funds owing to the acts of
commission and omission of the petitioner herein, which necessitated her cheque drawing powers
being withdrawn to prevent further misappropriation and also to honour existing dues to pay salary
and the bills to the existing contractors. The learned Additional Advocate General, therefore, stated
that the impugned order being only an interim order, need not be set aside by the Court and urged
that the Writ Petition should be dismissed.
18.I have given careful consideration to the arguments advanced and also perused the records.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
19.Even before entering into a discussion on facts, the following provisions would be material to
assist in determining the issues raised:
(a)Section 188(3) of the Tamil Nadu Panchayts Act, 1994:
“188.Village Panchayat Fund-
(1) .....
(2)......
(3) Subject to such general control as the Village Panchayat may exercise from time to
time, all cheques for payment from Village Panchayat Fund 10[***] shall be signed
jointly by the President and Vice President and in the absence of the President or
Vice President, as the case may be, by the Vice President or the President and another
member authorised by the Village Panchayat at a meeting in this behalf.]”
(b)Section 203 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayts Act, 1994:
“203.Emergency powers of Collector and Inspector.- Subject to such control as may
be prescribed, the Inspector or the Collector may, in cases of emergency, direct or
provide for the execution of any work, or the doing of any act which a Panchayat or
Executive Authority or Commissioner or Secretary is empowered to execute or do and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 5
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
the immediate execution or doing of which is in his opinion necessary for the safety
of the public and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such
act shall be paid by the person having the custody of the Village Panchayat Fund or
the Panchayat Union (General) Fund or the District Panchayat (General) Fund in
priority to any other charges against such Fund except charges for the service of
authorised loans.”
20.The facts are simple. The facts are straight forward. The https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
petitioner had been elected as President of Sitharevu Village Panchayat in the year 2019. As
President, one of the privileges attached to the post was the authority to sign cheques. That
authority had been withdrawn by the impugned order, necessitating filing the present Writ Petition.
The respondents have justified the impugned order on the ground that, an enquiry had been
conducted on the basis of a complaint against the petitioner herein and the enquiry revealed various
acts, which can be termed as violating the norms in the handling of funds allotted to the Panchayat.
21.I am deeply conscious that I should not venture into an examination of the relevant merits and
demerits of either the complaint or the proceedings under which an enquiry was conducted or the
outcome of the enquiry. These are issues, which are beyond the purview of this Court. The judicial
review of the impugned order has to be limited to determine whether the order was passed in
manner known to law or whether prejudice has been caused to the petitioner and more importantly,
whether case has been taken by the respondents to avoid complaints of prejudice caused to the
petitioner. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
22.The learned Counsel for the petitioner asserted that notice should have been issued to the
petitioner before a decision had been taken to withdraw the cheque signing authority. That
contention was based not only on the principles of natural justice, but also on the dictum laid down,
according to the learned Counsel for the petitioner, in 2011 (2) CTC 381, in the case of P.Suganthi vs
The District Collector cum Inspector of Panchayat and another. In that case, the District Collector,
who was the respondent therein, had passed an order transferring the cheque signing power of the
appellant, who was the Panchayat President, to the Block Development Officer, pending an enquiry
under Section 205 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994. A Writ Petition was filed questioning
transfer of such authority. The Writ Petition was dismissed. The petitioner therein took up the issue
before the Division Bench on appeal. In the appeal, the Division Bench held as follows:
“11. When the proceedings is initiated as against the President of Village related to
financial misdeeds, we are of the view that the transferring the cheque signing power
from the Village President to Block Development Officer, the Second Respondent is
definitely a case of emergency fitting within the provisions of Section 203 of the Act.
If the Appellant is allowed to continue to sign the cheques, it would amount to
endorse the alleged irregularities committed by the Appellant. Moreover, the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis transferring of cheque signing power is only an
interim arrangement, till the completion of the proceedings initiated as against the
Appellant under Section 205 of the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 6
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
12. The only aspect that has to be seen whether the notice has been issued to the
Appellant before transferring the cheque signing power to the Second Respondent,
the Block Development Officer. In the instant case, we find that the show cause
notice was issued on 31.5.2010 by the District Collector expressing his intention to
transfer the cheque signing power from the Appellant to the Second Respondent, the
Block Development Officer. The Appellant has also sent a reply to the said show
cause notice. Under such circumstances, the case relied upon by the learned Counsel
for the Appellant S. Udayakumar v. The District Collector-cum-Inspector of
Panchayats, 2009 Writ L.R.538, cannot be made applicable for the reason that the
facts of that case would show that no notice was issued before passing the impugned
order in transferring the cheque signing power.
13. In fact, in the Division Bench judgment in Pugazhendran, President,
Brammapnram, Village Panchayat v.
B.G. Balu and others, 2005 (1) CTC 545 (DB) : 2005 (1) LW 506, considered this issue. In that case,
since show cause notice was not issued before passing the impugned order in transferring the
cheque signing power, the order was quashed. The relevant portion of the said judgment reads as
follows:
“29. In the present case a perusal of the order of the District Collector, Vellore
(Inspector of Panchayats, Vellore) dated 7.11.2002 cancelling the power of the Vice
President to sign the panchayat’s cheques as joint signatory, shows that the District
Collector has merely acted on the recommendation of the Block Development Officer,
Katpadi Panchayat Union, and he has not applied his mind independently to the facts
of the case, and he has not come to any independent conclusion that the refusal to
sign cheques by the Vice President was mala fide or for ulterior motives. The District
Collector, Vellore without issuing notice to the Petitioner appears to have
mechanically accepted the report of the Block Development Officer, Katpadi
Panchayat Union, which in our opinion was not proper.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
30. In paragraph-4 of the Petitioner’s Affidavit it has been specifically alleged that no
notice was given by the District Collector before passing the impugned order, and this
allegation has not been denied by the Collector in his Counter Affidavit. In our
opinion, the District Collector’s order dated 1.11.2002 has Civil consequences, and
hence it was incumbent on him to give a show cause notice to the Petitioner before
passing it, which was not done. Hence, in our opinion, there was violation of the
Principles of Natural Justice, and the impugned order becomes illegal.
31.The District Collector, Vellore should have given a show cause notice and an
opportunity of hearing to the Vice President (which need not have been a personal
hearing as already stated above) and after considering the explanation and other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 7
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
materials submitted by the Vice President, he should have applied his mind
independently and in a fair and impartial manner, and should have recorded his own
reasons in the order he passed. Since that does not appear to have been done in the
order of the District Collector, Vellore dated 7.11.2002, in our opinion, the said order
was rightly quashed. The matter is remanded to the District Collector, Vellore to pass
a fresh order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the Vice President and
President of the Panchayat, and others concerned, and after recording his reasons.
This should be done very expeditiously by the District Collector, Vellore.”
14. The principle laid down in the judgment would spell out a clear meaning that after
affording an opportunity by issuing show cause notice to the Village President the
transfer of cheque signing power is made, no infirmity could be found.
In the instant case, after getting explanation from the Appellant by issuing show cause notice, the
First Respondent passed by the impugned order and we do not find any infirmity in the order
passed by the First Respondent. Hence, we are not inclined to make any interference in the order
passed by the learned Single Judge.” (Emphasis supplied).
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
23.In effect, the dictum laid down was that, when proceeding had been initiated against the
President of a Village Panchayat relating to financial misdeeds and such proceeding had been
initiated under Section 205 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, then, pending result or
outcome of such proceedings, under Section 203 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, the
District Collect, who incidentally was also the Inspector of Panchayas, can invoke the provision
under Section 203 of the Act and term it as a case of emergency and transfer the cheque signing
power. This was an interim arrangement till the completion of the proceeding under Section 205 of
the Act.
24.In the said judgment, it was also held that show cause notice should be issued and in that
particular case, the Division Bench has observed that the appellant therein was issued with a show
cause notice and had also issued a reply to the show cause notice. It was, therefore, held that the
transfer of cheque signing power was valid and the Division Bench did not interfere with the said
order.
25.Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai, learned Counsel for the petitioner, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
however, pointed out the contra-dictum, which naturally follows, namely, that if the notice had not
been issued prior to the withdrawal of cheque signing power, then, the order directing withdrawal of
cheque signing should be interfered with by the Court. That was emphasised in Pugazhendran,
President, Brammapnram, Village Panchayat v. B.G. Balu and others reported in 2005 (1) CTC 544
(DB), referred to by the Division Bench in the judgment cited supra.
26.There also precedents wherein, it had been held that the principle of natural justice cannot be
stretched to extreme limits when issue of notice would be an empty formality.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 8
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
27.In (2000) 7 SCC 529, Aligarh Muslim University and Others Vs. Mansoor Ali Khan, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court had an occasion to consider the effect of “ useless formality” - a theory, which is an
exemption to the principles of natural justice.
“21.As pointed recently in M.C. Mehta Vs. Union of India (1999 (6) SCC 237), there can be certain
situations in which an order passed in violation of natural justice need not be set aside under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. For example where no prejudice is caused to the person concerned,
interference under Article 226 is not necessary. Similarly, if the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
quashing of the order which is in breach of natural justice is likely to result in revival of another
order which is in itself illegal as in Gadde Venkateswara Rao vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh
[1966 (2) SCR 172 = AIR 1966 SC 828], it is not necessary to quash the order merely because of
violation of principles of natural justice.
22.In M.C.Mehta {1999} 6 SCC 237 it was pointed out that at one time, it was held in Ridge vs.
Baldwin ( 1964 AC 40) that breach of principles of natural justice was in itself treated as prejudice
and that no other 'defacto' prejudice needed to be proved. But, since then the rigour of the rule has
been relaxed not only in England but also in our country. In S.L. Kapoor Vs. Jagmohan ( 1980 (4)
SCC 379), Chinnappa Reddy, J. followed Ridge vs. Baldwin and set aside the order of supersession
of the New Delhi Metropolitan Committee rejecting the argument that there was no prejudice
though notice was not given. The proceedings were quashed on the ground of violation of principles
of natural justice. But even in that case certain exceptions were laid down to which we shall
presently refer.
23.Chinnappa Reddy, J. in S.L.Kapoor's case [(1980) 4 SCC 379], laid two exceptions (at p.395)
namely, " if upon admitted or indisputable facts only one conclusion was possible", then in such a
case, the principle that breach of natural justice was in itself prejudice, would not apply. In other
words if no other conclusion was possible on admitted or indisputable facts, it is not necessary to
quash the order which was passed in violation of natural justice. Of course, this being an exception,
great care must be taken in applying this exception.
24.The principle that in addition to breach of natural justice, prejudice must also be proved has been
developed in several cases. In K.L.Tripathi Vs. State Bank of India ( 1984(1) SCC 43), Sabyasachi
Mukherji, J. (as he then was) also laid down the principle that not mere violation of natural justice
but de facto prejudice (other than non-issue of notice) had to be proved. It was observed: quoting
Wade Administrative Law, (5th Ed.PP.472-475) as follows: ( para 31) "....it is not possible to lay
down rigid rules as to when principles of natural justice are to apply, nor as their scope and extent
....There must have been some real prejudice to the complainant; there is no such thing as a merely
technical https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis infringement of natural justice. The requirements of
natural justice must depend on the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the
rules under which the tribunal is acting, the subject matter to be dealt with and so forth".
Since then, this Court has consistently applied the principle of prejudice in several cases. The above
ruling and various other rulings taking the same view have been exhaustively referred to in State
Bank of Patiala Vs. S.K. Sharma ( 1996(3) SCC 364). In that case, the principle of 'prejudice' has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 9
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
been further elaborated. The same principle has been reiterated again in Rajendra Singh Vs. State of
M.P. ( 1996(5) SCC 460).
25.The 'useless formality' theory, it must be noted, is an exception. Apart from the class of cases of
"admitted or indisputable facts leading only to one conclusion" referred to above,- there has been
considerable debate of the application of that theory in other cases. The divergent views expressed
in regard to this theory have been elaborately considered by this Court in M.C. Mehta referred to
above. This Court surveyed the views expressed in various judgments in England by Lord Reid, Lord
Wilberforce, Lord Woolf, Lord Bingham, Megarry, J. and Straughton L.J. etc. in various cases and
also views expressed by leading writers like Profs. Garner, Craig, De. Smith, Wade, D.H. Clark etc.
Some of them have said that orders passed in violation must always be quashed for otherwise the
Court will be prejudging the issue. Some others have said, that there is no such absolute rule and
prejudice must be shown. Yet, some others have applied via-media rules. We do not think it
necessary, in this case to go deeper into these issues. In the ultimate analysis, it may depend on the
facts of a particular case.”
28.The same position had been reiterated in 2006 (8) SCC 647 [Punjab National Bank and Others]:
“In an industrial dispute referred to by the Central Government which has an
all-India implication, individual workman cannot be made parties to a reference. All
of them are not expected to be heard. The Unions representing them
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis were impleaded as parties. They were heard. Not
only the said Unions were heard before the High Court, as noticed hereinbefore from
a part of the judgment of the High Court, they had preferred appeals before this
Court, Their contentions had been noticed by this Court. As the award was made in
presence of the Unions, in our opinion, the contention of Respondents that the award
was not binding on them cannot be accepted. The principles of natural justice were
also not required to be complied with as the same would have been an empty
formality. The court will not insist on compliance of the principles of natural justice
in view of the binding nature of the award. Their application would be limited to a
situation where the factual position or legal implication arising thereunder is
disputed and not where it is not in dispute or cannot be disputed. If only one
conclusion is possible, a writ would not issue only because there was a violation of the
principles of natural justice.”
29.A Division Bench of this Court in a Judgement reported in 2006 4 LLN 358
[Dr.C.Chendroyaperumal Vs. National Institute of Port Management] had also expressed their views
on this aspect.
“9. Coming to the legal aspects canvassed by the learned counsel for the appellant, it is seen that
they revolve around violation of the principles of natural justice. Even at the outset, we are not
impressed with the said argument, since in our opinion, “Principles of natural justice is for
thoroughbred horses and not wild horses.” Wild horses understand only the language of the whip
and hence there is no use trying to tame them with persuasion. The principles of natural justice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 10
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
themselves have traversed a long way from the stage at which they were treated as a “tharaka
manthra” or panacea for all diseases, to the present stage where the Courts have started looking at
the credentials of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the person using them as a shield or sword and
accepting the fact that they are not indispensable.”
30.In the instance case, it has to be therefore, examined whether issuance of show cause notice
would be an useless formality or whether it was essential to issue a show cause notice to the
petitioner herein.
31.Reliance placed under Section 188(3) of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, by the learned Counsel
for the petitioner, cannot be pressed into service in the instant case, since it is not the case of either
the petitioner herein or the respondents that the petitioner was absent or had refused to sign the
cheques, therefore, necessitating invoking Section 188(3) of the Act.
32.Reference made to Section 219 of the Act, which deals with revision, may also not come into play,
since that provision is a fall out of an authorisation primarily under Section 218 of the Act. In the
instant case, it is pertinent point out that proceeding under Section 205 of the Act had not been
initiated against the petitioner. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
33.Section 205 of the Act contemplates removal of the President and naturally, when such a
proceedings, which might result in the removal of a President of the Panchayat had been initiated,
then, it is only natural that pending such proceedings, the President is divested with the power to
take any policy decision or to involve the President indulge in further acts relating to the funds of
the Village Panchayt. It would appropriate that the financial aspects are deal with another
independent officer and the President, during the course of such enquiry under Section 205 of the
Act, should not be in a position to further involve himself/herself in any financial transaction.
34.In this case, the impugned order does not refer to initiation of proceeding under Section 205 of
the Act. On the other hand, it refers to a complaint and an enquiry by the Block Development
Officer/second respondent. When the impugned order speaks about a complaint and an enquiry,
then, naturally the principles of natural justice will have to be applied. It cannot be termed as an
useless formality. It is essential that the person, against whom a complaint had been levied or
enquiry is conducted, is put on notice about such complaint and views are asked
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and thereafter, an the enquiry is conducted. Thus, even though the
principles of natural justice had been limited in various cases cited above, in the instant case, when a
drastic step is taken to withdraw the cheque signing authority, based on a complaint, then such
complaint should have been put to the petitioner herein and her explanation should have been
obtained. Even if an enquiry had been directed to find out whether the averments in the complaint
are prima facie true in nature, then the result of the enquiry should have been put to the petitioner
herein and her opinion sought.
35.Neither of these had been done by the first respondent. On the other hand, quite disturbingly, the
first respondent had stated that the enquiry report can be considered as, “epjpapog;ghfTk;
ifahlyhfTk; fUjg;gLfpwJ.”
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 11
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
36.This conclusion can never and should never have been reached by any authority without giving
notice to the person, against whom such a imputation is cast. The first respondent had no authority
to come to such a conclusion on the basis of an enquiry, which had been done
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis without notice. The result or conclusion of the enquiry should
have been put to the petitioner and on the basis of such explanation, an opinion can be formed by
the first respondent.
37.More over, a reading of Section 203 of the Act also shows that rules had been framed with respect
to exercise of power under Section 203 of the Act, namely, The Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Control of
the Emergency Powers of Collector of Inspector) Rules, 2001, vide G.O.Ms.No.148, Rural
Development (C-4), dated 31.05.2001.
38.Rule 3 of The Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Control of the Emergency Powers of Collector of
Inspector) Rules, 2001, reads as follows:
“3.Intimation after exercise of emergency powers- Collector or the Inspector, shall,
after exercise of the powers conferred by Section 203 of the Act, be reported
forthwith to the Director of Rural Development with the reasons in full, for the
exercise of such powers and a copy of the report shall, at the same time, be sent to the
Panchayat for information.”
39.In the counter, it had only been stated that power had been withdrawn by initiating proceeding
under Section 203 of the Tamil Nadu https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Panchayats Act. It is
indicated that the proceeding had not yet been initiated under Section 205 of the Act. It had not
been stated whether Rule 3 of The Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Control of the Emergency Powers of
Collector of Inspector) Rules, 2001, has been complied with by the first respondent. It is, thus, clear
that the first respondent had acted without adhering to any of the principles guiding natural justice.
40.The petitioner should have been put on notice or should have been marked with a copy of the
complaint. Before initiating enquiry of the complaint, the petitioner's explanation should have been
received. The enquiry under the complaint should have conducted with the participation of the
petitioner. Her application should have been received. Only thereafter, could any decision be taken.
None of the steps contemplated as fair and just have been taken by the first respondent. The
impugned order therefore suffers. Adherence to principles of natural justice cannot be brushed away
as an useless formality. They are part of the golden principles, which guides the first respondent,
when he/she deals with an errant official. There is an obligation to put the official on notice and
thereafter, initiate any action. Violation of that principle, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis results
in quashing any action initiated. In this case, the impugned order is, therefore, interfered with and
set aside.
41.The petitioner had given a representation, on 01.11.2021. The respondents may examine the same
and proceed further in accordance with procedure established by law and in manner recognised by
law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 12
Valarmathi vs The District Collector/Inspector Of ... on 29 November, 2021
42.With the said observations, this Writ Petition is allowed. The impugned order is set aside. No
costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
Index :Yes / No 29.11.2021
Internet :Yes
cmr
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
To
1.The District Collector/Inspector of Panchayats, Office of the District Collector, Dindigul, Dindigul
District.
2.The Block Development Officer (Village Panchayat), Athur Union Office, Dindigul District.
3.The Zonal Deputy Block Development Officer, Athur Union Office, Dindigul District.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.V.KARTHIKEYAN, J.
cmr Order made in 29.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2668384/ 13
