Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11
November, 2020
Author: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
Bench: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
W.P.No.15393 of 2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 11.11.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE Mrs. JUSTICE PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA
W.P.No.15393 of 2020
(Heard through VC)
Varsha Parappa Totagi .. Petitioner
Vs.
1.The District Collector
Chennai District
Chennai.
2.The Tahsildar
Egmore-Nungambakkam Taluk
Chennai .. Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed Under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the
records relating to the impugned order in Procs.C4/1538/2020 dated
01.10.2020 passed by the 2nd respondent, quash the same as null and
void and consequently directing the 2nd respondent to issue Nativity
Certificate.
For Petitioner : Mr.R.C.Paul Kanagaraj
for Mr.K.Kannan
For Respondents-1&2 : Mr.V.Shanmugasundar
Special Government Pleader
ORDER
The writ petition is directed against the order passed in Procs.C4/1538/2020 dated 01.10.2020 by
the 2nd respondent, refusing to grant Nativity Certificate to the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 1
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
2. The petitioner is an aspirant of medical education. She was born on 13.05.2002 in Chennai. She
belongs to Backward Class community having Tamil as her mother tongue. Originally, she resided in
Chennai till her second grade and subsequently, went to Dubai along with her parents, as her father
got transferred to Dubai. Thereafter, she continued her education in Dubai upto Grade 10 and came
back to Chennai to complete her 11th and 12th standards from S.B.O.A. School, Chennai under
CBSE pattern.
3. The petitioner has applied for NEET examination for this academic year. As Nativity Certificate is
one of the documents to be submitted along with application for medical counselling, the petitioner
applied for the same before the second respondent vide Application No.TN-3202007217108 dated
21.07.2020. The same was returned on the ground that the petitioner did not pursue her studies for
the last five years preceding 12th standard examination. In this regard, the petitioner pointed out
that her mother's date of birth is 20.09.1980, who was born in Tiruvannamalai and she has enclosed
the birth certificate of her mother. Her mother had studied in the Corporation School, Chennai
District and was married to the father of the petitioner, which was registered before the District
Registrar, Chennai North and the Marriage http://www.judis.nic.in Certificate is also produced.
Though the second respondent had issued Nationality Certificate and Community Certificate, he
refused to issue Nativity Certificate, without which, the petitioner will not be able to attend the
medical counselling.
4. The petitioner had her education in Dubai due to the avocation of her father. After a direction
from this court to consider her application at the earliest, the second respondent passed the
impugned order dated 01.10.2020 rejecting the application of the petitioner on the ground that
there was no proof of stay of the petitioner in Tamil Nadu for the last five years and the said order
was communicated to the petitioner only on 06.10.2020.
5. A counter affidavit has been filed by the second respondent on the same groundS as that of the
impugned order.
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that the petitioner herself was born in
Chennai and upto her second Grade, she had studied in Chennai only. The mother of the petitioner
was also born in Tamil Nadu at Tiruvannamalai and her birth certificate has also been produced.
The marriage of petitioner's parents was solemnised at Chennai and the same was registered with
the District Registrar, http://www.judis.nic.in Chennai North. The parents of the petitioner also
owns a house in No.5 (Old No.9/2) Bakthavatchalam Colony 2nd Street, Vadapalani, Chennai - 600
026 and has been paying property tax. The petitioner's mother's Aadhar card and the Family card,
all are in the same address. The Electoral Roll and Census list having contained the name of mother
and the petitioner and the other utility services, namely LPG purchase receipts have also been
produced to show their continuous residence in Tamil Nadu. The impugned order also mentions
about the enquiry being conducted in this regard.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 2
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
7. As admitted by the petitioner, she had her schooling till second grade and thereafter, she went to
Dubai to study upto 10th standard and came back to Chennai for her 11th and 12th standards and
completed her +2 in the year 2020. The only reason found by the Tahsildar is that, the details of the
father of the girl has not been mentioned. During arguments, it was mentioned that the father of the
petitioner belongs to Karnataka and the marriage of their parents was a love marriage. The
impugned order also refers to the guidelines of the government regarding issuance of the
Nativity/Residential certificate.
8. Clause (1)(a) says "Nativity means, a place by virtue of one's birth". In this regard, admittedly, the
petitioner was born in Chennai and http://www.judis.nic.in she assumes Chennai as her native by
virtue of her birth. She had also resided in Chennai till her second standard and she was taken to
Dubai only due to the avocation of her father.
9. In G.O. Ms. No.2388 dated 27.11.1990 issued by the Revenue Department, instructions and
guidelines for issuance of Nativity Certificate has been prescribed.
(i) As per clause (1), "the parents/guardians of the applicant students or the
applicants themselves should have permanently resided continuously for a period of
5 years in Tamil Nadu for obtaining Nativity Certificates". As mentioned earlier, the
mother of the petitioner was born in Tamil Nadu and has been residing in Tamil
Nadu having studied in Chennai and got married also in Chennai. Therefore, one of
the parents has been continuously living in Tamil Nadu and in proof of the same, the
birth certificate, marriage certificate, school certificate of the mother and also the
Aadhar and Family Cards have been produced. The property tax receipts also
indicates that the petitioner's mother has been living in the property belonging to the
family in Chennai and for the proof of their living, LPG receipts have also been
produced.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(ii) Clause (2) - "Whether the applicant has resided in Tamil Nadu continuously for 5 years should
be supported by documentary evidence". This criteria has also been fulfilled by the petitioner, as she
was born and studied till her second standard, during which time, she would have attained six years
and she had been residing in Tamil Nadu for a period of five years.
(iii) Clause (3) - "For proof of continuous stay for 5 years in Tamil Nadu, the certificate issuing
officers may verify the family card (ration card), Electoral Roll, Census List, if census has been taken
recently and if the applicant or his parent owns property, documents relating to such property such
as sale deed, house tax receipts, etc."
Even this criteria has been satisfied by the petitioner, as she has produced the sale deed dated
08.05.2002 standing in the name of her mother and the property tax receipts therefor.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 3
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
(iv) Clause (4) - "Besides, the transfer certificate from the school in which the student last studied
may be verified to know whether the applicant has studied in Educational Institutions in Tamil
Nadu for the last five years continuously."
http://www.judis.nic.in
10. As per the transfer certificate, admittedly the student had studied only for two years in Chennai
i.e. 11th and 12th standards and the five years continuous period of education is not there. Excepting
for this reason, all other criteria, are proved to the satisfaction of the authorities by the petitioner.
The Nativity Certificate is also rejected by the respondent only on the ground that the petitioner did
not have the continuous five years period of education in the last five years.
11. When the petitioner has satisfied the other criteria, the continuous education of five years
preceding the application, cannot be a ground to reject the same. It is not the will or wish of the
petitioner to go and study outside the State. It was only due to the avocation of her father, she had to
be away from Tamil Nadu. If this rule is to be strictly applied, the wards of the parents, who are
born, brought up and living for generations together in Tamil Nadu, if he/she on account of his/her
jobs had to move to various States, will deprive the son or daughter of the soil, their nativity. If the
parents are staying outside Tamil Nadu on account of their avocation, it does not mean that they
disown their native State. Perhaps that is the reason why in the guidelines in G.O. Ms. No.2388, in
clause (7), it is mentioned as follows:
"(7) The birth place of the parent, place of residence of the parent or grand father,
permanent assets, mother tongue, place of educaiton, place of marriage of the
applicant/parents, the http://www.judis.nic.in period of stay in and outside Tamil
Nadu may also be taken into consdieration before issuing nativity certificate."
The above said clause itself is only to enable those parents, who have to stay outside the State for
various reasons to be considered as a native of Tamil Nadu.
12. In this case, the birth place of one of the parents has been given as Tamil Nadu. Mother is having
a permanent residence in Chennai. She also has a permanent asset and her mother tongue is
admittedly Tamil, the mother had studied in Tamil Nadu and her marriage was solemnised in
Chennai and they stayed here till the petitioner was 6 or 7 years old. If the said criteria are
considered by the authorities, the petitioner has to be considered only as a native of Tamil Nadu and
she is entitled to a Nativity Certificate. When the guidelines issued by the government are so
complete and elaborate, the second respondent ought to have considered the same in its letter and
spirit.
13. The Nativity Certificate is mandatory for applying for medical seat, only in order to curtail the
seats that should go to the residents of the State and not to be hijacked by other State students. That
is the reason, the authorities, while issuing the Nativity Certificate, have to consider such aspects in
mind and consider the applications. In this http://www.judis.nic.in case, when the permanent
residence of the petitioner and her parents is in Chennai and it was only for a temporary period, on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 4
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
account of his job he has gone to Dubai, if the petitioner is denied Nativity Certificate, it is not
known, which other State in India, would accept them as their native and issue a Nativity Certificate.
If the Nativity Certificate is not produced, such student may have to claim only those seats
earmarked for "All India quota" and not under any other category, based on communal reservation
etc. The Policy of the Government is only to disentitle the candidates belonging to other States or in
other words, to give priority to the own State candidates i.e. Tamil Nadu quota.
14. In this regard, it is worthwhile to refer to the judgment of this court in M.Goutham vs The
Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu and others decided in W.A. No.1495 of 2018 etc. In paragraph
103 of the said judgment, the Hon'ble Division Bench of this court held as follows:
"103. When the State Policy is on nativity, and not place of residence, from the
material on record, arguments have been advanced on the basis of the residence, and
not nativity,. Residence is not equivalent to nativity. A person may reside in one
State, but he is not native of that State. Residence and nativity are not convertible
terms."
http://www.judis.nic.in
15. As stated in the above judgment, merely because a person has been absent from the State on
account of employment, etc. he/she will not lose his/her permanent residence in the State and that
is not the intention or the policy of the Government.
16. In view of the above, the order of the second respondent dated 01.10.2020 made in
Procs.C4/1538/2020 is set aside. The second respondent, namely the Tahsildar,
Egmore-Nungambakkam Taluk, Chennai, is directed to issue a Nativity Certificate to the petitioner
forthwith, considering the documents that have been filed already before him/her, to enable the
petitioner to apply for medical counselling, the last date of which is 12.11.2020.
17. With the above direction, the writ petition is disposed of. No cots.
11.11.2020
Index : Yes / No
Internet : Yes/No
Asr
Note to office:
Registry is directed to upload
the order copy today itself.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 5
Varsha Parappa Totagi vs The District Collector on 11 November, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
To
1.The District Collector
Chennai District
Chennai.
2.The Tahsildar
Egmore-Nungambakkam Taluk
Chennai
http://www.judis.nic.in
PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
Asr
Dated : 11.11.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/55837971/ 6
