Vasochan Ragui vs The Union Of India Represented By The ... on 20 November, 2024
Vasochan Ragui vs The Union Of India Represented By The ...
on 20 November, 2024
KABORAMBA Digitally
KABORAMBAM
signed by
M SANDEEP SANDEEP SINGH
Date: 2024.11.20
SINGH 11:31:40 +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
PIL No. 13 of 2024
Vasochan Ragui, aged about 30 years, D/o Benjamin
Ragui, a resident of Hamleikhong, P.O. & P.S. Ukhrul,
District - Ukhrul, Manipur.
Petitioner
-Versus-
1. The Union of India represented by the Secretary
Forest and Wildlife Division, Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Indira
Paryavaran Bhavan, Jorbagh Road, New Delhi -
110 003.
2. The State of Manipur represented by the Principal
Chief Conservator of Forest & Head of Forest
Force, Government of Manipur, Sanjenthong,
Imphal - 795001.
Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SIDDHARTH MRIDUL HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE
GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU KABUI For the petitioner :: Mr. Sarosh Damania, Advocate Mr.
Zinranso Shatshang, Advocate For respondent No. 1 :: Mr. W. Darakeshwar, Sr. PCCG For
respondent No. 2 :: Mr. H. Debendra, Dy. Advocate General assisted by Mr. I. Amri, Advocate Date
of reserving :: 21.10.2024 judgment & Order Date of Judgment & :: 20.11.2024 Order PIL No. 13 of
2024 Page 1 JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV) Justice Siddharth Mridul, C J:
[1] The present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been
instituted by a practicing advocate of this Court, statedly in the public interest, and
on the basis of articles in the public domain. The petitioner candidly admits that no
representation has so far been addressed to the authorities in relation to the omnibus
reliefs prayed for in the instant petition. [2] The petitioner seeks directions for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69271554/ 1
Vasochan Ragui vs The Union Of India Represented By The ... on 20 November, 2024
enforcement and implementation of the provisions in Chapter V-B of the amended
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, (hereinafter referred to as the Act), which became
effective on 1st April, 2023.
[3] It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that Exotic animals were hitherto not
covered by the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, till the amendment to the said Act
took effect as above stated on 1st April, 2023. The petitioner would urge that
meanwhile, international transfer of Exotic animals was governed by the Treaty
known as the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITIES) of
Wild Fauna and Flora, which has been ratified by India.
[4] The amendment to the said Act, it is asserted aims to implement the provisions of
the convention and to regulate issues in relation to ownership, possession and
domestic transfers of Exotic animals. It is urged that the animals covered by the
amendment are listed in Schedule IV of the Act, as amended, and correspond to those
enumerated in the Appendices of the Convention.
PIL No. 13 of 2024 Page 2
[5] Before the amendment of 1st April, 2023, a time-limited Voluntary
Disclosure Scheme was introduced on 11th June, 2020, by the Union of India,
respondent No. 1 herein, inviting the public to declare their personal inventory of
Exotic animals. This Scheme, it is asserted, was the subject matter of various
petitions, including one before the Supreme Court, which has consistently held that
the Scheme constitutes an amnesty providing immunity from coercive action for
applicants who declare their inventory thereunder. [6] Subsequently, the
aforementioned amendment to the Act introduced Section 49-M, which stipulates
that all owners of animals listed in the new Schedule IV must register them in
accordance with the prescribed Rules. The Living Animals Species (Reporting and
Registration) Rules, 2024, came into force in February, 2024, and Rule 3(3); which is
central to the petitioner's argument; requires that applicants for the registration of
animals acquired prior to the amendment must submit 'proof of acquisition' of the
animals.
[7] The petitioner would urge that the requisite proof must consist of a legitimate,
verifiable document evidencing the lawful acquisition of the animal; in the absence of
which, the animal is subject to seizure and repatriation to its country of origin or
placement in state run rescue facilities. [8] The petitioner has invited our attention to
a judgment dated 11.09.2024 rendered by the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High
Court in the matter of Bhupesh Charan Vs. Union of India and another (D.B. Civil
writ Petition No. 14968 of 2024). Additionally, the petitioner has referenced an
interim order dated 29.08.2024 passed by the Kerala High Court PIL No. 13 of 2024
Page 3 in Aviculture Association Bhaskaram and others Vs. Union of India and others
(W.P. (C) No. 30031 of 2024) [9] Nevertheless, the petitioner would urge that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69271554/ 2
Vasochan Ragui vs The Union Of India Represented By The ... on 20 November, 2024
ruling of Rajasthan High Court in Bhupesh Charan (supra) and the interim order
passed by the Kerala High Court in Aviculture Association Bhaskaram (supra) should
not impede our independent interpretation of Rule 3(3). The petitioner has
vigorously asserted that the Rajasthan High Court's decision in Bhupesh Charan
(supra) is flawed, inasmuch as, it fails to consider the Rules in their appropriate
context and neglects the fundamental principles of interpretation. In other words, it
is argued that the above judgment is not a binding authority on this Court.
[10] In our opinion, the central issue for deliberation is whether registration can be granted under
the aforementioned Rules for cases governed by Rule 3(3) solely based on a declaration submitted
under the Scheme. [11] In this behalf, it is pertinent to observe, that the Scheme in question has
been recognized by decisions of various High Courts, as well as a Supreme Court decision, as an
Amnesty Scheme. The Scheme indicates that following the submission of a declaration, an online
certificate of possession is to be issued to the declarant. Consequently, it is our view that this
Amnesty Scheme confers upon the declarant the benefit of retaining possession of the declared
animal. Given that this benefit has been established by a Scheme upon which the general public has
relied, it cannot be rescinded by subsequent legislation. Furthermore, we do not perceive Rule 3 as
having abrogated this benefit.
PIL No. 13 of 2024 Page 4
[12] We are bolstered in our opinion by the ruling of the Rajasthan
High Court in Bhupesh Charan (supra); with which we express our respectful agreement. We find no
merit whatsoever in the petitioner's assertion that the Rajasthan High Court's decision is flawed.
The Court, in our considered view, has accurately interpreted the Rules within the context of the
Scheme and its ramifications [13] We find ourselves unable to be persuaded by the argument that,
we should entirely disregard or overlook the Rajasthan High Court's ruling. It is important to
observe that a decision from another High Court, rendered in relation to an all India Act or Rules,
carries persuasive authority and typically promotes uniformity and certainty when adhered to. As
such, we discern no error in that decision, so as to warrant our disagreement with the findings
arrived at. Consequently, we find ourselves in concurrence with the Rajasthan High Court's ruling.
[14] The Rajasthan High Court in paragraph 10 of the report, clearly and unequivocally holds that,
benefits already conferred under the Advisory, namely, the Scheme, cannot be revoked to the
detriment of the beneficiaries. We find ourselves in agreement with the view that the declaration
made under the Advisory, i.e., the Scheme itself, should be regarded as sufficient evidence of
acquisition and an individual should not be compelled to provide additional 'so called' tangible or
verifiable proof. Furthermore, we find ourselves in complete agreement with the perspective
articulated in paragraph 11 of the said report, which posits that when a declaration is timely made,
but a PIL No. 13 of 2024 Page 5 certification of possession is not issued, a legal presumption arises,
that such a certificate is deemed to have been granted.
[15] The interim ruling of the Kerala High Court in Aviculture Association Bhaskaram (supra), in
our view, is in an entirely different context and given its nature as an interim direction, we find it
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69271554/ 3
Vasochan Ragui vs The Union Of India Represented By The ... on 20 November, 2024
unnecessary to refer to it any further.
[16] The relief sought for in the instant petition, calls for a direction to the respondents to conduct
seizures of Exotic animals held by private citizens, which admittedly were declared under the
Scheme and sought to be registered only on the basis of a declaration. It is our view that a
declaration under the Scheme constitutes sufficient evidence of acquisition in accordance with Rule
3 of the aforementioned Rules.
[17] We find ourselves completely unable to countenance the absurd clarification prayed for on
behalf of the petitioner, to the effect that, the decision of the Rajasthan High Court and the interim
order of Kerala High Court ought not to come in the way of the respondent authorities from taking
action as per the orders to be passed by this Court in the present proceeding. It is axiomatic that we
are not and cannot sit in appeal over a judgment and order passed by a Division Bench of another
High Court. [18] In view of the foregoing, in our considered opinion, the petitioner has failed to
make out any cogent case for the broad and omnibus directions that she seeks in the present public
interest petition. Even otherwise, as observed hereinabove, the petitioner has not approached the
competent PIL No. 13 of 2024 Page 6 authorities by way of a representation on the issues raised in
the present proceedings before approaching this High Court seeking sweeping directions in the
nature of a writ of mandamus.
[19] The present public interest litigation, being devoid of merit, is accordingly dismissed.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
Sandeep
PIL No. 13 of 2024 Page 7
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69271554/ 4
