Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on
30 November, 2021
Author: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
Bench: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
Crl.A.No.151 of 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 30.11.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA
Crl.A.No.151 of 2019
Vellairaja @ Rajendran ... appellant
Vs.
State by The Inspector of Police,
South Police Station, Tiruppur District.
(Cr.No.456 of 2015) .... Respondent
PRAYER : Criminal Appeal is filed under Sections 374(2) of
Criminal Procedure Code to set aside the judgment and conviction passed
in S.C.No.12 of 2016 dated 04.01.2019 on the file of the I
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Tiruppur.
For Appellant : Mr.K.V.Sridharan
For respondent : Mr.S.Sugendran, GA (Crl. Side)
JUDGMENT
The first accused in S.C.No.12 of 2016 has filed the present Criminal Appeal challenging the
judgment of conviction and sentence dated 04.01.2019 rendered by the learned I Additional
Sessions Court, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Tiruppur, finding him guilty for the offence
punishable under Section 304(i) IPC and convicting him thereon and sentencing him to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- in default to undergo simple
imprisonment for further period of three months.
2. The factual matrix in brief, as revealed from the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 1
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
materials available on record, is as under:-
(i) PW1 Kamalavathi is the wife of the Deceased Paalpandi.
A1, A2 and deceased Paalpandi were working as Ironing Masters in a Banian Factory namely Sakthi
Tex at Tirupur under the same Contractor.
(ii) On 17.05.2015, the deceased went to Pudur Junction near Saastha Bakery to receive his salary
from A1 and A2, since he was informed by the Contractor that it was sent through A1 and A2. On
return to his house at 6.00 p.m., the deceased had informed PW1 and PW2 that he was assaulted by
A1 and A2 while they had an altercation at that point of time and thereupon, PW1 and PW2 along
with the deceased went to Oorkounder Compound to question as to why A1 and A2 assaulted him,
but, without replying, A1 and A2 had assaulted PW1 and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis on being
questioned by the deceased, they had once again beat the deceased on his face and chest repeatedly.
(iii) By that time, PW3, Rangaraj, a neighbour and a lady running a grocery shop at the locality
pacified them. However, while returning, just after they went a little distance, the deceased fainted.
PW1 and PW2 alongwith PW8 Karthickraja, cousin of PW2, who arrived on call from P.Ws.1 and 2,
took the deceased to the hospital at Tirupur. PW5, Dr.Jatki Neslin, who examined the deceased, had
issued Ex.P3 Accident Register. According to Dr. PW5, the injured died on the way to Hospital and
thereby, he instructed for keeping the body in mortuary.
(iv) PW1 and PW8 Karthik Raja went to Tirupur South Police Station and lodged a complaint, Ex.P1.
(v) On receipt of the complaint, Ex.P1 at 9.30 pm on 17.5.2015, PW10, Sub Inspector of Police,
Tirupur South Police Station had registered a case in Cr.No.456 of 2015 under Section 302 IPC and
sent the FIR, Ex.P9 along with the complaint, Ex.P1 to Judicial Magistrate II, Tiruppur which
reached the Court at 6.45 a.m. on 18.05.2015. Subsequently, PW10 sent a copy of the same to PW12,
Inspector of Police, South Police Station and other copies to the higher
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis officials.
(vi) PW12, Inspector of Police proceeded to the scene of occurrence and prepared Rough Sketch
Ex.P11 and Observation Mahazar Ex.P2 attested by PW3 and another. At 7.00 a.m. on 18.05.2015,
PW12 had conducted inquest over the dead body of Paalpandi in the presence of PW1, PW2, PW8
and others and recorded their statements. . Ex.P12 is the Inquest Report. Thereafter, PW12 had sent
the body for post mortem.
(vii) PW6, Dr.Kirupakaran, who conducted postmortem, found the following external injuries over
the body:-
(1) Abrasion over left shoulder (2) Contusion over left eye ball (3) Contusion 5x2cm
over left side chest.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 2
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
The Doctor had not reported any internal injuries. After sending the Viscera and the Hyoid bone to
the Scientific expert for examination, the Doctor, PW6 had issued the post mortem certificate, Ex.P4
opining that no poison was detected; hyoid bone was found in tact and the deceased would appear to
have died of cardiogenic shock due to Acute Myocardial Infarction. Ex.P5 is the Pathology Report.
Ex.P6 is the opinion issued by Dr.S.Peranathan, the Forensic Expert (not examined) finding that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis hyoid Bone was found in tact and no anti mortem injury was
sustained by Hyoid Bone. Ex.P7 is the final opinion given by PW6. In Ex.P7, the Doctor PW6 had
given opinion that the deceased would appear to have died of Cardiogenic Shock due to Acute
Myocardial Infarction at abou 14 to 20 hours prior to autopsy. PW11, Scientific Officer at Regional
Forensic Science Laboratory, Coimbatore had issued his Report Ex.P10 stating that on examination
of the stomach and its contents, intestine and its contents, liver, kidney and preservative, no poison
was detected.
(viii) At 2.00 p.m. on 18.5.2015, PW12, on receipt of information about the accused, arrested A1 and
A2 in the presence of PW9 and another.
(ix) Subsequently, on transfer of PW12, his successor, PW13 Rajasekhar, Inspector of Police took up
further investigation and after examination of the Doctor, PW6, he filed the final report against
Accused 1 and 2 under Section 302 of IPC.
(x) The case was taken up on file in PRC.No.66 of 2015 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.II,
Tiruppur and on appearance of A1 and A2 before the Magistrate, they were furnished with copies of
documents under Section 207 Cr.PC and thereafter, the Court, finding
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis that the case was exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions, had
committed the case under Section 209 Cr.PC to the Principal Sessions Court, Tiruppur. The case
was taken up by the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Tiruppur in S.C.No.12 of 2016 and it was
made over to the Trial Court in accordance with law.
3. On appearance of A1 and A2 and after hearing the submissions of the accused and arguments of
the counsel on both sides, the Trial Court framed charges against A1 and A2 for the offence under
Section 302 IPC and when the charges were read over to the accused, they denied the charges and
pleaded not guilty and sought to be tried. During trial, A2 in this case had committed suicide and
thereby the charges against A2 got abated.
4. In order to prove the charges against the accused, the prosecution had examined PW1 to PW13
and marked Exs.P1 to PW12 and no Material Object was marked. Though the appellant/accused had
denied the charges when he was questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C.,. he had not chosen to let in
any evidence on his side.
5. The Trial Court, after perusing the materials and after hearing the counsel found the accused
guilty for the offence under Section https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 304(i) IPC and convicted and
sentenced him as stated above, against which the present Appeal has been filed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 3
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
6. Assailing the judgment of conviction and sentence, Mr.K.V.Sridharan, learned counsel appearing
for the appellant, would make the following submissions:-
(i) Even accepting the incident to be true, the appellant cannot be found guilty for the
offence under Section 304(i) IPC.
(ii) The accused had neither the intention to cause death nor the knowledge that their
act would result in the death of the victim. The occurrence took place allegedly during
a quarrel and free fight. The deceased along with his wife/PW1 and his son/PW2 are
stated to have gone to the house of the appellant to question them with regard to an
earlier quarrel. At that time, A2 (since deceased) is stated to have told that the
deceased had come to the house and he should not be left and he should be finished
and during such time, there was free fight.
(iii) The opinion of PW6/Doctor, who conducted post mortem is that the death was
due to Cardiogenie Shock due to Acute Myocardial Infraction and there is no specific
evidence the Doctor that the injuries found on the body of the deceased are sufficient,
in the ordinary course of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis nature, to cause death,
especially, when the injuries were found to be of not grievous in nature and no
corresponding internal injuries were found.
In the absence of such evidence that the injuries found on the body of the deceased are sufficient, in
the ordinary course of nature, to cause death, the accused cannot be convicted for the offence under
Section 304(i) or 304(ii) IPC.
(iv) The Medical Officer, in his cross examination, has admitted that the three external injuries,
found on the body of the deceased, would have been caused by multiple falling also. The Medical
Officer has also given opinion that consumption of liquor would also be a cause for Cardiogenie
shock. Therefore, the prosecution has failed in this case to establish by evidence of medical experts
and rule out the probability, as admitted by the Doctor, PW6 in his cross examination that
consumption of liquor would also be a cause of Cardiogenic Shock. The Chemical Examiner was
requested to given opinion only with regard to Hyoid bone and presence of poison in the stomach
and intestinal contents and no test for alcohol was conducted.
(v) The evidence of the prosecution is that the deceased was attacked with hands and only simple
injuries were caused during the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis occurrence. When there is no
evidence that the injuries are sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the case of
the prosecution will fall only under Section 323 IPC. Therefore, the medical evidence does not
support the case of the prosecution.
(vi) Though two persons were charged for the offences, there is absolutely no specific evidence with
regard to the injuries stated to have been caused by them and there is no charge against them for
having shared a common intention and even as per the evidence of PW1, there was a free fight. The
evidence of PW1 and PW2 coupled with the medical evidence would clearly show that the deceased
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 4
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
died due to Acute Myocardial Infraction and not on account of the beatings by the appellant.
7. In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the appellant would rely on the judgment of a
Division Bench of this Court in Criminal Appeal No.1099 of 2006 dated 30.06.2008 in the case of
Panchatcharam v. State rep by Inspector of Police, Arni Taluk Police Station, Arni, Tiruvannamalai
District.
8. Mr.S.Sugendran, learned Government Advocate (Criminal Side) appearing for the respondent
would submit that the accused and the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis deceased were
co-employees in Tiruppur Sakthi Tex Company and that on 17.05.2015 at about 5.30 pm, the
accused had demanded a sum of Rs.250/- from the wages of the deceased and there was a quarrel
between them, due to which, the accused had assaulted the deceased and it was informed by the
deceased to his wife/PW1 and son/PW2 and thereafter PW1 and PW2 alongwith the deceased had
gone to the house of A2 and at that time A2 had told A1 that they should not leave the deceased and
thereafter they had assaulted the deceased with hands resulting in the deceased sustaining injuries
and later, had collapsed. He would fairly concede that no weapons were used in the occurrence and
that no test was done by the prosecution with regard to presence of alcohol in the viscera and that
the Doctor, who conducted the post mortem, had opined that the death was due to Acute Myocardial
Infarction.
9. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and perused the materials available on
record.
10. While analysing the evidence of witnesses, PW1 is the wife of the deceased. She had deposed that
her husband/deceased Palpandi was working as Ironing master in a Banian company and she has
got two sons. On 17.05.2015, the deceased went to meet the accused near
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Saastha bakery situated at Pudhur Junction for asking his salary.
After return, at about 6.00 pm, he had informed PW1 that there was an altercation between them
and that the accused had assaulted him. When PW1 and her son PW2 went alongwith the deceased
to question the accused, once again, a quarrel had erupted and the accused were said to have
attacked PW1 and the deceased on his face, neck and chest repeatedly. On pacification by the
neighbours, the deceased was returning to his house with P.Ws.1 and 2, but, suddenly, he got fainted
and fell down and he was taken to hospital by P.Ws.1, 2 and 8, however, on examination, the Doctor
had informed that her husband died on the way to hospital.
11. PW1 had deposed that A1/appellant and yet another person (who figured as A2) assaulted her
husband and the other person, who attacked her husband was no more by then. She had deposed
that she had given a written complaint and on the information given by her, PW2 wrote the
complaint and she had signed and gave it to the respondent/police. The said complaint was marked
as Ex.P1. The police had enquired her and thereafter the body of her husband was sent to the
mortuary and post mortem was conducted on her identification. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
12. PW2/Selvakumar is the son of deceased Palpandi. He had corroborated the evidence of his
mother PW1. He had deposed that his father was attacked by the accused and on intervention of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 5
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
PW3, Thangaraj and a grocery shop keeper in the neighbourhood, the scuffle had come to an end,
however, on the way to their house, his father fainted complaining chest pain and they sprinkled
water on him and informed to his brother/Karthickraja, PW8, who came to the spot and took his
father to the Government Hospital, Tiruppur, where the Doctor had declared that his father was
brought dead and then, he gave a complaint at the police station.
13. PW3/Rangaraj is a resident in Oorgounder Nagar at Perichipalayam. He had deposed that on
17.05.2015 at 7.00 pm, while he was in his house, 2 to 3 persons were fighting inside the
neighbourhood compound and also on the street and he had seen the accused attacking the
deceased and thereafter, they had dispersed. He had further deposed that the police had come at
10.00 pm and visited the scene of occurrence and the surrounding area and prepared rough sketch.
He stood as a witnesses to the observation mahazar marked as Ex.P2 and one Murugeswari stood as
second witness. He had also identified the accused https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis produced in
court as that of the person who involved in the fight, who resides in the house opposite to his house.
14. PW4/Ravichandran had deposed that on 17.05.2015 at 5.30 pm, while he was having tea with his
friend in the Bakery at Perichipalayam, he had seen three persons fighting and later their fight
become intense and thereby, he and his friend had disengaged the persons fighting and later they
had left the place. He had also identified the accused as one of the persons who took part in the fight
and he had later come to know about the death of a person by name Palpandi.
15. PW5/Dr.Jatkin Neslin had deposed that on 17.05.2015, while he was on duty as Assistant
Medical Officer in the Tirupur Government Hospital, a person by name Palapandi aged about 45
years was brought by his wife/Kamalavathi to the hospital at about 8.40 pm and on examination, he
found that the said person was dead and he advised his staff to keep the corpse in the mortuary for
conducting post mortem. The Accident Register issued by him is marked as Ex.P3.
16. PW6/Dr.Kirubakaran had deposed that on 18.05.2015, while he was on duty, he had received an
information from the Inspector of Police, Tirupur South Police station requesting to conduct
autopsy over https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the corpse of one Palpandi and based on the
identification made by the constable, he conducted autopsy. On examination, he found an old
wound scar below right knee and an old would scar over left ankle as identification marks. He had
further deposed that he had conducted autopsy on 11.30 hours and found that the body was
moderately nourished symmetrical, eyes closed, no discharge from ears and nose, mouth was closed
and teeth were in tact. On further examination he found the following injuries :-
" i)abrasion over left shoulder 2x1cm on its back side
ii)contusion over left eye ball 3x2cm and iii)contusion left side chest 5x2cm.
The internal appearance : Ribs intact, Heart congested Dark thick coloured clotted blood 30gm
septum pale. Lungs congested hyoid sent for analysis. Stomach contain about 25ml of brown colour
fluid. Liver congested. Spleen congested kidneys congested intestine distended with gas bladder
empty. Skull bones intact. Membrance intact, brain pale. He had further collected the following
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 6
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
organs:- 1)Stomach and its contents https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2)Intestine and its contents 3)Sample of liver 4)one kidney 5)Preservative 6) Heart for Histo
Pathological examination 7)Hyoid in formalin and sent for chemical analysis."
He had concluded the post mortem on the same day at 12.30 hrs. Thereafter, he had received the
chemical analysis report and had given final report. In the final report, he had stated hat he had
found fat in the blood vessel to the heart (Atherometous) and he had further deposed that there is a
chance of fat in the blood vessels to the persons aged above 40 years. He had found the Hyoid bone
in tact and he had given his opinion that the deceased would appear to have died due to Cardiogenic
Shock due to Acute Myocardial Infarction at about 14-20 hours prior to the autopsy. The post
mortem certificate given by him was marked as Ex.P4. The pathology report was marked as Ex.P5
and the opinion regarding Hyoid bone was marked as Ex.P6 and the final report was marked as
Ex.P7.
17. However, in his cross examination, PW6 had deposed that the external injuries which were
found in the body of the deceased would have been caused due to the multiple fall by the person and
that there was https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis a chance of person having heart attack during
stress or depression and that there was also a chance of heart attack in the event of a person
consuming alcohol.
18. PW7/Sathishkumar deposed that on 17.05.2015 at 5.30 pm, while he and his friend
Ravichandran/PW4 gone to have a tea at Tasty Bakery in Pudhur pirivu at Dharapuram road, he
had seen the deceased and two other persons fighting and thereafter he and his friend Ravichandran
intervened and withdrawn them from fighting. At that time, the accused had told that they would
finish the deceased on the next day and on the next day, he heard about the death of Palpandi. The
accused present in the Court was was identified by PW7 as one of the persons who fought with
Palpandi.
19. PW8/Karthickraja nephew of the deceased had deposed that on 17.05.2015 Sunday at 7.30 pm,
he received a call from his brother/PW2 and he was informed that his uncle was attacked and he
was found in an unconscious state. He further deposed that he went to his uncle's house and saw his
uncle lying unconscious near the staircase and even on sprinkling water, his uncle did not regain
consciousness and he tried to get an ambulance and he came to know that it would take time
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and thereafter he had sent his uncle to the Tiruppur Government
Hospital by an auto and he had followed them in two wheeler and admitted Palapandi in the
hospital, however, after examination, the Doctor had informed that his uncle had died on the way
and thereafter, he had informed to his relatives. He had further deposed that subsequently, he
enquired his aunty about the incident and lodged a complaint and kept the corpse of his uncle in the
mortuary. On the next day, the corpse was identified as that of his uncle and post mortem was
conducted. He had further deposed that he went along with the police in their jeep to identify the
accused, then he identified the accused who were standing near the new bus stand and the police
had arrested them and later he went to attend the funeral of his uncle.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 7
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
20. PW9/Sugumar had deposed that on 18.05.2015 at 2.00 pm he had gone to Tiruppur bus stand to
pick up his friend who were coming from Ooty and when he was waiting, he had seen the police
rounding up two persons and they were identified by one person. He had further deposed that the
police had arrested the two persons and they gave their confession statement and he had signed as
witness to the the confession statement which was marked as Ex.P8.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
21. PW10/Sub Inspector of Police deposed that on 17.05.2015 while he was on duty
PW1/Kamalavathi had come to the police station at about 21.30 pm and she had given a complaint,
based on which, he had registered a case in Crime No.456 of 2015 under Section 302 IPC and
forwarded the express FIR/Ex.P9 alongwith the complaint to Judicial Magistrate No.II, Tiruppur
and one copy was sent to Inspector of Police/PW12 for investigation and other copies were sent to
the concerned superior officers.
22. PW11/Parthasarathy, Scientific Officer at Regional Forensic Science Laboratory, Coimbatore had
deposed that based on the requisition of the Medical Officer of Tiruppur Government Hospital, he
received the viscera of the deceased on 22.05.2015 and after analysis he had given opinion that as
per medical analysis, no toxic substance was found.
23. PW12/Nelson had deposed that he had received the FIR in Crime No.456 of 2015, took up the
investigation and visited the scene of occurrence and prepared the observation mahazar/Ex.P2 and
rough sketch/Ex.P11 in the presence of the witnesses and on the same day he had examined the
witnesses Kamalavathi, Selvakumar, Karthickraja, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Rangaraj,
Murugeswari and recorded their statements separately. On the next day at 7.00 am, he conducted
inquest over the corpse in front of the panchayatars and prepared inquest report Ex.P12 and
examined the witnesses and thereafter, he had sent the corpse to the Tirupur Government Hospital
for autopsy in order to know the medical reason for death. Thereafter, he had examined other
witnesses and recorded their statements separately. On the same day at about 2.00 pm, based on
the secret information, he arrested the accused and recorded their voluntary confession statement
and later they were brought to the police station and sent to Judicial custody on the same day. He
had received viscera after post mortem and sent it for chemical analysis. On 13.08.2015, he was
transferred and thereby he handed over the case files to his successor/PW13.
24. PW13/Rajasekaran, Inspector of Police had deposed that during 2015, while he was working as
Inspector of Police, Tiruppur South Police Station, he took up the case registered in Crime
No.456/2015 under section 302 IPC for further investigation. He had further deposed that on
29.09.2015, he had enquired the Doctor who confirmed the death of Palpandi and recorded the
statement of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Dr.Kirubakaran/PW6 who conducted the post
mortem and gave final opinion and recorded his statement and filed the final report against the
accused under Section 302 IPC.
25. In this case, so far as the motive or intention sought to be attributed on the part of the accused is
concerned, it is seen the accused and the deceased being co-employees in a Textile Company, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 8
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
accused is alleged to have demanded a sum of Rs.250/- from the deceased on 17.05.2015 at 5.30 pm
near Saastra bakery and thereupon there was an altercation between them and during such time, the
accused were alleged to have assaulted the deceased Palpandi and on receipt of such information,
PW1 and PW2 accompanied the deceased to the house of the accused to question the assault, the
accused were said to have assaulted the deceased on his face and chest repeatedly and on
compromise made by the neighbours, they dispersed and on return to their house, the deceased fell
having fainted and on the way to hospital, he died. The occurrence in which the accused were set to
have assaulted the deceased is concerned, it is a ramification of the earlier incident on the protest
made by P.Ws.1 and 2 at the premises of the accused.
26. Even as per the evidence of PW3/Rangaraj he had seen 2 or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 3
persons engaged in a fight and that they had later disbursed after fighting. Even according to the
prosecution witnesses, no weapon was used in the quarrel and the accused were alleged to have
assaulted the deceased with their bare hands only. Further, the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses is not specific and clear as to who inflicted which injury. After the incident, the deceased
had been taken to the hospital where he was declared as "brought dead".
27. On the next day of occurrence, post mortem was conducted by PW6/Doctor, who had given his
opinion, that the deceased would appear to have died of Cardiogenic Shock due to Acute Myocardial
Infarction at about 14-20 hours prior to the autopsy.
28. It is the contention of the counsel for the appellant that there is no intention for the accused to
commit the offence and that the deceased and his wife had gone to the house of the accused and the
incident had occurred, only during a rencounter. He further submits that the evidence of the
witnesses is not clear as to who inflicted the injury and that PW3 has also spoken that there was a
fight among three persons.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
29. The learned counsel for the appellant has also submitted that as per the opinion of the Doctor,
who conducted post mortem, death could have happened due to consumption of liquor. It is his
further contention that though the viscera and Hyoid bone were collected and sent for medical
analysis, no examination was done with regard to the consumption of alcohol by the deceased to rule
out the probability of consumption of alcohol being root cause for the death. It is the further
contention of the learned counsel that the Doctor/PW6 has also not deposed specifically that the
injuries found on the deceased could be sufficient, in the ordinary nature, to cause death and in the
absence of such evidence, the accused cannot be convicted either under Section 304(i) or under
Section 304(ii) IPC.
30. At this juncture, it is apposite to refer to the relevant paragraphs of the judgment of the Division
Bench of this Court in Crl.A.No.1099 of 2006 dated 30.06.2008 in the case of Panchatcharam v.
State rep by Inspector of Police, Arni Taluk Police Station, Arni, Tiruvannamalai District:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 9
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
"15. It is also relevant to note that though the appellant/accused is alleged to have
fisted on the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis chest and kicked on the lower
abdomen of the deceased, as seen from the post-mortem certificate, there is no
external injury or corresponding internal injury found by the Doctor, namely fracture
of ribs or rupture of abdominal vital parts, except blood clot in the congested urethra
and bloated scrotum. It is opined by the Doctor that in the absence of any fatal injury,
due to the blood clot in the urethra, which was due to the sudden blow to receptor
area like penis and lower abdomen, the deceased appeared to have died of primary or
neurogenic shock. It is pertinent to note that the Doctor has not stated that such
internal injury sustained by the deceased is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary
course of nature. Therefore, it is very clear from the medical evidence that the death
of the deceased is not due to the direct result of any injury. Therefore, the evidence of
the eye witnesses coupled with the medical evidence makes it crystal clear that the
accused cannot be imputed with having any intention of causing the death of the
deceased.
16. In an identical case, the Apex Court in Pirthi v. State of Haryana, 1994 Supp (1)
SCC 498, held that as per the medical opinion, admittedly, the injury to the testicles
was not the direct cause of death https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and as such the
conviction is modified to one under Section 323 IPC. The accused in this case is said
to have kicked the deceased on his stomach. Even assuming that the accused has
kicked on the testicles, P.W.5, the Doctor has admittedly not found any external or
internal injury. It is also to be pointed out that there is no external injury either on
the chest or on the stomach and the Doctor has not stated that the deceased died due
to the direct cause of any particular injury said to have been caused by the accused.
At the risk of repetition, we are constrained to reiterate that the Doctor has not stated
in his opinion that the injury sustained by the deceased is sufficient in the ordinary
course of nature to cause the death, as there is no external or internal injury of fatal
nature. Therefore, on the basis of the medical evidence, the fact remains that the
deceased did not die due to any particular injury.
17. That apart, even according to the evidence of the eye witnesses, the second overt
act of kicking of the deceased by the accused with his leg is only on the stomach or
abdomen and not on the testicles. Therefore, it is clear that at the moment of
c o m m i s s i o n o f t h e c r i m e , t h e a c c u s e d c o u l d n o t h a v e
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis had any intention to kill the deceased or had the
knowledge that his act of kicking in the lower abdomen may accidentally fall on the
private parts, and in consequence of that, even accepting the medical opinion, the
deceased, who was aged 65 years, would die due to neurogenic shock.
18. In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case, by no stretch of
imagination, the accused could be imputed with intention or knowledge of causing
the death of the deceased and at the worst, his act would fall only under Section 323
IPC. Therefore, we are left with the inevitable conclusion that the act of the accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 10
Vellairaja @ Rajendran vs State By The Inspector Of Police on 30 November, 2021
would clearly fall under Section 323 IPC for the offence of voluntarily causing hurt.
Accordingly, the conviction of the appellant/accused for the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC is modified to that of the offence punishable under Section 323 IPC
and the appellant/accused is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for One
Year. Further, we are of the considered view that the the accused/appellant shall pay
compensation to the family members of the deceased."
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
31. Having gone through the evidence on record and taking into consideration the facts and
circumstances of this case, this Court is of the opinion that by no stretch of imagination, the accused
could be imputed with an intention or knowledge of causing death of the deceased and at the worst,
the act of the accused would attract an offence punishable under Section 323 IPC.
32. Accordingly, the appeal stands partly allowed and the conviction of the appellant/accused for the
offence punishable under Section 304(i) IPC is set aside and in the alternative, he is found guilty for
the offence punishable under Section 323 IPC. It is reported that the accused was arrested on
18.05.2015 and thereafter, he was released on statutory bail. After conviction, the sentence was
suspended by an order of this Court dated 18.07.2019 and the appellant has suffered imprisonment
for a period of 6-1/2 months and in total, the appellant had suffered imprisonment for a period of
9-1/2 months.
33. In view of the above, the sentence is modified to the period of imprisonment already undergone
by the appellant/accused while confirming the sentence of payment of fine. Bail bond, if any
executed by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis him shall stand cancelled and the appellant is not
required to surrender.
34. With the above modification, the Criminal Appeal stands partly allowed.
30.11.2021 tsh/ssk.
To
1. The I Additional District and Sessions Judge, Tiruppur.
2. The Inspector of Police, South Police Station, Tiruppur District. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA, J tsh/ssk.
Crl.A.No.151 of 2019.
30.11.2021.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/98375526/ 11
