Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala Balak ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 August, 2019
Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala Balak ... vs The State Of Madhya
Pradesh on 28 August, 2019
Author: Anand Pathak
Bench: Anand Pathak
MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT
(1) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019)
(Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs. State of M.P.)
Gwalior Bench:
Dated 28/08/2019
Shri Akhilesh Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri R.S.Gurjar, learned PL for the respondent/State.
This criminal revision under Section 102 of Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act,
2015 (for short "Act of 2015") filed on behalf of petitioner- Rahul alias Kalu Kushwah (since minor)
through his legal guardian (father) Ramsiya Kushwah against the order dated 6/7/2019 passed by
Sixth Sessions Judge, Bhind in Criminal Appeal No. 77/2019; whereby, appeal preferred by
petitioner under Section 101(2) of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2000 has
been dismissed and order passed by Juvenile Justice Board dated 7/6/2019 rejecting the application
of the petitioner under Section 12 of the Act has been affirmed. By the order of the Juvenile Board
dated 7/6/2019 in Criminal Case No. 61/2019, the application of the petitioner under Section 12 of
the Act for release of the petitioner on bail bond of his parents was rejected.
It is the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that case is of false implication. Petitioner
is in confinement since 25/1/2019 and all other accused persons have already been enlarged on bail.
Counsel for the petitioner referred the report given by Probationer Officer, District Bhind in which
he has given positive report about the conduct of petitioner, therefore, in all likelihood,he MADHYA
PRADESH HIGH COURT (2) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019) (Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs.
State of M.P.) would not be contaminated (mentally as well as emotionally) by the surroundings and
his father has filed an affidavit that he would take care of his ward, in case, he is released on bail.
Petitioner is aged 17 years and has just started his life and career. He undertakes to cooperate in trial
and could not be a source of harassment or embarrassment to the complainant party in any manner.
He also undertakes to perform some community service to purge his misdeeds, if any.
Learned counsel for the State opposed the prayer and prayed for rejection of this criminal revision.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the case diary.
Looking to the fact situation of the case and the fact that petitioner is minor and his father is ready
to take care of his child and would try to make his future bright and appreciating such undertaking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8773632/ 1
Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala Balak ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 August, 2019
and efforts to be pressed into service by the father of petitioner, without commenting on the merits
of the case, this court inclined to release the petitioner on bail. Accordingly, this revision is allowed
and it is directed that on furnishing personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- (Rs. Fifty Thousand Only) with
one solvent surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of Juvenile Justice Board by father / legal
guardian of the petitioner, custody of petitioner be handed over to him (father) with the clear
stipulation to produce him MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT (3) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019) (Vidhi Ka
Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs. State of M.P.) before the Investigating Officer/trial Court as and
when required.
However, the aforesaid grant of bail shall be subject to the condition that petitioner shall plant 10
saplings (either fruit bearing trees or Neem/ Peepal) alongwith tree guards or has to make
arrangement for fencing for protection of the trees because it is the duty of the petitioner not only to
plant the saplings but also to nurture them. ** o`{kkjksi.k ds lkFk] o`{kkiks"k.k Hkh vko';d gS A**
He shall plant saplings/ trees preferably of 6-8 ft., so that they would grow into full fledged trees at
an early time. For ensuring the compliance, he shall have to submit all the photographs of plantation
of trees/ saplings before the concerned trial Court alongwith a report within 30 days from the date
of release of the petitioner.
It is the duty of the trial Court to monitor the progress of the trees because human existence is at
stake because of the environmental degradation and Court cannot put a blind fold over any
casualness shown by the petitioner regarding compliance. Therefore, trial Court is directed to
submit a report regarding progress of the trees and the compliance made by the petitioner by
placing a short report before this Court every quarterly (every three months), which shall be placed
under the caption "Direction"
MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT
(4) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019)
(Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs. State of M.P.) before this Court.
Any default on behalf of petitioner in plantation or caring of trees shall disentitle the petitioner from
enjoying the benefit of bail.
The petitioner shall be at liberty to plant these saplings/ trees at an place of his choice, if he intends
to protect the trees on his own cost by providing tree guards or fencing.
This direction is made by this Court as a test case to address the Anatomy of Violence and Evil by
process of Creation and a step towards Alignment with Nature. The natural instinct of compassion,
service, love and mercy needs to be rekindled for human existence as they are innately engrained
attributes of human existence.
"It is not the question of Plantation of a Tree but the Germination of a Thought."
Further, aforesaid extension of benefit of bail shall be subject to the condition that petitioner shall
serve the Community Health Centre, Gohad, District Bhind on every Monday to Wednesday from 9
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8773632/ 2
Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala Balak ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 August, 2019
am to 1 pm for two months and his role would be to assist the doctors/compounder while serving
outdoor patients. He would not be allowed to move inside the operation theater and private wards
and shall not be a source of infection and discomfort to the patients and MADHYA PRADESH HIGH
COURT (5) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019) (Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs. State of M.P.)
concerned duty doctors shall ensure this. In November, 2019 petitioner shall submit a report about
the works done by him and suggestions, if any for improvement of the system.
This direction is given looking to the age of the petitioner so that he can get a chance to assimilate in
the main stream. CMHO/Hospital Superintendent, District Bhind shall permit the petitioner to
work in the outdoor patient department only while assisting the ward boys and male nurses to serve
the patients. The services of the petitioner shall also be utilized in maintaining cleanliness in the
building and serving the patients and doing work like First Aid etc., so that petitioner may inculcate
some basis knowledge of First Aid or Emergency Care of patients which may be helpful for
unforeseen exigencies or natural calamities wherein petitioner may be helpful as a volunteer. It is
made clear that petitioner shall not be a source of any infection to the patients and would confine
himself in the work of cleanliness, registration of patients or those works which may not endanger
the interest of any patient.
This direction is made by this Court as a test case to address the Anatomy of Violence and Evil by
process of Creation and a step towards Alignment with Nature. The MADHYA PRADESH HIGH
COURT (6) ( Cr.R.No.3538/2019) (Vidhi Ka Ullanghan Karne Wala-Rahul Vs. State of M.P.) natural
instinct of compassion, service, love and mercy needs to be rekindled for human existence as they
are innately engrained attributes of human existence.
The Medical Superintendent of Community Health Centre, Gohad, District Bhind will observe the
conduct of the petitioner Rahul alias Kalu Kushwah and if any aberration and departure from any
normal conduct is observed then he shall immediately report the same to District Judge, Bhind who
will take care of the situation and in case the Superintendent of Community Health Centre finds any
act of petitioner contrary to the interest of the patients then he shall immediately stop the visit of
petitioner and would report to this Court about his conduct which may dis-entitle him from the
benefit of bail granted by this Court.
Any breach of condition or any activity contrary to the interest of patients and public would render
the petitioner dis- entitled from the relief granted by this Court.
CMHO, District Bhind be informed accordingly. Revision stands allowed and disposed of.
(Anand Pathak) Judge jps/-
JAI PRAKASH SOLANKI 2019.08.28 18:00:40 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8773632/ 3
