Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory
Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
S. No.06
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
B.A No. 77/2022
Reserved on:- 21.12.2022
Pronounced on:- 30.01.2023
1. Vijay Kumar aged 38 years S/o Tej Ram R/o ....Petitioner(s)
Jhathakota, Tehsil Mongar District
Udhampur (a/p lodged in Sub-Jail Reasi).
2. Shankar Chand, age 31 yrs S/o Sansar Chand
R/o Village Sarhi Tehsil Surjandhar District
Reasi (a/p lodged in Sub-Jail Reasi).
Through :- Rozina Afzal, Advocate.
V/s
Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir through ....Respondent(s)
Police Station Katra District Reasi.
Through:- Mr. Suraj Singh, GA.
7.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
O R D E R
1. Petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this court for seeking bail in case FIR No. 31/2017
dated 21-02-2017 u/ss 8,20,29 NDPS Act registered with Police Station Katra on the grounds, that
aforesaid FIR has been registered on the basis of false allegations as the police concerned after two
(2) years of lodging of the FIR arrested the petitioners, consequently a challan was presented before
the competent court of law which is pending disposal and since then the petitioners are in Judicial
Custody and facing the trial. It is averred, that from the bare perusal of the challan including the
statements of the witnesses there is no iota of evidence against the petitioners which connect them
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 1
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
with the alleged commission of offences, prosecution has failed to establish from the evidence on
record that what is the source of information regarding the arrest of the petitioners, after two (2)
years of the alleged commission of offence and moreover when the case of the prosecution is that
one passenger was travelling with the accused in his car and when the car was stopped by the police
at naka point, accused No.1 was found with the contraband and the passenger consequently ran
away from the spot and could not be traced because of the darkness. It is moreso averred, that there
is level of ambiguity in the challan with regard to the arrest of the petitioners, nothing has been
recovered from the possession of petitioners and it is unknown that why they have been charged for
offence under section 29 of the NDPS Act, prosecution case with respect to the petitioners is bound
to be dismissed as such it has willfully protracted the trial till date with a view to ensuring that the
petitioners continue to languish in incarceration, petitioners are in custody for more than one and
half years, petitioners have failed to secure bail from the court below as their bail applications have
been dismissed on 30.12.2021, petitioners are young people without any criminal history and have
deep roots in the society therefore the question of their absconding is remote, all the prosecution
witnesses in the challan are official witnesses (Govt. Employees) therefore cumulatively chance of
tempering with the witnesses is also remote, petitioners undertake to abide by all the terms and
conditions which this Court may impose while considering their release on bail and moreso they will
remain present before the trial Court on each and every date of hearing.
2. Respondent has opposed the bail on the grounds, that the accused persons are involved in a very
heinous offence and if bail is granted to them it will send wrong message to the society, that on
21.02.2017 Sgct Raj Kumar No. 399/RSI posted at PCP Moori reported in the Police Station and
produced a docket submitted by I/C PCP Moori written in Urdu that he along with Krishan Chand
ASI and SPO Mumtaz Din were performing the routine checking/frisking duty, during checking at
about 09.50 pm one vehicle Car Icon bearing registration No. JK02R-2577 on its way from Jammu
towards Katra was stopped for checking and conducted enquiry from the driver of the vehicle, on
enquiry he disclosed his name as Vijay Kumar @ Biju S/o Tej Ram Caste Brahmin R/o Thatha Kote
Tehsil Moungri District Udhampur and also conducted enquiry from the passenger who sat in the
vehicle, who took advantage of darkness fled away from the spot in the bushes, during checking a
white colour thalla was found which was kept under the seat of vehicle from which 11-packets of
charas like substance were recovered though it has been clearly shown that the said persons do the
business of selling and purchasing Charas, on the basis of above facts the said persons committed
offence u/s 8/20 of the NDPS Act. It is contended, that on receipt of the docket and on the request
of I/C PCP Moori a case under FIR No. 31/2017 stands registered at Police Station Katra and the
investigation of the case was entrusted to SI Mohd Ashraf ExJ-115712, that during the course of
investigation I.O visited the spot and as per the identification of I/C PCP Moori prepared site plan,
seized the contraband substance weighing 4kg 500 gms (03kg 700 gms pure charas and 800 gms
empty packets) and thereafter prepared the exhibits marked as A. A-1 and A-2. Mark "A" contains
03 kg 700 gms and mark "A-1" and "A-2" contains 150/150 gms each; all the exhibits were sealed on
spot in presence of witnesses with a ring and ring has been handed over to Sgct. Shabir Ahmed
298/RSI and seized the vehicle bearing registration No. JK02R/2577 in the case as an evidence and
conducted enquiry from the eye witnesses and recorded statement of the witnesses u/s 161 Cr.P.C
thereafter the exhibits have been got resealed from the Executive Magistrate Ist Class Katra and the
letter has been obtained from the office of SDPO Katra for submitting exhibits marked as A-1 to FSI
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 2
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Jammu for chemical analysis and obtained receipt. It is moreso contended, that during investigation
I.O searched the accused persons namely Vijay Kumar @ Biju S/o Tej Ram Caste Brahmin R/o
ThathaKote Tehsil Moungri District Udhampur and Shankar Singh S/o Sansar Chand caste Lohar
R/o Bagdar Tehsil & District Reasi and arrested both the accused on 10.09.2019 in the said case,
prayer has been made for dismissal of bail application.
3. Ld. Counsel for the petitioners while reiterating the grounds taken in averments of bail
application, has vehemently sought release of petitioners on bail by projecting arguments, that the
petitioners have been falsely implicated in the case as both of them have been arrested after two (2)
years of lodging of the FIR and since then the petitioners are in Judicial Custody and facing the trial.
It is argued, that nothing has been recovered from the possession of petitioners and that is why they
have been charged for the offence under Section 29 of the NDPS Act, police has failed to establish
the connection of the petitioners with the offence and from the last ten (10) months no prosecution
witnesses have been recorded by the trial court even and it has willfully protracted the trial even
though all the prosecution witnesses cited in the challan are official witnesses (Govt. employees). It
is moreso argued, that the personal liberty granted under Article 21 of the Constitution of India is
more precious and is to be given more weight and preference than any other right, even the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the fundamental right is the bedrock of the constitution, petitioners in
the present case are young people and first offenders without any criminal history have deep roots in
the society, therefore, they may be released on bail. In support of her arguments, learned counsel
has relied upon the judgments reported in, (i) 2022 Legal Eagle 220 [Amritpal Singh Versus State of
Punjab] & (ii) AIR Online 2021 J&K 240 [Mushtaq Ahmad Katoch V. UT of J&K].
4. Ld. GA for respondents has strenuously opposed the bail by canvassing arguments, that
petitioners have committed very heinous offence u/s 8/20/29 of NDPS Act as on the day of
occurrence on 21-02-2017 at 9.15pm A-1 Vijay Kumar while driving his vehicle/car Icon bearing
registration No. JK02R/2577 from Jammu towards Katra with another person A-2 sitting in the car,
when reached at PCP Moori Katra, the vehicle was stopped by police for checking and during
checking a white colored Thalla was found from the vehicle which was kept under the seat of vehicle
from where 11 packets of charas weighing 4 kg 500 grams (3 kg 700 grams pure charas & 800 grams
empty packets) were recovered, but both the accused taking advantage of darkness fled away from
the spot. It is argued, that the quantity of contraband charas is of commercial nature, therefore,
rigor contained u/s 37 of NDPS Act applies with full force as law is settled, that a person accused of
an offence u/s 19/24/27-A & also for commercial quantity shall only be released on bail if the court
is satisfied that, (i) there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence, &
(ii) that he is not likely to commit any offence on bail. Prayer has been made for dismissal of bail
application.
5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the relevant law on the subject
matter. At the outset, it is pertinent to set forth that the allegations against petitioners are, on
21-02-2017 at 9.15pm A-1 Vijay Kumar while driving his vehicle/car Icon bearing registration No.
JK02R/2577 from Jammu towards Katra with another person A-2 sitting in the car, when reached
at PCP Moori Katra, the vehicle was stopped by police for checking and during checking a white
colored Thalla was found from the vehicle which was kept under the seat of vehicle from where 11
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 3
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
packets of charas weighing 4 kg 500 grams (3 kg 700 grams pure charas & 800 grams empty
packets) were recovered, but both the accused taking advantage of darkness fled away from the spot.
6. Now, I would like to appreciate the decisions in regard to grant or refusal of bail under the
provisions of Section 37 of NDPS Act.
In 2017 (4) Crimes 384(SC) SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Union of India--Appellant Versus
Niyazuddin Sk. and Anr--Respondent], Hon'ble Supreme Court while rejecting bail and setting aside
the order of the High Court granting bail to the accused for possessing commercial quantity of
contraband as the High Court did not discuss the two mandatory conditions appearing in section 37
of the Act viz; (i) that the court must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
the person is not guilty of such offence &
(ii) that the person is not likely to commit any offence on bail, in paras 7,8&9 of the judgment held
as under:-
(7) Section 37 of NDPS Act contains special provisions with regard to the grant of bail
in respect of certain offences enumerated under the said section. They are:-
(1) In the case of person accused of an offence punishable under section 19. (2) Under
section 24.
(3) Under section 27A and (4)Of offences involving commercial quantity.
The accusation in the present case is with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial quantity.
Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor opposes the application for bail to a person accused of
the enumerated offences under section 37 of the NDPS Act, in case, the court proposes to grant bail
to such person, two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to the normal
requirements under the provisions of the Cr. PC or any other enactment,(1) the court must be
satisfied that there is reasonable ground for believing that the person is not guilty of such offence;
(2)that person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(8)There is no such consideration with regard to the mandatory requirements, while releasing the
respondents on bail.
(9) Hence, we are stratified that the matter needs to be considered afresh by the High Court.
Impugned order is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for fresh consideration. It
will be open to the parties to take all available contentious to the High Court.
In another case law reported in 2018 (5) Supreme 705 SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Satpal
Singh--Appellants Versus The State of Punjab-- Respondents], Hon'ble Supreme Court while
rejecting bail of an accused indicted for the allegations of possessing commercial quantity of
contraband in para 15 of the judgment held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 4
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
15. Be that as it may, the order dated 21.09.2017 passed by the High Court does not
show that there is any reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act. The quantity is
reportedly commercial. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court
could not have and should not have passed the order under Sections 438 or
439Cr.P.C.
without reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act and without entering finding on the required level
of satisfaction in case the Court was otherwise inclined to grant the bail. Such a satisfaction having
not being entered, the order dated 21.09.2017 is only to be set aside and we do so.
Ratios of the decisions rendered by Hon'ble Supreme Court in "NiyazuddinSk's Case" & "Satpal
Singh's Case" (Supra) make the legal proposition abundantly clear, and also settles the legal
controversy at rest, that in case of the accusations against accused regarding possession of
commercial quantity of the contraband, the court has to render twin findings regarding, (i) that the
court must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person is not guilty
of such offence & (ii) that the person is not likely to commit any offence on bail, and if these
conditions are not satisfied by the court, the accused is not entitled bail. It is apt to mention here,
that Hon'ble Supreme Court in a case law titled N.C.B versus Krishan Lal [AIR 1991 S.C 588]
handed down/held that "unless conditions prescribed under section 37 of NDPS Act are not fulfilled,
the court has no discretion to relax these conditions in order to give the benefit of bail to an
accused". It is trite law by the authoritative pronouncement by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a
case law reported in, AIR 2007 S.C 451 (Rajesh Ranjan Yadav alias Pappu Yadav v.s CBI through its
Director), "that the interest of society outweighs the individual interest of a person and the longer
period of imprisonment cannot be a ground for grant of bail".
7. In the case in hand, out of total 11 prosecution witnesses listed in the charge sheet, till date three
prosecution witnesses viz; PW-SPO Mumtaz Din, PW-Raj Kumar Sgct and PW-ASI Krishan Chand
have been recorded and the remaining eight important witnesses are yet to be recorded. The
witnesses so far recorded have not turned hostile towards the prosecution. It is settled position of
law that at the stage of granting bail, court can only go into the question whether prima-facie case is
established against accused and cannot go into the evidentiary value/credibility and reliability of the
prosecution witnesses. Petitioners/accused as per the allegations against them, on the date of
occurrence on 21-02-2017 at 9.15 pm while driving vehicle Icon Car bearing registration No.
JK02F/2577 by A-1 alongwith A-2 sitting in the said car was stopped for checking at PCP Moori
Katra and from the said car during checking contraband charas pure in nature weighing 3 kg 700
grams of commercial quantity was recovered, but taking advantage of the darkness,
petitioners/accused fled away from the spot, went absconding and were finally apprehended on
10-09-2021 after almost 2 ½ years. It is unambiguously reiterated, that petitioners have been found
in possession of 03kg 700 grams pure charas which is huge quantity of commercial nature as the
small quantity is 100 grams and commercial quantity starts from 1 kg. In 2022 Legal Eagle 220
(Amritpal Singh versus State of Punjab) relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioners, Punjab & Haryana
High Court granted bail to the accused indicted under the rigor contained under Section 37 of NDPS
Act on the ground, that there are arguable points whether the documents in question have been
prepared in accordance with law and whether or not they indicate towards serious laps in the case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 5
Vijay Kumar Aged 38 Years S/O Tej Ram R/O vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
prosecution and in the challan out of 16 witnesses none were examined and the trial was likely to
take time. After perusal of the facts of the case law (Supra), I respectfully disagree with the view
taken by the Punjab & Haryana High Court as the twin conditions, (i) that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that accused is not guilty of such offence, & (ii) he is not likely to commit such
offence on bail have not been discussed and appreciated by Punjab & Haryana High Court. In AIR
Online 2021 J&K 240 [Mushtaq Ahmad Katoch Vs. UT of J&K], relied by Ld. Counsel for
petitioners, a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court granted bail to accused Mushtaq Ahmad for the
reasons that from his possession as per the contents of charge sheet nothing was recovered,
whereas, from the possession of co-accused namely Parvaiz Ahmad and Tauqeer Ahmad on
20-06-2019 commercial quantity of charas weighing 1 kg 900 grams was recovered. The case laws
(Supra) relied upon by Ld. Counsel for petitioners are distinguishable and inapplicable to the facts
of the bail application in hand.
8. It is trite law, that at the stage of dealing with cases regarding bail, a detailed examination of
evidence and elaborate documentation of merits of the case are not to be undertaken and as in the
case in hand this Court prima-facie finds the involvement of the accused then the bail is not to be
allowed/granted to them. Even at this stage, no finding can be rendered, (i) that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that accused is not guilty of such offence, & (ii) he is not likely to
commit such offence on bail. Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that the menace of the crime of
smuggling of contraband drugs is on increase, and therefore, the perpetrators of the crime who are
destroying the society and younger generations rendering them incapacitated by falling prey to drug
abuse, must be dealt with iron hands. The crime alleged against petitioners is against the society and
by their criminal activities, they are spoiling the young generation of the country. Such types of
offences are to be dealt with severity and with heavy hands. Showing leniency in such matters would
be really a case of misplaced sympathy. The criminal act of petitioners operating in a manner as the
smuggler of contraband charas, is destructive and is aimed to destroy the social fiber of the country,
therefore, curtailment of their liberty is reasonable and rigor contained u/s 37 is applicable with full
vigor. The act of petitioners is not only shocking but outrageous in contours. The granting of bail to
the petitioners would lead to the danger of the course of justice being thwarted, therefore, I hold
that this is a fittest case where, "Jail" and not "Bail", is the appropriate remedy. The bail application
being misconceived under law, is disallowed, rejected and dismissed.
9. Disposed of accordingly.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Jammu 30.01.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No Whether the
order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24575381/ 6
