Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 28.12.2022
Pronounced on: 17.03.2023
CRM(M) 830/2022
CrlM No. 1719/2022
Vijay Thappa .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. G. S. Thakur, Advocate
Vs
Union Territory of J&K ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner through the medium of this petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C is seeking
quashment of FIR bearing No. 06/2022 registered with Police Station, Special Crime Wing, Jammu
for commission of offences punishable under Sections 420, 465, 466, 467, 468, 471, 120-B IPC (for
brevity 'impugned FIR'). Her case is that she has been falsely implicated and she has not committed
any such offence.
2. The factual matrix of the matter, as reflected from the complaint, is that an anonymous complaint
was lodged in the Crime Branch alleging therein that petitioner herein, a lady, has managed her
appointment as Lab. Assistant on the basis of a fake matric diploma from Himachal Board of
Secondary Education in the year 2004. After appointment she was posted in 2 CRM(M) 830/2022
Government Girls Higher Secondary School, Canal Road, Jammu. In the complaint, it was alleged
that the petitioner was married to one Ashok Thappa in the year 1978 who died in the year 1992 and
in the year 1993, the whole family was shifted to Jammu and that she had no relations in any part of
any village, town or any city of Himachal Pradesh, so question of her acquiring education in
Himachal Pradesh does not arise. It is further alleged that the petitioner is going to complete 60
years of her age during the current year, whereas her fake matriculation diploma indicates her age
as 45/46 years till date. It is further alleged that one Kishu Master Krishan Koushal of Reasi who
had been a comrade and a trade union leader having vast contacts within and outside the State can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 1
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
be the mastermind behind the arrangement of her fake diploma or one S. Jasbir Singh can also be
an instrument in the matter.
3. In the complaint, it is alleged that during the posting of the petitioner in the Government Girls
Higher Secondary School, Canal Road, Jammu, the staff became suspicious about her appointment
and started questioning about her eligibility, however, she managed her transfer in the Govt. Girls
High School, Bhagwati Nagar, Jammu and subsequently managed her promotion in the next cadre
i.e. Class III employee.
4. Mr. Thakur, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the impugned FIR has been
registered on the basis of anonymous complaint and as such, is against the Circular issued by the
General Administration Department vide No. 22-GAD (Vigilance) of 2015 which is 3 CRM(M)
830/2022 an abuse of process of law and prima facie does not constitute an offence. It is stated that
petitioner was selected on the basis of her basic qualification and has superannuated from service.
5. The petitioner-herein challenges the impugned FIR No. 06/2022 on the following grounds:-
(i) That the impugned FIR is a complete abuse of process of law and in order to wreck vengeance
against the petitioner an anonymous complainant has been filed and as per the Circular issued by
the Government no action is required to be taken as the complaint contains vague allegations;
(ii) That the FIR is not sustainable in the eyes of law and from the perusal of the impugned FIR, it
does not constitute an offence punishable under Sections 420, 465, 466, 467, 468, 471, 120-B IPC;
(iii) That the impugned FIR is otherwise not sustainable in the eyes of law in view of the fact that the
petitioner who was selected on the basis of her basic qualification which she was possessing and has
opted for volunteer retirement because of her ailments;
(iv) That the impugned FIR is otherwise illegal, perverse and based on non-application of mind, as
such, is liable to be quashed;
6. It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that otherwise as well, the allegations
made in the impugned FIR, if taken on their face value and accepted in entirety, do not prima-facie
constitute any 4 CRM(M) 830/2022 offence or else make out a case against the petitioner.
7. Status report has been filed by respondent No. 1, stating therein that after receiving the
anonymous complaint received through Crime Headquarter, J&K on 24.08.2018, approval for
initiating preliminary verification into the allegations leveled against the petitioner was recorded
and, accordingly, during probe offences under Sections 420, 465, 466, 467, 468, 471, 120-B IPC
were prima facie established. It is stated that an anonymous complaint was lodged in Crime Branch
alleging therein that Mrs. Vijay Thapa-petitioner herein is a lady don and has managed/secured her
appointment as Lab Assistant by procuring and producing fake matric diploma from the Himachal
Board of Secondary Education. The petitioner was married to Ashok Thapa in the year 1978 and her
age at the time of marriage if taken as minimum 20 years, would be of the age of approximately 45
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 2
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
years in the year 2003/2004 and thus was ineligible for any Govt. Job. It is further stated that it is
beyond doubt that she has managed her fake diploma after the death of her husband from the year
1995 onwards. After receipt of the complaint, a preliminary verification was got conducted and
during the course of enquiry, it came to fore that Vijay Kumari Thappa-petitioner herein had
submitted matriculation certificate of Punjab School Education Board bearing No. 817 S. No.
238172. Thereafter, the genuineness of the said matriculation certificate was taken up with the Joint
Secretary Board of School Education, Punjab and in this connection the Board (supra)
communicated that Vijay Kumari 5 CRM(M) 830/2022 Thapa-petitioner herein had not appeared
in matriculation examination held in the year 1986-87 under Roll No. 4852. In the status report, it is
further stated that during the course of investigation petitioner herein was summoned and during
her examination, she produced original marks certificate of class 8th for the year 1973-74 issued in
her favour by the Principal Govt. Girls Higher Secondary School, Udhampur. She also produced age
certificate wherein her date of birth as per academic school record is 19.08.1959 and the same has
been seized as evidence. Apart from it, the matter was also taken up with the Chief Education
Officer, Jammu and the Principal Govt. Higher Sec. School, Canal Road, Jammu wherefrom her
service book/character roll has been obtained and on the perusal of first page of service book, it is
indicated that the date of birth of Vijay Kumari Thapa-petitioner herein is 25.09.1970 as per her
10th Class diploma duly issued in her favour from Punjab School Education Board in the year 1987.
8. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in view of the Circular No. 22-GAD (Vig) of 2015,
no action is required to be taken on a anonymous complaint filed against the petitioner.
8. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
9. A perusal of the record tends to show that in the instant case, an anonymous complaint was
received making serious allegations against the petitioner regarding managing/securing her
appointment as Lab Assistant by procuring and producing fake matric diploma from Himachal
Board of 6 CRM(M) 830/2022 Secondary Education and in order to find out the truth or otherwise
of the information a preliminary verification was conducted before registering the FIR. Accordingly,
a preliminary enquiry was conducted by the respondent and as the enquiry revealed the commission
of cognizable offences against the petitioner, impugned FIR has been registered against her. In
order to find the genuineness of the matriculation certificate secured by the petitioner, matter was
taken up with the Joint Secretary Board of School Education, Punjab and in this connection, the said
Board communicated that Vijay Kumari Thapa-petitioner herein had not appeared in matriculation
examination held in the year 1986-87 under Roll No. 4852. During the course of investigation,
petitioner herein was also summoned and during her examination she produced original marks
certificate of Class 8th issued in her favour by the Principal Govt. Girls Higher Secondary School,
Udhampur. She also produced age certificate wherein her date of birth as per academic school
record is 19.08.1959. Apart from it, matter was also taken up with the Chief Education Officer,
Jammu and Principal Govt. Higher Sec. School Canal Road Jammu and as per the respondent, her
service book/character roll has been obtained and on the perusal of first page of service book, it is
indicated that the date of birth of Vijay Kumari Thapa-petitioner herein is 25.09.1970 as per her
10th Class diploma duly issued in her favour from Punjab School Education Board in the year 1987.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 3
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
9. It may not be out of place to mention here that the Supreme Court in State of Telangana v. Habib
Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017 7 CRM(M) 830/2022 (2) SCC 779, has held that the powers
under Section 482 Cr.PC or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to quash the FIR, is to be
exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or smother the prosecution that is
legitimate. Inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the High Court to act
according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised sparingly, with circumspection and in
the rarest of rare cases. Inherent powers in a matter of quashing FIR have to be exercised sparingly
and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the test specifically laid down in
provision itself. Power under Section 482 Cr.PC, is a very wide, but conferment of wide power
requires the Court to be more conscious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty on the Court.
10. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana & ors v. Bhajan Lal and others 1992 Suppl (1)
SCC 335, has elaborately considered scope and ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. and Article 226 of the
Constitution of India in the background of quashing the proceedings in criminal investigation. After
noticing various earlier pronouncements, the Supreme Court enumerated certain categories of cases
by way of illustration, where the power under Section 482 Cr. P.C. can be exercised to prevent abuse
of the process of the Court or secure ends of justice. Paragraph 102, which enumerates seven
categories of cases where power can be exercised under Section 482 Cr. P.C. are extracted as follows:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various 8 CRM(M) 830/2022
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law
enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the
extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of
the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following
categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised
either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and
sufficiently channelized and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an
exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 4
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the
Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 9 CRM(M)
830/2022 accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
11. In another case State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy, reported in (2004) 6 SCC
522, while dealing with the inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482 Cr. P.C. in
paragraphs 5, 7 and 8 Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under:
"Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all 10 CRM(M)
such powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquid alique concedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 5
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto.
12. In the above backdrop, it may be added here that Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, preserves inherent powers of the High Court to prevent an abuse
of process of any court or to secure ends of justice. The provision does not confer new
powers. It only recognizes and preserves powers which inhere in the High Court. The
High Court, while forming an opinion, as to whether a criminal proceeding or
complaint or FIR should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482
Cr.
11 CRM(M) P.C., must evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the exercise
of the inherent power. While inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and
plenitude, it has to be exercised to secure ends of justice or to prevent an abuse of the
process of any court.
13. In the instant case, for ascertaining the truthfulness of the allegations, the
petitioner was summoned and during her examination she has produced age
certificate wherein her date of birth as per academic school record is 19.08.1959,
whereas in the 10th Class diploma obtained from Punjab School Board of Education
her date of birth is shown as 25.09.1970, which shows that she had hatched criminal
conspiracy and by means of cheat and fraud she had managed matriculation
certificate on the basis of which she was appointed as Lab Assistant in the year 2004
and posted in Govt. Girls Higher Secondary School, Canal Road, Jammu. The
genuineness or credibility of the certificate in question cannot be gone into at this
stage. The registration of FIR cannot be said to be abuse of process of law and further
the allegations leveled in the impugned FIR regarding the commission of the alleged
offences are required to be proved during the trial by adducing the evidence and the
grounds taken by the petitioner in the instant petition can be well taken in defence
before the trial Court.
15. Resultantly, the interim order dated 20.10.2022 is vacated and respondent is
directed to proceed with the investigation and on completing the same, produce the
challan before the competent Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 6
Vijay Thappa vs Union Territory Of J&K on 17 March, 2023
12 CRM(M)
16. The instant petition is without any merit and is, accordingly, dismissed along with
connected CM(s).
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE Jammu 17.03.2023 Bir Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97450573/ 7
