Vijendra Singh Kirar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 11 July, 2019
Vijendra Singh Kirar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 11
July, 2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
M.Cr.C. No.724/2017
(Ramjilal Vs. State of M.P. and another)
&
M.Cr.C. No.1777/2017
(Vijendra Singh Kirar Vs. State of M.P. and another)
Gwalior, dated: 11.07.2019
Shri Yash Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners.
Shri Manoj Kumar Dwivedi, learned Public Prosecutor for
the respondent/State.
Shri R.K. Shukla, learned counsel for the complainant/respondent No.2.
Challenge in this petition u/S.482 of Cr.P.C. is to the order dated 22.09.2016 of the trial Court
accepting an application u/S.156(3) of Cr.P.C. of complainant/respondent No.2 herein and directing
the Police Station Gwalior to inquire into the matter and register an FIR followed by investigation
and filing of final report u/S.173 of Cr.P.C. Further challenge is made to the consequential lodging of
FIR by the police on 19.10.2016 bearing Crime No.502/2016 alleging offences punishable u/Ss.294,
406, 418, 420, 506 r/w 34 of IPC against both the petitioners herein.
Learned counsel for the rival parties are heard on the question of admission.
It may not be out of place to mention here that this Court primarily due to default on the part of the
State to respond to this petition stayed the investigation in Crime No.502/2016 by interim order
dated 18.09.2017 which appears to subsist till date as there is no express order of vacating the same.
The gravement of charges is that land bearing Survey Nos.608/2, 664, 665 admeasuring 1 bigha and
6 biswa (0.272 hectare) at village Baraua, Nurabad, District Gwalior, which belongs to the
government has been wrongly shown to belong to petitioners who attempted to alienate the same in
favour of complainant by an agreement to sale where a part of sale consideration exchanged hands
but the sale deed could not be executed due to reluctance of accused/petitioners herein to come
forward to execute the sale deed and also since the complainant/respondent No.2 meanwhile gained
knowledge that the land in question belonged to the government and not to the petitioners. This led
the complainant to file an application u/S.156(3) of Cr.P.C. before the learned Magistrate who
passed the impugned order leading to filing of impugned FIR.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37454031/ 1
Vijendra Singh Kirar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 11 July, 2019
Learned counsel for petitioners primarily submits that no offence is made out as the entire
transaction was purely of civil nature where an agreement was entered into, but since the sale deed
could not be executed, the only legitimate course available to the complainant was under the civil
law to seek a decree for specific performance but the question of invoking the criminal law does not
arise as there is no mens-rea attached to the transaction in question.
The State filed two status reports which reveal that discrepancy in the revenue record wrongly
showing petitioners as owner of land in question came to light due to variance in the Patwari's
report showing the name of accused recorded as Bhumiswami, whereas information gathered under
the Right to Information Act, 2005 revealing that the land belonged to the government. The Status
reports further reveal that on discovery of aforesaid discrepancy in the revenue record an enquiry
was initiated by the Tehsildar, Gwalior whereafter the matter was forwarded to the Collector,
Gwalior vide letter dated 20.07.2018 of Tehsildar, Gwalior which is annexed with the affidavit of the
then Collector, Gwalior filed on 23.07.2018.
As detailed above, the investigation in the matter pursuant to impugned FIR has come to a standstill
due to interim order passed by this Court on 18.09.2017. Thus, evidence/material whether
exculpatory or inculpatory qua the petitioners, is yet to be collected by the Investigative Agency
whose hands are tied by the interim order of stay. Thus, the possibility of implicative material
coming on record in the future against the petitioners in investigation cannot be ruled out.
Since, investigation is incomplete, it would be inappropriate for this Court to pre-empt the fate of
the investigation. It would thus be apposite that the Investigative Agency is afforded opportunity to
complete the investigation and file a closure report or final report u/S.173 of Cr.P.C., as the case may
be, depending upon the material collected in the investigation.
However, a bare perusal of the FIR by itself reveals allegations having civil overtones but since
evidence and material have not yet come on record, it would be premature for this Court to assume
that there is no criminal intent on the part of petitioners to defraud the complainant while entering
into agreement to sale qua the said land.
The inherent powers of this Court cannot be exercised to truncate an investigation at a nascent
stage. Any such attempt would in fact lead to failure of justice thereby defeating the very object
behind inherent powers u/S.482 of Cr.P.C.
Consequently, this Court declines interference in view of the nascent stage of investigation and
leaves it to the Investigative Agency to conclude the investigation in free and fair manner without
letting extraneous consideration or prejudice to come into play.
Before parting, it would be appropriate to deal with the judicial pronouncements relied upon by the
petitioners. First being the decision in the case of Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia and Ors. Vs.
Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre and Ors, AIR 1988 SC 709. A bare reading of the decision reveals
that the same turns on its own facts where the prosecution was based on criminal complaint
u/S.200 of Cr.P.C. entertained by the trial Court and not pertaining to an incomplete investigation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37454031/ 2
Vijendra Singh Kirar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 11 July, 2019
Further reliance is placed in the case of Uma Shankar Gopalika Vs. State of Bihar and Ors, 2005(10)
SCC 336, where the factual matrix appears to be quite similar to the present case where the Apex
Court had quashed the proceedings at the initial stage itself but in view of the decision of the Apex
Court in State of Bihar and another Vs. J.A.C. Saldanha and others, (1980) 1 SCC 554, the inherent
powers u/S.482 Cr.P.C. are cautioned not to exercise when investigation is pending. The relevant
paras 24, 25 and 26 of said judgment are reproduced below for ready reference and convenience:
24. The next contention is that the High Court was in error in exercising jurisdiction
under Art. 226 at a stage when the Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate who has
jurisdiction to entertain and try the case has not passed upon the issues before him,
by taking upon itself the appreciation of evidence involving facts about which there is
an acrimonious dispute between the parties and giving a clean bill to the suspects
against whom the first information report was filed. By so directing the learned Addl.
Chief Judicial Magistrate the judgment of the High Court virtually disposed of the
case finally. As we are setting aside the judgment of the High Court with the result
that the case would go back to the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, it
would be imprudent for us to make any observation on facts involved in the case.
25. There is a clear cut and well demarcated sphere of activity in the field of crime
detection and crime punishment. Investigation of an offence is the field exclusively
reserved for the executive through the police department, the superintendent over
which vests in the State Government. The executive which is charged with a duty to
keep vigilance over law and order situation is obliged to prevent crime and if an
offence is alleged to have been committed it is its bounden duty to investigate into the
offence and bring the offender to book. Once it investigates and finds an offence
having been committed it is its duty to collect evidence for the purpose of proving the
offence. Once that is completed and the investigating officer submits report to the
Court requesting the Court to take cognizance of the offence under s. 190 of the Code
its duty comes to an end. On a cognizance of the offence being taken by the Court the
police function of investigation comes to an end subject to the provision contained in
s. 173(8), there commences the adjudicatory function of the judiciary to determine
whether an offence has been committed and if so, whether by the person or persons
charged with the crime by the police in its report to the Court, and to award adequate
punishment according to law for the offence proved to the satisfaction of the Court.
There is thus a well defined and well demarcated function in the field of crime
detection and its subsequent adjudication between the police and the Magistrate.
This has been recognised way back in King Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, where
the Privy Council observed as under:
"In India, as has been shown, there is a statutory right on the part of the police to
investigate the circumstances of an alleged cognizable crime without requiring any
authority from the judicial authorities and it would, as their Lordships think, be an
unfortunate result if it should be held possible to interfere with those statutory rights
by an exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. The functions of the judiciary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37454031/ 3
Vijendra Singh Kirar vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 11 July, 2019
and the police are complementary, not overlapping, and the combination of
individual liberty with a due observance of law and order is only to be obtained by
leaving each to exercise its own function, always, of course, subject to the right of the
Court to intervene in an appropriate case when moved under Section 491 of the
Criminal Procedure Code to give directions in the nature of habeas corpus. In such a
case as the present, however, the court's functions begin when a charge is preferred
before it, and not until then"
26. This view of the Judicial Committee clearly demarcates the functions of the executive and the
judiciary in the field of detection of crime and its subsequent trial and it would appear that the
power of the police to investigate into a cognizable offence is ordinarily not to be interfered with by
the judiciary. Other decisions cited by the petitioners in G. Sagar Suri and Ors. Vs. State of U.P. and
Ors., AIR 2000 SC 754, Md. Ibrahim and Ors. Vs. State of Bihar and Ors., (2009) 8 SCC 751, B.
Suresh Yadav Vs. Sharifa Bee and Ors., AIR 2008 SC 210 and Paramjeet Batra Vs. State of
Uttarakhand and Ors., (2013) 11 SCC 673, also turn on their own facts and cannot be relied upon in
the present case where precious government land has been prima facie found to be usurped by
private individuals in connivance with the revenue authorities.
Consequently, this Court declining interference in the limited inherent powers of this Court u/S.482
of Cr.P.C. dismisses the present petition.
Accordingly, present petition stands dismissed, sans cost.
(Sheel Nagu) Judge SS SATEESH KUMAR SEN 2019.07.16 17:59:06 -07'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37454031/ 4
