Vikas vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Vikas vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:619
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 29357 of 2024
Applicant :- Vikas
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Ajay Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Ajay Kumar, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Sunil Kumar, learned A.G.A. for
the State and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 301 of 2023, under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 304B I.P.C.
and Section 3/4 of D.P. Act and Section 3/25/27 of Arms Act, Police Station Khurja Nagar, District
Bulandshahr, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187609820/ 1
Vikas vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
4. The applicant is stated to have committed murder of his wife within the precincts of his house in
the night of 17/18.04.2023.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. It is a case of suicide committed by the deceased person and the applicant has strong alibi as he
was serving at NOIDA and the deceased person used to live at Khurja, Bulandshahr.
7. Two witnesses of fact have been examined as PW-1 and PW-2 and they have not supported the
prosecution story. They have completely resiled from their earlier statements given to the I.O. and
the allegations of the FIR.
8. The witnesses have been cross-examined by the public prosecutor after declaring them hostile.
9. There is no possibility of conviction in the present case under the circumstances.
10. The fact of suicide stands falsified from the post mortem report itself whereby the gun shot was
found on the right temporal bone of the deceased person and there is blackening present around the
wound of entry as such, the applicant has been falsely implicated in the case.
11. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
12. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
18.04.2023. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE :
13. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
14. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
15. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187609820/ 2
Vikas vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
16. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
17. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of
bail to the applicant.
18. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
19. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
20. Let the applicant-Vikas involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
21. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
22. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187609820/ 3
