Vimla Devi vs State Of U.P. Through Its Secretary ... on 2 January, 2025
Vimla Devi vs State Of U.P. Through Its Secretary ... on 2
January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:149
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 45855 of 2024
Applicant :- Vimla Devi
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Through Its Secretary Home, Govt. Of U.P
Counsel for Applicant :- Brijesh Kumar Prajapati,Mahesh Kumar,Maheshwari Prasad Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Brijesh Kumar Prajapati, learned counsel for the applicant as well as Sri Pranshu
Kumar, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.156 of 2024, under Sections 115(2), 351(3), 85, 80(2) B.N.S.
and Section 3/4 D.P. Act, Police Station Hanuman Ganj, District Kushinagar, during the pendency
of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97169992/ 1
Vimla Devi vs State Of U.P. Through Its Secretary ... on 2 January, 2025
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The FIR was instituted against the applicant and other family members with the allegations that
the son of the applicant had married the sister of the informant as per Hindu Rites about five
months before her death and the family members are stated to have subjected her to cruelty for
demand of dowry and had smothered her on 21.08.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
5. The applicant is the mother-in-law of the deceased person and has been falsely implicated in the
present case.
6. The allegations are per se false.
7. The cause of death was found to be asphyxia as a result of ante-mortem hanging, as such, the
allegations of strangulating or smothering the deceased person stand falsified.
8. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against her. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
9. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 23.08.2024.
The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, she will not
misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/OPPOSITE PARTY:
10. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
11. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
12. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
13. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97169992/ 2
Vimla Devi vs State Of U.P. Through Its Secretary ... on 2 January, 2025
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
14. Learned A.G.A. could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial
of bail to the applicant.
15. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned A.G.A.
16. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
17. Let the applicant- Vimla Devi involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail
on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against her in
accordance with law.
18. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
18. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Ravi/-
(Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/97169992/ 3
