Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27
March, 2025
Author: Alok Mathur
Bench: Alok Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:17758
Court No. - 12
Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION No. - 294 of 2025
Revisionist :- Vimlesh
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of Home Lko. And Another
Counsel for Revisionist :- Srees Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Alok Mathur,J.
1. Heard Sri Srees Kumar Srivstava, learned counsel for petitioner as well as learned A.G.A. for the
State.
2. By means of the present revision under Section 397/401 Cr.P.C. read with Section 438/442 of
B.N.S.S., the revisionist has assailed the order dated 26.11.2024 passed by Additional Sessions
Judge, Court No. 3, Unnao whereby the application under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. moved by the
informant/respondent No. 2 in Case Crime No. 230 of 2019 under Section 498A, 304B, I.P. & 3/4
Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station Gangaghat, District Unnao in Session Trial No. 388 of 2018
(State Vs. Ashok) has been allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 1
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
3. It has been submitted by learned counsel for revisionist that a F.I.R. in Case Crime No. 230 /2019
was lodged by private respondents alleging that his daughter Laxmi was married to one Ashok who
is the uncle (Mama) of the revisionist. It was alleged that there was a demand of Motorcycle from
the deceased and she was also abused and maltreated for not bringing adequate dowry.
4. The deceased was found hanging on 06.04.2019 in Sulabh Chauchalaya, pursuant to which first
information report was lodged. It has been submitted that family members of the deceased were
present at the time of inquest and have also participated in rites and rituals and in the post mortem
report the cause of death was shown to be Asphyxia as a result of antemortem hanging.
5. During investigation, the statements of complainants were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
where only the husband-Ashok was named as accused. It is during the trial proceedings that when
P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 have been examined that the application under Section 319 Cr.P.C. was moved
which has been allowed by means of impugned order. It has been stated that a perusal of the
statement of Ram Muneshwar who is the father of the deceased and P.W. 1, in his statement had
also made vague allegations against all family members including revisionist with regard to demand
of dowry.
6. Neither was any particulars of the allegations substantiated in the said statement nor was any
other allegations linking them to the cause of death of the deceased. It is on the statement that
application under Section 319 Cr. P.C has been moved and allowed by the trial court which has been
assailed in the present case.
7. Counsel for the revisionist has submitted that for exercising power under Section 319 of Cr.P.C.
there has to be sufficient material so as to join the person against whom evidence is available as an
accused alongwith the others and the stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity is
required to be adduced rather than a vague statement made during examination-in-chief. He
submits that a perusal of the statement of Prem Shanker would indicate that merely a passing
reference has been made to the revisionist being present at the site of occurrence which is the only
material available on record for allowing the application under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. He submits
that this aspect of the matter has been duly considered by the Supreme Court in the case of
Brijendra Singh and others versus State of Rajasthan, (2017) 7 SCC 706, where the Supreme Court
has approved the dictum of another judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hardeep Singh
versus State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92, where it has been stated that the provisions of Section 319
of Cr.P.C. cannot be invoked lightly and the material on record should be sufficient and the evidence
on record has to be more than what is collected during evidence. He has further submitted that the
trial court should have waited for the cross-examination of the witness before invoking its power
under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. and also they should have waited till the police officer who had
investigated the matter was duly examined.
8. He has further submitted that the trial court should have waited for the cross-examination of the
police officer, who had investigated the matter and exculpated the revisionist from the array of the
accused before proceeding to exercise its power under Section 319 of Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 2
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
9. Learned A.G.A., on the other hand, has opposed the revision and submitted that even in the FIR
the revisionist was named as an accused and even during the trial the complicity of the accused
came forth in the testimony of Ram Muneshwar and accordingly, supported the impugned order.
8. I have heard the rival contentions and perused the record. The issue in the present case is as to
whether there was sufficient material before the trial court to invoke the provisions of Section 319 of
Cr.P.C. The law with regard to exercise of power under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. have been duly
considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Brijendra Singh (supra), where they affirmed the law
laid down by the previous judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hardeep Singh (supra), the
relevant portion is quoted here-in-below for ready reference:-
"9. The powers of the Court to proceed under Section 319 CrPC even against those persons who are
not arraigned as accused, cannot be disputed. This provision is meant to achieve the objective that
real culprit should not get away unpunished. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Hardeep Singh v.
State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92, explained the aforesaid purpose behind this provision in the
following manner:
"8. The constitutional mandate under Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution of India
provides a protective umbrella for the smooth administration of justice making
adequate provisions to ensure a fair and efficacious trial so that the accused does not
get prejudiced after the law has been put into motion to try him for the offence but at
the same time also gives equal protection to victims and to society at large to ensure
that the guilty does not get away from the clutches of law. For the empowerment of
the courts to ensure that the criminal administration of justice works properly, the
law was appropriately codified and modified by the legislature under Cr indicating as
to how the courts should proceed in order to ultimately find out the truth so that an
innocent does not get punished but at the same time, the guilty are brought to book
under the law. It is these ideals as enshrined under the Constitution and our laws that
have led to several decisions, whereby innovating methods and progressive tools have
been forged to find out the real truth and to ensure that the guilty does not go
unpunished.
* * *
12. Section 319 CrPC springs out of the doctrinejudex damnatur cum nocens
absolvitur (Judge is condemned when guilty is acquitted) and this doctrine must be
used as a beacon light while explaining the ambit and the spirit underlying the
enactment of Section 319 CrPC.
13.It is the duty of the court to do justice by punishing the real culprit. Where the
investigating agency for any reason does not array one of the real culprits as an
accused, the court is not powerless in calling the said accused to face trial. The
question remains under what circumstances and at what stage should the court
exercise its power as contemplated in Section 319 CrPC?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 3
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
* *
19. The court is the sole repository of justice and a duty is cast upon it to uphold the
rule of law and, therefore, it will be inappropriate to deny the existence of such
powers with the courts in our criminal justice system where it is not uncommon that
the real accused, at times, get away by manipulating the investigating and/or the
prosecuting agency. The desire to avoid trial is so strong that an accused makes
efforts at times to get himself absolved even at the stage of investigation or inquiry
even though he may be connected with the commission of the offence."
10. It also goes without saying that Section 319 Cr.P.C., which is an enabling provision empowering
the Court to take appropriate steps for proceeding against any person, not being an accused, can be
exercised at any time after the charge-sheet is filed and before the pronouncement of the judgment,
except during the stage of Sections 207/208 Cr.P.C., the committal, etc. which is only a pre-trial
stage intended to put the process into motion.
11. In Hardeep Singh's case, the Constitution Bench has also settled the controversy on the issue as
to whether the word 'evidence' used in Section 319(1) CrPC has been used in a comprehensive sense
and indicates the evidence collected during investigation or the word 'evidence' is limited to the
evidence recorded during trial. It is held that it is that material, after cognizance is taken by the
Court, that is available to it while making an inquiry into or trying an offence, which the court can
utilise or take into consideration for supporting reasons to summon any person on the basis of
evidence adduced before the Court. The word "evidence" has to be understood in its wider sense,
both at the stage of trial and even at the stage of inquiry. It means that the power to proceed against
any person after summoning him can be exercised on the basis of any such material as brought forth
before it. At the same time, this Court cautioned that the duty and obligation of the Court becomes
more onerous to invoke such powers consciously on such material after evidence has been led
during trial. The Court also clarified that "evidence" under Section 319 CrPC could even be
examination-in-chief and the Court is not required to wait till such evidence is tested on
cross-examination, as it is the satisfaction of the Court which can be gathered from the reasons
recorded by the Court in respect of complicity of some other person(s) not facing trial in the offence.
12. The moot question, however, is the degree of satisfaction that is required for invoking the powers
under Section 319 Cr.P.C. and the related question is as to in what situations this power should be
exercised in respect of a person named in the FIR but not charge-sheeted. These two aspects were
also specifically dealt with by the Constitution Bench in Hardeep Singh's case and answered in the
following manner:
"95. At the time of taking cognizance, the court has to see whether a prima facie case
is made out to proceed against the accused. Under Section 319 CrPC, though the test
of prima facie case is the same, the degree of satisfaction that is required is much
stricter. A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Vikas v. State of Rajasthan [(2014) 3 SCC
321] , held that on the *objective satisfaction* of the court a person may be "arrested"
or "summoned", as the circumstances of the case may require, if it appears from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 4
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
evidence that any such person not being the accused has committed an offence for
which such person could be tried together with the already arraigned accused
persons.
* * *
105. Power under Section 319 CrPC is a discretionary and an extraordinary power. It
is to be exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the
case so warrant. It is not to be exercised because the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge
is of the opinion that some other person may also be guilty of committing that
offence. Only where strong and cogent evidence occurs against a person from the
evidence led before the court that such power should be exercised and not in a casual
and cavalier manner.
106. Thus, we hold that though only a prima facie case is to be established from the
evidence led before the court, not necessarily tested on the anvil of
cross-examination, it requires much stronger evidence than mere probability of his
complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case
as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent
that the evidence, if goes unrebutted, would lead to conviction. In the absence of such
satisfaction, the court should refrain from exercising power under Section 319 CrPC.
In Section 319 CrPC the purpose of providing if "it appears from the evidence that
any person not being the accused has committed any offence" is clear from the words
"*for which such person could be tried together with the accused*". The words used
are not "for which such person could be convicted". There is, therefore, no scope for
the court acting under Section 319 CrPC to form any opinion as to the guilt of the
accused."
13. In order to answer the question, some of the principles enunciated in Hardeep Singh's case may
be recapitulated: power under Section 319 Cr.P.C. can be exercised by the trial court at any stage
during the trial, i.e. before the conclusion of trial, to summon any person as an accused and face the
trial in the ongoing case, once the trial court finds that there is some "evidence" against such a
person on the basis of which evidence it can be gathered that he appears to be guilty of offence. The
"evidence" herein means the material that is brought before the Court during trial. Insofar as the
material/evidence collected by the IO at the stage of inquiry is concerned, it can be utilised for
corroboration and to support the evidence recorded by the Court to invoke the power under Section
319 Cr.P.C. No doubt, such evidence that has surfaced in examination-in-chief, without cross-
examination of witnesses, can also be taken into consideration. However, since it is a discretionary
power given to the Court under Section 319 Cr.P.C. and is also an extraordinary one, same has to be
exercised sparingly and only in those cases where the circumstances of the case so warrant. The
degree of satisfaction is more than the degree which is warranted at the time of framing of the
charges against others in respect of whom charge-sheet was filed. Only where strong and cogent
evidence occurs against a person from the evidence led before the Court that such power should be
exercised. It is not to be exercised in a casual or a cavalier manner. The prima facie opinion which is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 5
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
to be formed requires stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity."
9. A perusal of the aforesaid judgment indicates that though even at the stage of
examination-in-chief without cross-examination the power under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. can be
exercised but undoubtedly, the reliable and cogent material which should be emerging from the
statement should be a stronger evidence than mere probability of his complicity. The test which has
to be applied is one which is more than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing of charge
but short of satisfaction to the extent that the evidence is unrebutted would lead to conviction. On
the touchstone of the aforesaid judgments, I find that the exercise of power by the trial court was not
inconformity with the law laid down by the Supreme Court. Even in the examination-in-chief it was
a mere occurrence of the name of the revisionist which was taken alongwith the other accused who
had participated at the offence resulting into FIRs which were lodged on 26.03.2005. There is no
further detail of involvement of the revisionist nor any mention of his further participation in the
said crime.
10. In this regard, Hon'ble Supreme Court has given a much needed relief to the family members
implicated in similar cases with vague allegations which does not disclose their active involvement
in the case of Geeta Mehrotra v. State of U.P., (2012) 10 SCC 741 :
"20. Coming to the facts of this case, when the contents of the FIR are perused, it is
apparent that there are no allegations against Kumari Geeta Mehrotra and Ramji
Mehrotra except casual reference of their names which have been included in the FIR
but mere casual reference of the names of the family members in a matrimonial
dispute without allegation of active involvement in the matter would not justify
taking cognizance against them overlooking the fact borne out of experience that
there is a tendency to involve the entire family members of the household in the
domestic quarrel taking place in a matrimonial dispute specially if it happens soon
after the wedding.
25. However, we deem it appropriate to add by way of caution that we may not be
misunderstood so as to infer that even if there are allegations of overt act indicating
the complicity of the members of the family named in the FIR in a given case,
cognizance would be unjustified but what we wish to emphasise by highlighting is
that, if the FIR as it stands does not disclose specific allegation against the accused
more so against the co-accused specially in a matter arising out of matrimonial
bickering, it would be clear abuse of the legal and judicial process to mechanically
send the named accused in the FIR to undergo the trial unless of course the FIR
discloses specific allegations which would persuade the court to take cognizance of
the offence alleged against the relatives of the main accused who are prima facie not
found to have indulged in physical and mental torture of the complainant wife. It is
the well-settled principle laid down in cases too numerous to mention, that if the FIR
did not disclose the commission of an offence, the court would be justified in
quashing the proceedings preventing the abuse of process of law. Simultaneously, the
courts are expected to adopt a cautious approach in matters of quashing, especially in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 6
Vimlesh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Deptt. Of ... on 27 March, 2025
cases of matrimonial disputes whether the FIR in fact discloses commission of an
offence by the relatives of the principal accused or the FIR prima facie discloses a
case of overimplication by involving the entire family of the accused at the instance of
the complainant, who is out to settle her scores arising out of the teething problem or
skirmish of domestic bickering while settling down in her new matrimonial
surrounding."
11. Accordingly, I find that the material on the basis of which the trial court had allowed the
application, falls short of the test laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgments. I am
also of the view that once during the investigation number of witnesses were examined some of
whom had stated that the revisionist was not present at the scene of crime but was with them
elsewhere and, therefore, in these peculiar circumstances the trial court should have waited till
examination of the investigating officer was complete which would have lead to a more cogent and
reliable piece of material necessitating invocation of powers under Section 319 of Cr.P.C.
Accordingly, merely naming the revisionist without giving any further details of his participation in
the alleged offence does not show that there was sufficient material for invocation of power under
Section 319 Cr.P.C.
12. Accordingly, this Court is of the considered view that at the present stage this Court finds that
there was no reliable and cogent material available for exercising powers under Section 319 Cr.P.C.,
accordingly, the revision is allowed. The order dated 26.11.2024 passed by Additional Sessions
Judge, Court No. 3, Unnao is set aside.
13. Further it is made clear that subsequently if the trial court is of the opinion that there is other
substantial, relevant and cogent evidence available then he would be at liberty to exercise his powers
in accordance with law.
(Alok Mathur, J.) Order Date :- 27.3.2025 Ravi/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8444061/ 7
