Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2
March, 2016
Equivalent citations: AIR 2016 PATNA 86, (2016) 2 PAT LJR 783
Author: Ahsanuddin Amanullah
Bench: Ahsanuddin Amanullah
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.3807 of 2016
Along with
Interlocutory Application No. 1723 of 2016
And
Interlocutory Application No. 1967 of 2016
===========================================================
1. Vinay Kumar Pappu, son of Late Dr. S.N. Roy Yadav, resident of Mohalla
Goriyatoli, Station Road, Police Station - Kotwali, Post Office G.P.O., District
Patna.
2. Nitin Nabin (Member of Legislative Assembly) son of Late Navin Kishore
Prasad Sinha 137 Member of Legislative Assembly Flat, Beerchand Patel Path,
P.O. G.P.O., P.S. Kotwali, District Patna.
3. Sudhir Kumar Singh son of Surendra Singh, resident of C.D.A. Colony, North
L.B.S. Nagar, P.S. Shastrinagar, District Patna.
.... .... Petitioner/s
Versus
1. The Union of India, through Secretary, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, Government of India, New Delhi.
2. Central Board of Film Certification (referred as Censor Board), Bharat
Bhawan, 91-E, Valkashwar Road, Mumbai 400006 represented through its
Chairperson.
3. Chairperson, Sri Pahlaz Nihalani, Bharat Bhawan, 91-E, Valkashwar Road,
Mumbai 400006.
4. Chief Executive Officer, Bharat Bhawan, 91-E, Valkashwar Road, Mumbai
400006.
5. M/s Prakash Jha Production, a proprietorship concern, through its proprietor
Mr. Prakash Jha having its registered office at 201 Abhishek, Off New Link
Road, Andheri West, Mumbai - 40053.
6. Mr. Prakash Jha son of Sri Tej Nath Jha resident of village Barharwa, P.O.
Turaha Palti, P.S. Sirisio, Anchal Chanpatia, District West Champaran.
.... .... Respondent/s
===========================================================
Appearance :
For the Petitioners : Mr. Ajay Kumar Thakur, Advocate.
Mr. Ajit Kumar, Advocate.
Mr. Krishna Chandra, Advocate.
Mr. Pankaj Kumar Singh, Advocate.
Mr. B.Kumar, Advocate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 1
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
Mr. Avinash Kumar, Advocate.
Mr. Shashank Shekhar, Advocate
Mr. Nilesh Kumar, Advocate.
For the Resp. No.1 to 4 :Mr. S.D Sanjay, Addl. Solicitor General
Mr. Ram Anurag Singh, CGC.
For the Resp. No.5 & 6: Ms. Aparajita Singh, Advocate.
Mr. Rohitabh Das, Advocate.
Mr. Harshvardhan Jha, Advocate.
===========================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH
ORAL JUDGMENT
Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016
2/22
Date: 02-03-2016
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
The three petitioners before the Court, the first being a
former Deputy Mayor of Patna Municipal Corporation, second being
an Hon(cid:128)ble Member of the Bihar Legislative Assembly from
Bankipur Constituency and the third a citizen of the city, have moved
the Court seeking to restrain broadcasting of the film „Jai Gangajal(cid:128)
on the ground that it depicts defamatory references to the citizens and
more particularly with regard to respondent no. 2, who has been
elected from the constituency which has not only been named in the
movie but also shows the role of the elected representative of his
constituency „Bankipur' as well as „Lakhisarai' in a negative light.
Interlocutory Applications No. 1723 of 2016 and 1967
of 2016 have also been filed on behalf of the petitioners.
Interlocutory Application No. 1723 of 2016, though not
very aptly worded, in effect seeks interim stay from broadcasting of
the defamatory portion of the said film whereas Interlocutory
Application No. 1967 of 2016 seeks amendment in the main writ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 2
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
petition by seeking additional relief to quash the order dated
22.01.2016
passed by the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FCAT") with
regard to the film in question.
Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 In view of the writ petition having been
heard at length for final disposal, Interlocutory Application No. 1723 of 2016, becoming infructuous,
stands disposed off.
With regard to I.A. No. 1967 of 2016, the same being integrally connected with the issue raised and
relief sought in the main writ petition, the Court deems it appropriate to allow the prayer.
Accordingly, the challenge to the appellate order of the FACT dated 22.01.2016 with regard to the
film in question shall form part of the main writ application.
Interlocutory Application No. 1967 of 2016 stands disposed off.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the movie has the potential of co-relating the
petitioners, especially petitioner no. 2, who is the sitting M.L.A. from Bankipur Constituency in the
State of Bihar and to that extent, he is directly affected by public screening of the movie. It is
submitted that the main objection to such broadcast of the film is on account of the same carrying
visual portrayal of the character of the M.L.A. from Bankipur Constituency i.e., the petitioner no. 2
around whom the movie revolves and where he is shown in a negative role to the extent of not only
washing away all the good work done in the past by him but also belittling him in the eyes of the
public at large causing Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 personal loss of
good-will and reputation both to himself, his family as also to the political party which he
represents. It is further submitted that the petitioners no. 1 and 3 being citizens of Bankipur
Constituency are also affected for the reason that the M.L.A. who has been portrayed in the movie,
claims to have been elected in the last three consecutive general elections and also makes a claim
that in future also nobody can defeat him whereby imputing a sense of helplessness as well as
impotency of the electorate of Bankipur Constituency of not being able to elect a better
representative. Learned counsel submits that the reference to Bankipur Constituency cannot be said
to be a mere coincidence for the reason that the respondent no. 6, who himself is a resident of this
constituency, was well aware of the name and instead of any other fictitious name, using the name
Bankipur, cannot be so innocuous, moreso, for the reason that he himself has dabbled in active
politics as a member of the ruling party in the State of Bihar, which is opposed to the party
represented by the petitioner no. 3 and further the reference extending to the identification of the
M.L.A. of Bankipur Constituency in the movie to a person of short stature and him having been
elected consecutively in the last three elections, aptly fits with regard to the petitioner no. 2, who is
also representing the constituency Bankipur for the last three consecutive terms and bears a short
stature. Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 Learned counsel submits that the
intention of the petitioners in approaching the court for the cause which they are espousing, is bona
fide, which will be reflected from their conduct inasmuch as way back in January, 2016 itself, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 3
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
petitioner no. 2 had sent a legal notice to the respondents no. 5 and 6 to make appropriate changes
with regard to the name of the constituency shown in the film. It is submitted that the petitioners at
no point of time have been against total ban of the movie and have only tried to indicate to the
respondents no. 5 and 6 a reasonable and genuine apprehension and which could have been
redressed in the right spirit without making an issue for the simple reason that there was sufficient
time to re-dub or replace the word "Bankipur" with any other fictitious name, which has not been
reciprocated properly by the respondents no. 5 and 6. Learned counsel further submits that the
petitioner no. 2 had also sent his objection to the Central Board of Film Certification (hereinafter
referred to as the "CBFC") raising such objection but got no intimation and only when the trailer of
the movie was being aired, he was shocked to notice that the suggested change of name of the
constituency of the petitioner no. 2 had not been incorporated, compelling the petitioners to move
before the Court in the present writ application. Learned counsel submits that though the
constitutional guarantee of right of freedom of expression should be Patna High Court CWJC
No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 protected and is an important facet in a democracy and is also
required for its healthy growth, but the Constitution itself under Article 19(2) has given power to the
State to put appropriate restrictions so that such liberty is not misused. It is submitted that the
competent statutory body constituted for the said purpose despite being informed by the petitioner
no. 2, has failed to consider his objection as he has not been intimated with regard to any decision
on his objection and even the subsequent clearance by the FCAT does not indicate that the said
objection was considered and that too without the petitioner no. 2 having been given any notice or
opportunity of hearing. Learned counsel submits that the Court is not fettered in its power under
judicial review to consider the position even after the competent authority has given a certificate for
public broadcast of the movie, if the situation so warrants. Learned counsel further submits that the
resemblance/similarity not being of a minor nature and the extreme negative portrayal of the
character of the public representative of the constituency represented by the petitioner no. 2 have
given a valid cause of action to the petitioners and the Court may take judicial notice of the position
and interfere in the matter. Learned counsel submits that the reference to Bankipur Constituency is
also indicative of a deliberate attempt to malign the public image both of the petitioner no. 2 as well
as the general public Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 of the State of Bihar
in view of the fact that another M.L.A. of Lakhisarai, which too is a real Constituency in the State of
Bihar, has also been depicted in the movie is an equally negative light. Learned counsel submits that
the public statement of the respondent no. 6 that there is a disclaimer and that the character has not
been shown with the petitioner no. 2 being in mind, cannot be taken at face value as the same is
contrary to what actually has been portrayed in the movie. Learned counsel submits that a genuine
criticism or portrayal of facts cannot be objected to but when such portrayal is so different from the
character or the public image of the petitioner no. 2, it being shown to the public at large and that
too through the powerful media of cinema and further which cannot be confused with any other
constituency as Bankipur Constituency is the only constituency by that name in the whole of India, a
mere disclaimer is only an eye-wash and not a substitute for not changing it by some fictitious name.
Learned counsel further submits that the sequence of coincidences cannot be so consistent as in the
present case, where even the reference to M.L.A. from Lakhisarai has been made, which besides
being a real constituency by that name in the State of Bihar, is represented by the party to which the
petitioner no. 2 belongs and in the background of there being intense political rivalry between the
parties represented by the petitioner no. 2 and his Lakhisarai colleague and the party of Patna High
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 4
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 which the respondent no. 6 at one point of time had
been a candidate, having earlier entered the electoral fray, leave no doubt that there is a deliberate
attempt to damage the prospect and public image of the petitioner no. 2, his party and also show
their electorate in poor light. For the aforesaid proposition, learned counsel has relied upon the
decisions of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in the case of K.A. Abbas v. Union of India reported in
A.I.R. 1971 SC 481, relevant being at paragraphs-14, 21 and 22; Raj Kapoor v. State reported in
(1980) 1 SCC 43, relevant being at paragraph-19; S. Rangarajan v. P. Jagjivan Ram reported in
(1989) 2 SCC 574, relevant being at paragraphs-20 and 21; Bobby Art International v. Om Pal Singh
Hoon reported in (1996) 4 SCC 1, relevant being at paragraphs 22, 23 and 31; Devidas Ramachandra
Tuljapurkar v. State of Maharashtra reported in (2015)6 SCC 1, relevant being at paragraphs-12 and
13; an unreported judgment of the Madras High Court dated 05.08.2005 in the case of Ms. A.
Arulmozhi Vs. The Government of India & Ors. (Writ Petition No. 24430 of 2004) as well as that of
the Himachal Pradesh High Court dated 01.01.2004 in the case of Virbhadra Singh Vs. Union of
India and Ors. (Civil Writ Petition No. 303 of 1999).
Learned counsel further submits that once the petitioner no. 2 had objected in writing before the
CBFC, the authorities were Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 duty bound
under law not only to consider the same and intimate the result to him but also to give him a
personal hearing which has admittedly not been done and till date he has not been communicated
any action/decision taken either by the CBFC or FCAT, with regard to the objection raised by him.
Learned Additional Solicitor General, representing respondents no. 1 to 4, submits that originally on
an application made by the respondent no. 6 before the CBFC, the movie was screened before the
Full Committee and because of there being differences among the members, the matter was referred
to the Revising Committee for re-examination and the same gave it as „A(cid:128) certificate. However, on a
plea by respondent no. 6 for „UA(cid:128) certificate, the same was recommended with 11 cuts in the movie.
The respondent no. 6 being aggrieved by the same moved before the FCAT and by order dated
22.01.2016, the appeal was disposed off with a direction to delete two portions. It appears that
pursuant to the respondents no. 5 and 6 accepting the said order and making the necessary
corrections, by a subsequent order dated 15.02.2016, the FCAT directed for issuance of
„UA(cid:128)certificate in favour of the film in question. It is submitted that as per his instructions, the
letter sent by the petitioner no. 2 dated 11th January, 2016 was received by the CBFC on 13th
January, 2016 but as the matter had already reached Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016
dt.02-03-2016 the FCAT, upon notice being issued and records called for, the CBFC forwarded the
entire records as well as the objection of the petitioner no. 2 to the FCAT and final order by the
FCAT has been passed thereafter. He submits that he is not taking any position with regard to the
merits of the case in view of the limited role which the State authorities have and in the present case
also they have discharged their statutory obligation without any ill-will, bias or favour.
Learned counsel for the respondents no. 5 and 6 submits that the basic thrust of the whole writ
petition is on the presumption that the depiction of the character of M.L.A. of Bankipur
Constituency is defamatory as far as petitioner no. 2 is concerned, which, besides being premature,
is also not borne out by the factual position. Firstly, she submits that the petitioner no. 2 has
approached the Court without disclosing that he had already objected before the CBFC which is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 5
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
suppression of material fact and further, if no action was taken, why he did not move the Court
against such inaction by the CBFC, which cannot be considered to be due diligence on his part as
there was no occasion for him to wait for such a time when the date for official release of the film
had already been widely publicized. Learned counsel submits that the amendment sought in
Interlocutory Application No. 1967 of 2016 is also a belated reaction which shows the casual
approach of the petitioners in Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 conducting
matters before the Court inasmuch as after the matter was heard on three occasions including
yesterday(cid:128)s detailed hearing, only late last evening, a copy of the amendment application was
served and thus the respondents no. 5 and 6 have not been given adequate opportunity to rebut or
counter the averments made in the Interlocutory Application. However, she submits that she is not
seriously pressing this objection in view of the fact that the main writ petition itself is being disposed
off. Learned counsel submits that to succeed before the Court, the minimum requirement of the
petitioners is to show that prejudice has been caused to them and a legal right infringed so as to
even make their case maintainable before the Court, much less worth consideration. Learned
counsel submits that except for the reference to M.L.A. of Bankipur, the petitioners have not been
able to show to the Court or have given even one specific incidence of what the objectionable portion
is or what could be the perceived damage to them so as to give the other side a fair chance to rebut
or the Court to take an objective view. Learned counsel submits that merely going on the trailer and
alleging that the constituency represented by him has been named in the movie may not be enough
for the Courts to interfere in a matter which basically relates to the respondents no. 5 and 6 making
a movie meant for the entertainment of the general public without claiming it to be either a biopic or
based Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 on any true incidences or even
related to any real life events and for this purpose at the very beginning of the movie there is a
specific, clear-cut and unambiguous disclaimer in the following terms:-
"DISCLAIMER All characters, characters names, location names, building names,
property used, names assigned are all fictional and imaginary. If there is any
resemblance to any location, person, property, etc., it is purely co-incidental and
non-intentional."
It is submitted that the very initiation of the film is with the declaration that a fictitious story is
going to be shown to the audience which clearly is sufficient to dispel any imaginary misconception
in the minds of the petitioners with regard to there being any insinuation or correlation or
identification of either the character or image of the petitioner no. 2 in particular or electorate of
Bankipur and Lakhisarai constituencies in general. Learned counsel submits that as far as reference
being to Lakhisarai is concerned, none of the petitioners are either residents or can be said to
represent the said constituency in any capacity. Learned counsel further submits that the Courts
have been very careful and circumspect when dealing with issues relating to public morality,
decency, obscenity and defamation and have balanced the same keeping the constitutional mandate
in mind and as the law has evolved, by now the consistent view of the Courts is that the
constitutional right of freedom of speech and expression should not be curbed and even if it goes to
the extent of specifically targeting any person or Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016
dt.02-03-2016 constituency, it has been held that the remedy would lie post facto and that too by
way of moving for damages by filing suit for defamation. It is submitted that the present issue has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 6
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
been blown out of proportion and unnecessarily the petitioners, moreso petitioner no. 2, has been
oversensitive to the issue and thus, the very basis of moving the High Court cannot be said to be a
bona fide exercise on the part of the petitioners. Learned counsel submits that the balance of
convenience also is against the petitioners for the reason that with huge investment made in
production and publicity, any interference or interim restrain on release of the movie, at the
eleventh hour when the movie is set for public release on 4th March, 2016, shall cause irreparable
loss not only to the respondents no. 5 and 6 but to many people who have not been made party in
the proceedings and about whom the Court would be mindful. Learned counsel submits that if the
petitioners are so confident that there may be something which would be worth agitating against or
for which there may be a legal remedy, unless the cause of action is ripe, no futile or pre-emptive
writ should be issued.
It is submitted that in the present case, till now, the petitioners have not been able to show or
actually pinpoint either the dialogues or the depiction to which they object and in the absence of the
same and solely on the ground of mere reference to Bankipur and Patna High Court CWJC No.3807
of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 Lakhisarai is not sufficient for the Court to consider as to whether there is
substance in the submissions and contentions of the petitioners. It is submitted that in the absence
of there being an opportunity either for the Court to judge or the respondents no. 5 and 6 to meet
the objections, as the same have not been spelt out, itself is against the principles of natural justice
as the party against whom a complaint is made/allegation levelled is unable to meet/rebut/counter
the same in absence of there being anything specific and only on bald statements and perceived
damages the issue is sought to be agitated before the Court in the present proceeding. Learned
counsel submits that the petitioners no. 1 and 2, being public figures, the threshold to judge the
damage to their reputation is much higher and the standard of proof is equally high, as compared to
a common citizen, and the Courts have also held that unless malice is proved in accordance with
law, even direct statements and portrayals which may be patently false, will not be a ground for any
interim injunction.
Learned counsel submits that with regard to the contention of the petitioners that because of his
political affiliation, the respondent no. 6 has targeted the petitioner no. 2 and his party is also
misplaced for the reason that he being a free thinker and a creative artist and known for his passion
both on the political and personal front having fought elections under the banner of two Patna High
Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 different political parties and once as an independent,
the charge of settling political scores through his films has never even been insinuated earlier
moreso, when at present he is neither associated with any political party nor does he carry any
grudge against either petitioner no. 2 or the party which he represents. Learned counsel submits
that even with regard to the similarity being drawn by the learned counsel for the petitioners that
the character of M.L.A. of Bankipur Constituency in the film is of short stature which is akin to the
petitioner no. 2, she submits that there is no reference to such factual aspect in the pleadings and
thus the same is only imaginary at the present, and just on the basis of similarity in stature of the
character in the movie to that of a particular personality (respondent no. 2) cannot be a ground for
drawing adverse inference for the reason that real persons performing on the screen will obviously
have characteristics of real persons who actually exist and thus stature by itself cannot be factor to
draw similarity so as to pinpoint a person or individual. Learned counsel, for the aforesaid
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 7
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
propositions, has relied upon the decisions of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in the case of R. Rajgopal
v. State of T.N. reported in (1994)6 SCC 632, the relevant being at paragraphs 18,22, 22(3) and 29;
Bobby Art International (supra); Prakash Jha Productions v. Union of India reported in (2011) 8
SCC 372, relevant being at paragraphs 25, 26; S. Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016
dt.02-03-2016 Rangarajan (supra), the relevant being at paragraphs 20, 21; Patna High Court in the
case of Asha Parekh and Ors. vs. The State of Bihar and Ors. reported in 1977 Cr. L. J. 21; Ashvani
Dhir v. State of Bihar reported in A.I.R. 2005 Pat 101, the relevant being at paragraphs 24,25 and
26; Allahabad High Court in the case of Anirudh Prasad Yadav v. Union of India reported in A.I.R.
2004 All. 123, the relevant being at paragraphs- 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,13, 14 and 17; Delhi High Court in
the case of Naveen Jindal & Anr. Vs. Zee Media Corporation Ltd. & Ors. {C.S. (OS) No. 881 of 2014}
dated 01st April, 2014, the relevant being at paragraphs 18 and 23; Prakash Jha Productions vs. Bata
India Limited & Ors. {FAO (OS) 505 of 2012} dated 17th October, 2012, the relevant being at
paragraphs- 7, 8, 11 and 15; Shilpesh Chaudhary and Anr. Vs. Union of India and Ors. {W.P. (C) No.
1492 of 2013} dated 8th March, 2013, the relevant being at paragraphs-2, 3, 4 and 5 and Andhra
Pradesh High Court in the case of Vadlapatla Naga Vara Prasad vs. Chairperson, Central Board of
Film Certification, Bharat Bhavan Mumbai (Writ Petition No. 30376 of 2011) dated 01st December,
2011, the relevant being at paragraphs-10 and 18.
Having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and submissions of the learned counsel
for the parties, this Court would briefly like to comment on the factual aspect inasmuch as the Patna
High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 petitioners have tried to show to the Court that
the portrayal of the character of M.L.A. from Bankipur as well as Lakhisarai constituencies not being
fictitious and existing in reality in the State of Bihar and also being represented by the party to
which the petitioner no. 2 belongs, is no mere co-incidence and rather deliberate for various reasons
including the political affiliation of the respondent no. 6. The petitioners have also tried to impress
upon the Court that the similarity being so close to reality and the representation of the character in
the movie, which is to be viewed by the general public, has the potential to seriously infringe the
petitioners(cid:128) right both in their individual capacity as well as in the capacity of being the public
representative and holding a constitutional post which are good and sufficient grounds for the Court
to intervene. The Court, thus, initially had issued notice to the respondents no. 5 and 6 with the
hope that if a solution could be worked out to the satisfaction of the parties on mutually acceptable
terms, the Court may not be required to go into the legal aspects. The same having failed, the Court
has thus been called upon to take a call with regard to issues raised and relief sought by the
petitioners. The hearing of the case has led the court to the conclusion that the materials before it
are not sufficient to reach to any positive conclusion as to whether the apprehension of the
petitioners, as raised Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 in the writ petition,
are well founded or they are over sensitive to an innocuous portrayal with fleeting references having
some connection with the post held by the petitioner no. 2, without any justifiable ground made out
for interference.
The only admitted position before the Court is that there is a character, who is said to represent
Bankipur Constituency and is a member of the Legislative Assembly. This position is true as there is
a real constituency of Bankipur in the State of Bihar represented by the petitioner no. 2 but the State
shown and named is a fictitious „Madhya Prant(cid:128) and not Bihar However, this fact may itself not be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 8
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
enough to prevent any portrayal of even an Hon(cid:128)ble Member of the Legislative Assembly subject to
the condition that it should not be with the intention to target a particular person and further such
showing him in a negative light should not be of the nature which may persuade a reasonable or
prudent man to either adversely change his impression of the person or damage the reputation in
public perception both of himself as well as of the party he represents.
In the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners the references were direct and
real so as to identify the person concerned and more importantly, the stage was after the cause of
action had really arisen, that is, the film having been broadcast/released and the party aggrieved
being aware of the entire Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 factual position.
On the other hand, the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents no. 5 and 6
clearly buttresses their objection that the Courts have been very liberal in upholding the right of a
citizen to free expression and any restriction, and that too in the present case where it is only
presumptive based on reference to the name of the constituency of the petitioner no. 2, may not be
sufficient reason for the Court to go for pre-censorship. It has rightly been submitted that the Courts
have also held that the relief of a public figure or that of a private citizen is only after the cause of
action has arisen which in the present case would be the release of the film and that too by way of
damages. Contention of learned counsel for the respondents no. 5 and 6 that pre-restrain on any
such public release, besides not being in public interest being based on mere conjunctures, surmises
and imaginary perception, should not persuade the Court to exercise the power of judicial review
and intervene in matters which are purely in the domain of common civil law without there being
any real, legal or constitutional issue involved, is well founded. The Court further finds that the
decisions relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents no. 5 and 6 clearly hold that even
where there is a definite identification of personalities on the basis of what has been shown relating
to events or him or her being depicted in a manner which may not be said to be Patna High Court
CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 in good taste, the Courts have leaned in favour of freedom of
expression by not putting any restrain on release/publication and at the same time have also
safeguarded the interest of such persons by permitting them to seek common law remedy of moving
for damages.
In the present case, there being a clear cut disclaimer as well as the respondent no. 6 in a public
interview/press conference having clearly stated that the petitioner no. 2 was never in mind when
the movie was either conceived or completed in July, 2015, is clearly established from the fact that
the elections itself being held only in October-November, 2015, there could not have been a
premonition that the petitioner no. 2 would be elected and thus there cannot be any deliberate or
intentional reference/similarity with regard to any real person/situation relating to the character
portrayed in the film. The petitioner no. 2 having been elected much after completion of the movie,
cannot complain of him being targeted with the object to identify him in real life.
At this juncture, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that as they had not been heard either
by the CBFC or the FCAT, the matter be relegated to them so that the petitioners may get an
opportunity of hearing and their grievance considered since the said bodies are obliged to do so
under law, especially Section 5-B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with Rules 22(8), 24 and
27 of Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 the Cinematograph (Certification)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 9
Vinay Kumar Pappu & Ors vs The Union Of India & Ors on 2 March, 2016
Rules, 1983 as also Clause 2(xviii) of the Guidelines for Certification of Films for Public Exhibition
dated 06.12.1991. In the alternative, he suggests that the Court may view the movie for coming to a
definite conclusion. The Court, momentarily was impressed by such submission of learned counsel
for the petitioners but having given due consideration to the same, in the background of the fact that
the FCAT, which is the appellate body and headed by a retired High Court Judge, had viewed the
movie after being aware of the objection of petitioner no. 2, it shall be deemed that such objection
was considered, and still the FCAT not directing for any deletion or substitution with reference to
the said objection, the Court does not feel persuaded to itself once again undertake the exercise of
viewing the movie for even if it reaches the conclusion that a different view is possible, it would
rather lean in favour of freedom of speech and expression and not substitute its own views for that
of the appellate body. Moreover, the law is also well settled on the point that a decision may not be
casually interfered with while exercising the power of judicial review merely on the ground that a
different view is also possible. Once a statutory fact finding body has taken a conscious decision and
there being no material on record to indicate that the same is perverse or apparently erroneous, it
does not warrant interference. Patna High Court CWJC No.3807 of 2016 dt.02-03-2016 In view of
the discussions made hereinabove, the Court finds no ground to interfere in the matter. Accordingly,
the writ petition stands dismissed.
However, the petitioners shall be at liberty to move in accordance with law before the appropriate
forum, upon the release of the film, if they find any justifiable cause of action.
(Ahsanuddin Amanullah, J.) Patna High Court, Patna Dated the 2nd March, 2016 AFR
Sujit/P.Kumar U
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45706266/ 10
