Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on
20 February, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
65
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM (M) No. 783/2021
Vinod Singh Saini and others .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
q
Through: Mr. Manpreet Singh Saini, Advocate
vs
U. T. of J&K and another ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy.AG for No. 1
None for No. 2
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
ORDER
1. The petitioners have challenged the challan emanating from FIR bearing No. 29/2018 for offences
under Sections 366, 376, 342, 506 and 34 RPC registered with Police Station, Arnia, Jammu
pending before the Fast Track Court, Jammu.
2. As per the prosecution case, on 09.05.2018, petitioner No. 4 had entered into a wedlock with
respondent No. 2, the complainant. However, petitioner No. 1was compelling petitioner No. 4
(hereinafter to be referred as the prosecutrix) to enter into wedlock with him and in this connection,
petitioner No. 2 who happens to be the brother of petitioner No. 1 used to approach the prosecutrix
time and again. The said petitioner told the prosecutrix to proceed to Mumbai to meet petitioner No.
1 or else he would finish off his life. Accordingly, on 12.05.2018, the prosecutrix while she had gone
to market along with her husband in Arnia, accused/petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 made the prosecutrix to
board a motorcycle forcibly and she was taken to Jammu Airport. Thereafter, the prosecutrix was
made to board the aeroplane and was taken to Mumbai to petitioner No. 1-Vinod Singh Saini. At
Mumbai, petitioner No. 1 took the prosecutrix to a guest house and committed rape upon her in a
room. She was locked inside the room for the night and on the second day, the prosecutrix was sent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 1
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
back to Jammu in an aeroplane. When she reached Jammu, she met mother of the petitioner No. 1
who took her to Police Station, Women Cell, Jammu. Thus, according to the prosecution, offences
under Sections 366, 376, 342, 506 and 34 stand established against petitioners No. 1 to 3.
3. During the pendency of the challan, it seems that the prosecutrix and accused/petitioner No. 1
have entered into a compromise whereby the prosecutrix has agreed to withdraw the criminal
prosecution against the accused i.e. petitioners No. 1 to 3.
4. It has been contended in the petition that parents of the prosecutrix forcibly and against her
consent and wish solemnized her marriage with respondent No. 2 while she was interested in
entering into wedlock with petitioner No. 1. It has been submitted that the prosecutrix on
16.05.2018 out of her own will and volition left her matrimonial house as she did not live with
respondent No. 2. It has further been stated that the prosecutrix went to meet some of her friends
and when she came back, she was pressurized by respondent No. 2 to make a false statement
regarding rape and kidnapping against petitioner Nos. 1 to 3. It has been submitted that the
prosecutrix dissolved her marriage with respondent No. 2 and thereafter, she has entered into a
wedlock with petitioner No. 1 and out of the said wedlock, a girl child is stated to have been born on
30.01.2021.
5. In the deed of compromise also, the aforesaid assertions have been reiterated and in support of
the deed of compromise, the petitioners have made their statements before the Registrar Judicial of
this Court.
6. On the basis of the aforesaid facts, the petitioners have sought quashment of the impugned
challan on the ground that continuance of proceedings against the accused in the facts and
circumstances of the case would be an abuse of process of law.
7. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. So far as facts relating to the compromise arrived at between the accused/petitioners 1 to 3 and
the prosecutrix/petitioner No. 4 are concerned, the same are not in dispute. In the backdrop of these
facts, question arises as to whether this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly when
one of the offences alleged to have been committed by the petitioners 1 to 3, is a heinous offence of
rape punishable under Section 376 RPC. Before answering this question, legal position in this regard
needs to be noticed.
9. In Gian Singh v State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 303, while determining the issue as to whether
High Court in exercise of its powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can quash criminal proceedings
against an offender who has settled his dispute with the victim of the crime even though the crime is
not compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C. observed as under:
"57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of settlement
between an offender and victim is not the same thing as compounding of offence.
They are different and not interchangeable. Strictly speaking, the power of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 2
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
compounding of offences given to a court under Section 320 is materially different
from the quashing of criminal proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences, power of a criminal court is
circumscribed by the provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is guided
solely and squarely thereby while, on the other hand, the formation of opinion by the
High Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal proceeding or criminal
complaint is guided by the material on record as to whether the ends of justice would
justify such exercise of power although the ultimate consequence may be acquittal or
dismissal of indictment.
61. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus: the
power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent
power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in
accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to secure the ends of
justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court. In what cases power to quash the
criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and
the victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before exercise of such power,
the High Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.
cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the offender
have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious
impact on society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim and the offender in
relation to the offences under special statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or
the offences committed by public servants while working in that capacity, etc.; cannot
provide for any basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such offences. But
the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil flavour stand on
a different footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where
the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved
their entire dispute. In this category of cases, the High Court may quash the criminal
proceedings if in its view, because of the compromise between the offender and the
victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of the
criminal case would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words, the High Court
must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the criminal proceeding
would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and compromise
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 3
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
between the victim and the wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of justice, it is
appropriate that the criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to the above
question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to
quash the criminal proceeding."
10. In Ananda D. V. v State (Criminal Appeal No. 394-395 of 2021, dated of decision 12.04.2021),
the Supreme Court while hearing an appeal against a judgment passed by the High Court of Delhi,
rejecting a quashing petition in respect of an FIR for an offence of rape, observed as under:
"Considering the nature of allegations in the FIR and the realization of the fact that
due to miscommunication FIR came to be registered at the relevant point of time
which issues/misunderstanding have now been fully resolved and the parties are
happily married since
11.10.2014, the basis of FIR does not survive. Rather registering such FIR was an ill-advised move
on the part of the private respondent, is the stand now taken before us. It is seen that the appellant
and private respondent are literate and well-informed persons and have jointly opted for quashing
of the stated FIR. Taking overall view of the matter, therefore, in the interest of justice, we accede to
the joint request of quashing of FIR in the peculiar facts of the present case.
Hence, these appeals must succeed. The impugned judgment and order is set aside. Instead, the
Writ Petition filed by the appellant for quashing is allowed, as a result of which, all steps taken on
the basis of impugned FIR be treated as effaced from the record in law."
11. A Single Bench of the Delhi High Court in Ashish v State (2021) 1 HCC (Del)163, while
considering a petition for quashing of FIR under Sections 376 and 506 IPC on the ground that the
parties had entered into a compromise and had entered into a wedlock observed as under:
"7. In a somewhat similar circumstances, a Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court
in Pankaj v. UT of Chandigarh [Pankaj v. UT of Chandigarh 2020 SCC OnLine P&H
4007] , while quashing the proceedings for the offences under Section 376IPC, has
observed as under:
"5. In normal circumstances, the court would not entertain a matter when the
non-compoundable offences are heinous in nature and against the public. In the
instant case, the offence, complained of is under Section 376IPC, which is an offence
of grave nature. In the eyes of law, the offence of rape is serious and
non-compoundable and the courts should not in ordinary circumstances interfere
and quash the FIR that has been registered. However, there are always exceptions to
the normal rules and certain categories of cases, which deserve consideration
specially when it is a case of love affair between teenagers and due to fear of the
society and pressure from the community one party alleges rape, cases where the
accused and the victim are well known to each other and allegation of rape is levelled
only because the accused refused to marry, as well as the age, educational maturity
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 4
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
and the mental capacity, consequences of the same ought to be kept in mind when
inclined to interfere."
8. Although, as per the directions of the Supreme Court in Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of Gujarat
[ParbatbhaiAahir v. State of Gujarat (2017) 9 SCC 641 : AIR 2017 SC 4843] , the FIR should not be
quashed in case of rape as it is a heinous offence, but when complainant prosecutrix herself takes
the initiative and states that she made the complaint due to some misunderstanding and now wants
to give quietus to the misunderstanding which arose between her and the petitioner, in my
considered opinion, in such cases, there will be no purpose in continuing with the trial. Ultimately, if
such direction is issued, the result will be of acquittal in favour of the accused, but substantial public
time shall be wasted. A similar view was taken by this Court in Danish Ali v. State [Danish Ali v.
State2019 SCC OnLine Del 11712] .
9. Taking into account the aforesaid facts and the fact that the petitioner and prosecutrix have
already married on 25-9-2020, therefore, this Court is inclined to quash the present FIR as no
useful purpose would be served in prosecuting petitioner any further."
12. Again Delhi High Court in the case of Vikas Kumar vs State 2021 SCC Online Delhi, 2749, while
dealing with a quashing petition relating to an FIR for offences under Sections 328, 376 and 506 IPC
and after discussing the judgment of the Supreme Court in Gian Singh (supra) observed as under:
"8. A perusal of the above mentioned judgments show that wherein the allegation of
rape has been made, it cannot be quashed only because the prosecutrix and the
accused have entered into a compromise and the victim's family and the offender
have settled the dispute because these offences are not private in nature and has a
serious impact on the society.
9. In the present case, the allegation in the FIR is that the prosecutrix and the
accused were working in the same place and have become friends. They fell in love
and were living together for two years. The accused went to his native place and the
FIR was lodged alleging rape. The prosecutrix has married the accused with whom
she was living for two years. The prosecutrix in her affidavit has affirmed the
statements made in the petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. that the parties got
married on 01.10.2020 according to Hindu Rites and Ceremonies. Their families
have accepted the marriage and they have a child from the marriage. In the facts of
the case, continuation of the proceedings would cause immense harm to the
prosecutrix and the small child. This Court is aware that offences like rape cannot be
quashed by exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. if a compromise has
been reached, but, at the same time, this Court cannot ignore and overlook the
welfare of the small child and the future of the prosecutrix.
10. Similar views have been taken by the High Court of Kerala in Ashiq N.A. v. State
of Kerala, 2019 SCC OnLine Ker 1731 and Freddy @ Antony Francis v. State of Kerala,
[Crl.M.C. No. 723/2017] decided on 02.02.2017 and by the High Court of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 5
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
Uttarakhand in Akash Gupta v. State of Uttarakhand, [Criminal Misc. Application
No. 502/2018) decided on 27.10.2018.
11. Mr. Raja Ram Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has placed
reliance on an order dated 07.09.2020 passed by this Court in Bitu Yadav @ Vikas
Yadav v. State(NCT of Delhi), [CRL.M.C.1761/2020], wherein this Court has quashed
the FIR where the prosecutrix and the accused were married. Paras 17, 18 and 19 of
the said order, read as under:
"17. In view of the submissions made by the respondent No. 2 before this Court, the
respondent No. 2 is liable to be prosecuted. However, keeping in view the fact that
the petitioner and respondent No. 2 are married and living happy married life, I
hereby refrain from taking any legal action against the respondent No. 2. A similar
view was taken by this court in the case of Danish Ali v. State in Crl.M.C.1727/2019.
18. Taking into account the aforesaid facts and the fact that the petitioner and
respondent No. 2 are in love affair since 2013 and they are married, this Court is
inclined to quash FIR as no useful purpose would be served in prosecuting petitioner
any further.
19. For the reasons afore-recorded, FIR No. 384/2020 dated 31.07.2020, for the
offence punishable under Sections 376/506 IPC, registered at PS-Dwarka North,
Delhi and consequent proceedings emanating therefrom are quashed."
(emphasis added)
12. The instant FIR is being quashed only keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case
and this order cannot be taken as a precedent on the power of High Court to exercise its jurisdiction
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash an offence of rape on the ground that the victim and the accused
have entered into a compromise."
13. A Single Bench of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Thedlapu Manikanta v State of A. P,
2023 SCC Online AP 102 quashed a case involving offence of rape on the ground that the parties
were now married. While doing so, the Court observed as under:
"The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Uday v. State of Karnataka (2003) 4 SCC 46, Pramod
Suryabhan Pawar v. State of Maharashtra (2019) 9 SCC 608, Sonu v. State of Uttar
Pradesh 2021 SCC OnLine SC 181, Hitesh Verma v. State of Uttarakhand (2020) 10
SCC 710, Kapil Gupta v. State of NCT Delhi, in Criminal Appeal No. 1217 of 2022 @
SLP (CRL.) No. 5806 of 2022 had held that even serious offences such as offences
under Section 376 of I.P.C can be quashed on the basis of the compromise between
the parties where the parties are bound by marriage or are close family members. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court had taken a view that continuation of such cases between
family members and between a wife and husband would not ensure to anybody's
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 6
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
benefit and would only result in further straining of ties within the family."
14. Again Delhi High Court in Brijesh Singh v State(NCT of Delhi), 2022 SCC Online Delhi 4551,
while allowing quashing of an FIR for offence 376 IPC observed as under:
"7. The parties have been blessed with two children who are 07 years and 05 years
respectively. The prosecutrix has not stated anything against the present
accused/petitioner either before the police or before the Magistrate. Though,
ordinarily such FIRs should not be quashed, however, It was observed by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 303, that it is
encouraged to quash the FIR in circumstances wherein a compromise has been
achieved....
.
.
.
10. In the exceptional circumstances as such where the parties are living together
since long and have now been blessed with two children who are minor and whose
future depends on the outcome of the present FIR, this Court deems it appropriate to
quash the present proceedings."
15. In Kapil Gupta vs State of NCT of Delhi and another, (Criminal Appeal No. 1217 of 2022 decided
on 10.08.2022), the Supreme Court while considering an appeal against an order of High Court of
Delhi rejecting a quashing petition for proceedings under Section 376 IPC held as follows:
12. No doubt that the learned ASG is right in relying on various judgments of this
Court which reiterate the legal position that in heinous and serious offences like
murder or rape, the Court should not quash the proceedings. It will be relevant to
refer to paragraph 29.5 to 29.7 of the judgment of this Court in the case of Narender
Singh versus State of Punjab, which read thus:
"29.5 While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the
possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would
put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
caused to him by not quashing the criminal cases.
29.6 Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and serious
offences and therefore are to be generally treated as crime against the society and not
against the individual alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision
merely because there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 7
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution
has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving the charge
under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by
the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate
parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries
suffered by the victim can generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima
facie analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility
of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it
can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas in
the latter case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
compounding the offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this
stage, the Court can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement between the
parties is going to result in harmony between them which may improve their future
relationship.
29.7 While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or
not, timings of settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is
arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the matter is still
under investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason that at this
stage the investigation is still on and even the charge-sheet has not been filed.
Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising
its powers favourably, but after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material
mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost
complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of
argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under
Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a position to
decide the case finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence
under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the
conviction is already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties would not be a
ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has already been
convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question
of sparing a convict found guilty of such a crime."
13. It can thus be seen that this Court has clearly held that though the Court should be slow in
quashing the proceedings wherein heinous and serious offences are involved, the High Court is not
foreclosed from examining as to whether there exists material for incorporation of such an offence
or as to whether there is sufficient evidence which if proved would lead to proving the charge for the
offence charged with. The Court has also to take into consideration as to whether the settlement
between the parties is going to result into harmony between them which may improve their mutual
relationship.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 8
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
14. The Court has further held that it is also relevant to consider as to what is stage of the
proceedings. It has been observed that if an application is made at a belated stage wherein the
evidence has been led and the matter is at the stage of arguments or judgment, the Court should be
slow to exercise the power to quash the proceedings. However, if such an application is made at an
initial stage before commencement of trial, the said factor will weigh with the court in exercising its
power.
15.....
16. In both the cases, though the charge sheets have been filed, the charges are yet to be framed and
as such, the trial has not yet commenced. It is further to be noted that since the respondent No.2
herself is not supporting the prosecution case, even if the criminal trial is permitted to go ahead, it
will end in nothing else than an acquittal. If the request of the parties is denied, it will be amounting
to only adding one more criminal case to the already overburdened criminal courts.
17. In that view of the matter, we find that though in a heinous or serious crime like rape, the Court
should not normally exercise the powers of quashing the proceedings, in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the present case and in order to give succour to Respondent No. 2 so that she is
saved from further agony of facing two criminal trials, one as a victim and one as an accused, we
find that this is a fit case wherein the extraordinary powers of this Court be exercised to quash the
criminal proceedings."
16. A contrary view has been taken by the Delhi High Court in the case of Swantantra Kumar
Jaysawal vs State, 2022 SCC Online Del 30 in which the Court after relying upon the settled position
enumerated in the case, titled Gian Singh (supra) held that the settlement between the complainant
and the accused and their subsequent marriage does not waive off the offence of rape.
17. From the foregoing analysis of law on the subject, it is clear that in heinous and serious offences
like murder, rape or attempt to murder, the High Court should not normally exercise its power of
quashing the proceedings, more particularly when the compromise between the parties has taken
place after the conviction of the accused. Proceedings should not be quashed even in a case where it
appears to the court that the accused has entered into wedlock with the prosecutrix just to avoid his
prosecution and conviction. However, situation may be different where because of the opposition of
the family members of the boy or the girl to their relationship, becomes a cause of registration of an
FIR and initiation of criminal proceedings. Factors like solemnization of marriage between the
parties without there being any compromise between them and consequent giving birth to a
children as a result of wedlock would also weigh in favour of permitting quashing of criminal
proceedings in such cases. This is especially true where it appears that the FIR has been filed either
in the context of promise to marry or under pressure from the family where the family disapproves
the relationship between the parties. The Court has also to consider the material collected by the
Investigating Agency as also the allegations made in the FIR, to prima facie come to a conclusion as
to whether it is a case of kidnapping and rape or it is a case of elopement and consensual sex
between the parties.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 9
Vinod Singh Saini And Others vs U. T. Of J&K And Another on 20 February, 2023
18. That takes us to the facts that have emerged from the record in the instant case. It appears that
the prosecutrix never wanted to marry respondent No. 2 and she was in deep love with petitioner
No. 1. Even in her statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C, she has stated that she boarded the
aeroplane at Jammu Airport and reached Mumbai to meet petitioner No. 1 though she has also
stated that she was kidnapped by other accused while she was in Arnia Bazaar along with her
husband. The fact that proseuctrix travelled all the way from Jammu to Mumbai and stayed with
petitioner No. 1 without there being a whisper in her statement that she had resisted or tried to
escape during her long journey to Mumbai, prima facie goes on to show that she had left the
company of her husband out of her own will and volition. Not only that, after coming back to
Jammu, she met mother of petitioner No. 1, which is clear from her statement and she did not go to
her husband. All these factors go on to show that it was not a case of kidnapping and rape but a case
of elopement and consensual sex between petitioner No. 1 and the prosecutrix.
19. Apart from the above, during the pendency of the prosecution, petitioner No. 1 (main accused)
and the prosecutrix have entered into a wedlock, out of which, a baby girl is born. They are staying
together as husband and wife and this has prompted them to enter into a compromise so that
petitioner No. 1 is saved from the agony of criminal prosecution as they intend to live a happy
married life in company of each other.
20. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case as indicated hereinabove, in case the
prosecution against petitioner No. 1 and other accused is allowed to continue, in-spite of the
compromise having been arrived at between the accused and the prosecutrix, it will amount to grave
injustice not only to the accused but also to the baby girl and the prosecutrix. The continuance of
criminal proceedings against petitioner No. 1 is going to adversely affect the marital life of the
prosecutrix and deprive the innocent baby girl of her paternal love. Even otherwise there are remote
chances of earning a conviction of the accused out of the impugned prosecution because the
prosecutrix in all probability would resile from the prosecution case in order to save her husband i.e
petitioner No. 1. The continuance of criminal proceedings in these circumstances would be a futile
exercise.
21. For the foregoing reasons, this is fit case where this Court should exercise its jurisdiction under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to bring to an end the criminal prosecution initiated against petitioners No. 1
to 3, so as to secure the ends of justice.
22. Accordingly, the petition is allowed and the challan emanating from FIR bearing No. 29/2018
for offences under Sections 366, 376, 342, 506 and 34 RPC registered with Police Station, Arnia,
Jammu as well as proceedings initiated thereon pending before the Fast Track Court, Jammu are
quashed.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 20.02.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199691309/ 10
