Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1
May, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
In The High Court Of Judicature At Allahabad
Sitting At Lucknow
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:25538
A.F.R.
Court No. - 15
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 5057 of 2024
Applicant :- Vishnu Prabhakar
Opposite Party :- Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of Enforcement Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Purnendu Chakravarty,Alok Kumar Singh,Ankit Kumar Pandey,Ashutosh Verma,Aviral Raj Singh,Dhruv Kumar Singh,Palash Banerjee,Ritwick Rai,Vaibhav Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Kuldeep Srivastava
Hon'ble Subhash Vidyarthi J.
1. Heard Sri Purnendu Chakravarti, Sri Ritvik Rai and Sri Aviral Raj Singh, the learned counsel for
the applicant and Sri Kuldeep Srivastava, the learned counsel for the respondent - Directorate of
Enforcement (which will hereinafter be referred to as 'the E.D.').
2. By means of the instant application filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the applicant has prayed for
quashing of a complaint dated 16.09.2017 filed by the Directorate of Enforcement against the
applicant, the cognizance and summoning order dated 02.04.2018 and the entire proceedings of
Sessions Case No. 123 of 2023, under Section 3 & 4 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
2002 in the Court of Special Judge (C.B.I.), Court No. III, Lucknow, qua the applicant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 1
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
3. Briefly stated, facts of the case are that initially on 27.12.2008, the Chief Regional Manager,
Indian Overseas Bank, Zonal Office, Lucknow sent a complaint to the Superintendent of Police,
C.B.I., Bank Securities and Frauds Cell, New Delhi complaining about certain fraudulent
transactions and stating that : -
"It would thus be clear from the above that the functioning of the Branch during the
tenure of Shri. A.K. Dutta was anything but proper. The investigation report also
gives clear indications that Shri. Vijay Kumar Jaiswal was inclined to use all his
means, fair and mostly unfair, to have his ways and that Shri. A.K. Dutta was willing
to co-operate with him even at the cost of exposing the Bank to huge risks and losses.
Some of the contents of the investigation report detailed below point to undesirable
and criminal acts on the part of the duo.
• Handing over signed Bankers Cheques to M/s. Shiva Distributors / M/s. Vinayak
Distributors without debiting their a/c, or without accounting for the BCs in the
books of the Bank.
• Erasure of the counter-signature of Shri. A.K. Dutta on the Bankers Cheque for Rs.
40 lakhs issued favouring 'Reliance Communications Infrastructure Ltd.', before
presentation of the cheque to the clearing house and returned by the Branch on
05.10.2006.
• Sanction of a CC limit of Rs. 40 lakhs to M/s. Vinayak Distributors after erasing the
subjects' request for limit of Rs. 25 lakhs only.
• The above acts of Shri. Vijay Jaiswal and Shri A.K. Dutta clearly smack of
criminality and it is evident that Shri. A. K. Dutta had abused his powers to confer
undue pecuniary gains on Shri. Vijay Kumar Jaiswal and other unknown persons.
Their activities have not only caused wrongful loss of a mammoth size to our Bank,
but also pose direct threats to the lives and limbs of the staff members of the
Branch/Bank. The Involvement of some other outsiders also cannot be ruled out. The
fraudulent transactions put through by Shri. Dutta has been assessed at Rs. 852.61
lakhs, as per details provided In the Annexure enclosed. This amount does not
Include the likely loss of Interest/ commission/exchange incomes to the Bank on a/c.
undue excesses/ credits provided in certain a/cs and the excess amount of charges
claimed on a/c, of cash remittances, as detailed in the foot note of the Annexure.
These accounts have become NPA on 01.04.2008 & suits have been filed in DRT
Lucknow on 28.05.2007 except M/s. Kritarth Communications.
We therefore request you to register a regular case against Shri. Vijay Kumar Jaiswal,
(Proprietor: M/s. Shiva Distributors), Shri. A.K. Dutta, then Senior Manager,
Varanasi Cantonment Branch (presently under suspension) and other unknown,
persons who are involved in conspiring against the Bank to perpetrate the fraud,
cause a thorough and in-depth investigation, bring the culprits to book and initiate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 2
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
further action according to law."
4. On 06.02.2009, the Superintendent of Police, C.B.I., Bank Securities and Frauds Cell, New Delhi
endorsed on the complaint that the facts stated in it prima facie disclose commission of offences
punishable under Sections 120-B read with 420, 468, 471 I.P.C. and Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and substantive offences thereunder on the part of (1) Sri
A. K. Dutta, the then Senior Manager, Indian Overseas Bank, Varanasi and (2) Sri Vijay Kumar
Jaiswal, Proprietor of M/s Shiva Distributors, Varanasi and (3) other unknown persons.
5. On 06.02.2009 itself, F.I.R. No. RCBD1/2009/E/0003 was lodged at Police Station C.B.I/Bank
Securities and Fraud Cell, New Delhi under Sections 120-B, 420, 468 and 471 I.P.C. and Section
13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and substantive offences
thereunder against - (1) Sri A. K. Dutta, the then Senior Manager, Indian Overseas Bank, Varanasi
and (2) Sri Vijay Kumar Jaiswal, Proprietor of M/s Shiva Distributors, Varanasi and (3) other
unknown persons, on the basis of the aforesaid complaint dated 27.12.2008
6. After investigation, a charge-sheet was submitted on 10.06.2010 for the offences under Section
120-B read with Section 420, 477-A, 201 IPC and Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(c) and (d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act and substantive Offences thereof against six persons - (1) Ashok
Kumar Dutta, the then Senior Manager, Indian Overseas Bank, Cantt., Varanasi, (2) Vijay Kumar
Jaiswal, (3) Vishnu Prabhakar, the then Assistant Manager, Indian Overseas Bank, Cantt., Varanasi
(the applicant), (4) Vivek Ballabh Chaturvedi, the then Senior Manager, Indian Overseas Bank,
Cantt., Varanasi (5) Jay Shree Jaiswal, wife of Vijay Kumar Jaiswal and (6) Rishi Mohan. The
charge-sheet states that undue facilities were granted by A. K. Dutta to Vijay Kumar Jaiswal and the
accesses were not reported in the monthly returns by A. K. Duta, Vishnu Prabhakar and Vivek
Ballabh Chaturvedi, as per the guidelines of the bank. The firm was enjoying O.C.C. limit of 40 lakh
and accesses that were allowed in the account of the firm were more than Rupees 1 Crore. The
account became highly irregular after September 17, 2005. The C.C. limit of the firm was enhanced
of Rs.90 lakhs and thereafter the accused persons further allowed accesses in the account of the firm
and banker's cheques were issued to M/s Shiva Distributors without receipt of any consideration.
The trial instituted on the basis of the aforesaid charge-sheet is still pending.
7. On 19.05.2010, the Directorate of Enforcement registered ECIR/1/VCI/ 2010 against (1) Sri A. K.
Dutta and (2) Sri Vijay Kumar Jaiswal only. After investigation, on 16.09.2017 the Directorate of
Enforcement filed Complaint No. 1 of 2018 in the Court of Special Judge, PMLA, Allahabad against
six persons - (1) Vijay Kumar Jaiswal, (2) Ashok Kumar Dutta, (3) Vishnu Prabhakar, (4) Vivek
Ballabh Chaturvedi, (5) Rishi Mohan and (6) Jay Shree Jaiswal. On 02.04.2018, the Court passed an
order summoning the accused persons to face the trial. Presently the trial is pending in the Court of
Special Judge C.B.I. Court No. 3 / Special Judge PMLA, Lucknow
8. The applicant has been granted anticipatory bail by means of an order dated 24.07.2023 passed
by this Court in Anticipatory Bail Application No. 954 of 2023. The learned Counsel for the parties
have informed the Court that the trial Court has framed Charges on the last date during pendency of
this application.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 3
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
9. The applicant has sought quashing of the proceedings under the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act (which will hereinafter be referred to as 'PMLA') on the ground that the only allegation leveled
against the applicant in the complaint filed by the Directorate of Enforcement is that the applicant
has violated the provisions of Section 3 of PMLA by knowingly assisting the other accused persons
in generation of proceeds of crime. The learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the
applicant is already facing prosecution for the scheduled offences instituted on the allegation that he
has participated in commission of offence through which the proceeds of crime have been generated
by the co-accused Vijay Kumar Jaiswal. He has submitted that providing assistance in generation of
proceeds of crime does not make out the offence of money laundering under PMLA. He has placed
reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhari
Vs. Union of India and Others: (2023) 12 SCC 1 = 2022 SCC OnLine SC 929.
10. Per contra, Sri Kuldeep Srivastava, the learned counsel for the ED has submitted that acquisition
of proceeds of crime and providing assistance in acquisition of proceeds of crime are included in the
definition of money laundering contained in Section 3 of the PMLA. He has placed reliance upon the
following passage from the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Y. Balaji Vs.
Kartik Desari and Another: 2023 SCC OnLine SC 645: -
"100. ...The argument that the mere generation of proceeds of crime is not sufficient
to constitute the offence of money-laundering, is actually preposterous. As we could
see from Section 3, there are six processes or activities identified therein. They are, (i)
concealment; (ii) possession; (iii) acquisition; (iv) use; (v) projecting as untainted
property; and (vi) claiming as untainted property. If a person takes a bribe, he
acquires proceeds of crime. So, the activity of "acquisition" takes place. Even if he
does not retain it but "uses" it, he will be guilty of the offence of money-laundering,
since "use" is one of the six activities mentioned in Section 3."
11. In reply to the aforesaid submission, the learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that
generation of proceeds of crime and acquisition of proceeds of crime are different and distinct
things. The applicant is alleged to have assisted in generation of proceeds of crime and not in
acquisition of proceeds of crime.
12. The offence of money laundering is defined in Section 3 of the PMLA, which is as follows: -
"3. Offence of money-laundering.--Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to
indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any
process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime including its concealment,
possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming it as untainted property
shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering.
Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that,--
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering if such person is found to
have directly or indirectly attempted to indulge or knowingly assisted or knowingly is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 4
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
a party or is actually involved in one or more of the following processes or activities
connected with proceeds of crime, namely--
(a) concealment; or
(b) possession; or
(c) acquisition; or
(d) use; or
(e) projecting as untainted property; or
(f) claiming as untainted property, in any manner whatsoever;
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a continuing activity
and continues till such time a person is directly or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of
crime by its concealment or possession or acquisition or use or projecting it as
untainted property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner whatsoever."
13. Section 3 of the PMLA has been interpreted by a Bench consisting of three Hon'ble Judges of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhari (Supra) in the following manner: -
"124. This section was first amended vide Act 2 of 2013. The expression "proceeds of
crime and projecting" was substituted by the expression "proceeds of crime including
its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming". We are
not so much concerned with this change introduced vide Act 2 of 2013. In other
words, the provision as it stood prior to amendment vide Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019
remained as it is. Upon breaking-up of this provision, it would clearly indicate that--it
is an offence of money laundering, in the event of direct or indirect attempt to
indulge or knowingly assist or being knowingly party or being actually involved in
"any process or activity" connected with the proceeds of crime. The latter part of the
provision is only an elaboration of the different process or activity connected with the
proceeds of crime, such as its concealment, possession, acquisition, use, or projecting
it as untainted property or claiming it to be as untainted property. This position
stands clarified by way of Explanation inserted in 2019.
* * *
128. To put it differently, the section as it stood prior to 2019 had itself incorporated
the expression "including", which is indicative of reference made to the different
process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime. Thus, the principal
provision (as also the Explanation) predicates that if a person is found to be directly
or indirectly involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 5
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
must be held guilty of offence of money laundering. If the interpretation set forth by
the petitioners was to be accepted, it would follow that it is only upon projecting or
claiming the property in question as untainted property, the offence would be
complete. This would undermine the efficacy of the legislative intent behind Section 3
PMLA and also will be in disregard of the view expressed by FATF in connection with
the occurrence of the word "and" preceding the expression "projecting or claiming"
therein.
* * *
132. The Explanation as inserted in 2019, therefore, does not entail in expanding the
purport of Section 3 as it stood prior to 2019, but is only clarificatory in nature.
Inasmuch as Section 3 is widely worded with a view to not only investigate the
offence of money laundering but also to prevent and regulate that offence. This
provision plainly indicates that any (every) process or activity connected with the
proceeds of crime results in offence of money laundering. Projecting or claiming the
proceeds of crime as untainted property, in itself, is an attempt to indulge in or being
involved in money laundering, just as knowingly concealing, possessing, acquiring or
using of proceeds of crime, directly or indirectly. This is reinforced by the statement
presented along with the Finance Bill, 2019 before Parliament on 18-7-2019 as noted
above [See paras 119 to 121 of this judgment.] .
133. Independent of the above, we have no hesitation in construing the expression
"and" in Section 3 as "or", to give full play to the said provision so as to include
"every" process or activity indulged into by anyone, including projecting or claiming
the property as untainted property to constitute an offence of money laundering on
its own. The act of projecting or claiming proceeds of crime to be untainted property
presupposes that the person is in possession of or is using the same (proceeds of
crime), also an independent activity constituting offence of money laundering. In
other words, it is not open to read the different activities conjunctively because of the
word "and". If that interpretation is accepted, the effectiveness of Section 3 of the
2002 Act can be easily frustrated by the simple device of one person possessing
proceeds of crime and his accomplice would indulge in projecting or claiming it to be
untainted property so that neither is covered under Section 3 of the 2002 Act.
134. From the bare language of Section 3 of the 2002 Act, it is amply clear that the
offence of money laundering is an independent offence regarding the process or
activity connected with the proceeds of crime which had been derived or obtained as
a result of criminal activity relating to or in relation to a scheduled offence. The
process or activity can be in any form -- be it one of concealment, possession,
acquisition, use of proceeds of crime as much as projecting it as untainted property or
claiming it to be so. Thus, involvement in any one of such process or activity
connected with the proceeds of crime would constitute offence of money laundering.
This offence otherwise has nothing to do with the criminal activity relating to a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 6
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
scheduled offence -- except the proceeds of crime derived or obtained as a result of
that crime.
135. Needless to mention that such process or activity can be indulged in only after
the property is derived or obtained as a result of criminal activity (a scheduled
offence). It would be an offence of money laundering to indulge in or to assist or
being party to the process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime; and such
process or activity in a given fact situation may be a continuing offence, irrespective
of the date and time of commission of the scheduled offence. In other words, the
criminal activity may have been committed before the same had been notified as
scheduled offence for the purpose of the 2002 Act, but if a person has indulged in or
continues to indulge directly or indirectly in dealing with proceeds of crime, derived
or obtained from such criminal activity even after it has been notified as scheduled
offence, may be liable to be prosecuted for offence of money laundering under the
2002 Act -- for continuing to possess or conceal the proceeds of crime (fully or in
part) or retaining possession thereof or uses it in trenches until fully exhausted. The
offence of money laundering is not dependent on or linked to the date on which the
scheduled offence, or if we may say so, the predicate offence has been committed.
The relevant date is the date on which the person indulges in the process or activity
connected with such proceeds of crime. These ingredients are intrinsic in the original
provision (Section 3, as amended until 2013 and were in force till 31-7-2019); and the
same has been merely explained and clarified by way of Explanation vide Finance
(No. 2) Act, 2019. Thus understood, inclusion of clause (ii) in the Explanation
inserted in 2019 is of no consequence as it does not alter or enlarge the scope of
Section 3 at all.
136. As mentioned earlier, the rudimentary understanding of "money laundering" is
that there are three generally accepted stages to money laundering, they are:
136.1. Placement : which is to move the funds from direct association of the crime.
136.2. Layering : which is disguising the trail to foil pursuit.
136.3. Integration : which is making the money available to the criminal from what
seem to be legitimate sources.
* * *
147. We may also note that argument that removing the necessity of projection from the definition
will render the predicate offence and money laundering indistinguishable. This, in our view, is ill
founded and fallacious. This plea cannot hold water for the simple reason that the scheduled
offences in the 2002 Act as it stands (amended up to date) are independent criminal acts. It is only
when money is generated as a result of such acts that the 2002 Act steps in as soon as proceeds of
crime are involved in any process or activity. Dealing with such proceeds of crime can be in any form
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 7
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
-- being process or activity. Thus, even assisting in the process or activity is a part of the crime of
money laundering. We must keep in mind that for being liable to suffer legal consequences of one's
action of indulging in the process or activity, is sufficient and not only upon projection of the
ill-gotten money as untainted money. Many members of a crime syndicate could then simply keep
the money with them for years to come, the hands of the law in such a situation cannot be bound
and stopped from proceeding against such person, if information of such illegitimate monies is
revealed even from an unknown source.
148. The next question is : Whether the offence under Section 3 is a stand-alone offence? Indeed, it
is dependent on the wrongful and illegal gain of property as a result of criminal activity relating to a
scheduled offence. Nevertheless, it is concerning the process or activity connected with such
property, which constitutes offence of money laundering. The property must qualify the definition of
"proceeds of crime" under Section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 Act.
* * *
153. In other words, the authority under the 2002 Act is to prosecute a person for offence of money
laundering only if it has reason to believe, which is required to be recorded in writing that the
person is in possession of "proceeds of crime". Only if that belief is further supported by tangible
and credible evidence indicative of involvement of the person concerned in any process or activity
connected with the proceeds of crime, action under the Act can be taken forward for attachment and
confiscation of proceeds of crime and until vesting thereof in the Central Government, such process
initiated would be a stand-alone process."
(Emphasis added)
14. Y. Balaji Vs. Kartik Desari and Another: 2023 SCC OnLine SC 645 is a judgment rendered by a
Bench consisting of two Hon'ble Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. One of the two questions
involved in the case before the Two-Judge Bench was:-
"Question 1: Whether without identifying the proceeds of crime or a property
representing the proceeds of crime and without identifying any process or activity
connected to proceeds of crime as required by Section 3, which constitute the
foundational/jurisdictional fact, ED can initiate an investigation and issue
summons?"
15. The relevant facts of that case relevant for answering the above mentioned question are that
three FIRs were lodged alleging that the accused had committed offences included in the Schedule
by taking illegal gratification for providing appointment to several persons in the Public Transport
Corporation. In one case it was alleged that a sum of more than Rs. 2 Crores had been collected and
in another case a sum of Rs. 95 lakhs had been collected. In this factual background, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 8
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
"100. ...It is this bribe money that constitutes the 'proceeds of crime' within the
meaning of Section 2(1)(u). It is no rocket science to know that a public servant
receiving illegal gratification is in possession of proceeds of crime. The argument that
the mere generation of proceeds of crime is not sufficient to constitute the offence of
money-laundering, is actually preposterous. As we could see from Section 3, there are
six processes or activities identified therein. They are, (i) concealment; (ii)
possession; (iii) acquisition; (iv) use; (v) projecting as untainted property; and (vi)
claiming as untainted property. If a person takes a bribe, he acquires proceeds of
crime. So, the activity of "acquisition" takes place. Even if he does not retain it but
"uses" it, he will be guilty of the offence of money-laundering, since "use" is one of the
six activities mentioned in Section 3.
101. The FIRs for the predicate offences identify all the three components of Section
3, namely, (i) persons; (ii) process; and (iii) product. Persons accused in the FIRs are
those who have indulged in the process or activity. The illegal gratification that they
have taken, represents the proceeds of crime. The (i) acquisition of such illegal
gratification in the first instance; (ii) the possession of the tainted money before
putting it to use; and (iii) today projecting it as untainted money, is the process or
activity in which the accused have indulged. The corruption money represents the
proceeds of crime."
16. In the aforesaid factual background, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held in Y. Balaji (Supra): -
"97. If the main part of Section 3 is dissected with forensic precision, it will be clear
that Section 3 addresses itself to three things (we may call them 3 'P's) namely, (i)
person; (ii) process or activity; and (iii) product. Insofar as persons covered by
Section 3 are concerned, they are, (i) those who directly or indirectly attempt to
indulge; or (ii) those who knowingly assists; or (iii) those who are knowingly a party;
or (iv) those who are actually involved. Insofar as process is concerned, the Section
identifies six different activities, namely (i) concealment; (ii) possession; (iii)
acquisition; (iv) use; (v) projecting; or (vi) claiming as untainted property, any one of
which is sufficient to constitute the offence. Insofar as product is concerned, Section
3 identifies "proceeds of crime" or the property representing the proceeds of crime as
the product of the process or activity.
98. Out of the three things that Section 3 addresses, namely (i) person; (ii) process;
and (iii) product, the first two do not require any interpretation or definition. The
third aspect namely "product", which Section 3 refers to as "proceeds of crime"
requires a definition and hence it is defined in Section 2(1)(u) as follows:-
"2. Definitions. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
XXX XXX XXX (u) "proceeds of crime" means any property derived obtained,
directly or indirectly, by any person as a result of criminal activity relating to a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 9
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
scheduled offence or the value of any such property or where such property is taken
or held outside the country, then the property equivalent in value held within the
country or abroad; JO Explanation. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that "proceeds of crime" including property not only derived or obtained from the
scheduled offence but also any property which may directly or indirectly be derived
or obtained as a result of any criminal activity relatable to the scheduled offence;"
* * *
100. All the three FIRs allege that the accused herein had committed offences included in the
Schedule by taking illegal gratification for providing appointment to several persons in the Public
Transport Corporation. In one case it is alleged that a sum of more than Rs. 2 crores had been
collected and in another case a sum of Rs. 95 lakhs had been collected. It is this bribe money that
constitutes the 'proceeds of crime' within the meaning of Section 2(1)(u). It is no rocket science to
know that a public servant receiving illegal gratification is in possession of proceeds of crime. The
argument that the mere generation of proceeds of crime is not sufficient to constitute the offence of
money-laundering, is actually preposterous. As we could see from Section 3, there are six processes
or activities identified therein. They are, (i) concealment; (ii) possession; (iii) acquisition
(iv) use; (v) projecting as untainted property; and (vi) claiming as untainted property. If a person
takes a bribe, he acquires proceeds of crime. So, the activity of "acquisition" takes place. Even if he
does not retain it but "uses" it, he will be guilty of the offence of money-laundering, since "use" is
one of the six activities mentioned in Section 3.
101. The FIRs for the predicate offences identify all the three components of Section 3,
namely, (i) persons; (ii) process; and (iii) product. Persons accused in the FIRs are those who have
indulged in the process or activity. The illegal gratification that they have taken, represents the
proceeds of crime. The (i) acquisition of such illegal gratification in the first instance; (ii) the
possession of the tainted money before putting it to use; and (iii) today projecting it as untainted
money, is the process or activity in which the accused have indulged. The corruption money
represents the proceeds of crime.
102. Therefore, all the arguments as though there are no foundational facts or jurisdictional facts,
are simply aimed at hoodwinking the Court."
(Emphasis added in original)
17. It appears that although the judgment rendered by a Bench consisting of three Hon'ble Judges in
the case of Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhari (Supra) was placed before the two Judge Bench which
decided Y. Balaji (Supra), the scope of definition of money laundering given by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhari (Supra) has not been dealt with in the judgment passed in the
case of Y. Balaji. In Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhari (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court has considered
various provisions of PMLA and has interpreted the same and has laid certain principles of law
based on the interpretation of the provision of PMLA. Y. Balaji (supra) has been decided on the basis
of peculiar facts and circumstances of that case noted above.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 10
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
18. It is settled law that a precedent is to be read keeping in view the background in which the case
was decided. In Y. Balaji the accusation against the accused persons was of having taken the bribe
and thus generated proceeds of crime by this. The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that taking bribe
amounts to acquisition of proceeds of crime.
19. In the present case, there is no allegation against the applicant that he had generated or acquired
any proceeds of crime. The only allegation against the applicant is that he has assisted in generation
of crime and thereby violated the provision of Section 3 of Prevention of Money Laundering Act. The
allegation against the applicant in the case relating to the scheduled offence is that in the monthly
returns he did not report accesses made by A. K. Dutta in granting undue facilities to Vijay Kumar
Jaiswal and thus he did not follow the guidelines of the bank.
20. In Parasa Raja Manikyala Rao v. State of A.P.: (2003) 12 SCC 306, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
held that: -
"9. Each case, more particularly a criminal case, depends on its own facts and a close
similarity between one case and another is not enough to warrant like treatment
because a significant detail may alter the entire aspect. In deciding such cases, one
should avoid the temptation to decide cases (as said by Cordozo) by matching the
colour of one case against the colour of another. To decide, therefore, on which side
of the line a case falls, the broad resemblance to another case is not at all decisive."
21. As per the law laid down in Vijay Madan Lal Chaudhary (Supra), the process or activity of money
laundering can be indulged in only after the property is derived or obtained as a result of a
scheduled offence. The fundamental stages of "money laundering" are - (1) Placement: which is to
move the funds from direct association of the crime, (2) Layering: which is disguising the trail to foil
pursuit and (3) Integration: which is making the money available to the criminal from what seems to
be legitimate sources. There is no allegation in the complained filed by ED that the applicant was
involved in any of the aforesaid activities. It is only when money is generated as a result of such acts
that PMLA steps in as soon as proceeds of crime are involved in any process or activity but in the
present case, the applicant is not alleged to have been involved in any process or activity after
generation of the proceeds of crime.
22. A person can be prosecuted under PMLA only if the ED has reason to believe that the person is
in possession of proceeds of crime, which belief is supported by tangible and credible evidence
indicative of involvement of the person concerned in any process or activity connected with the
proceeds of crime. In the present case, there is no allegation that the applicant has at any point of
time been in possession of any proceeds of crime.
23. The applicant is already facing trial for the scheduled offence since the year 2010 and the
learned counsel for the parties have informed that in that case also merely charges have been framed
till date and no prosecution witness has been examined. The case lodged by the Directorate of
Enforcement was initiated by lodging the ECIR in the year 2010, the complaint was filed in the year
2017, charges have been framed in the year 2025 and further proceedings are yet to take place. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 11
Vishnu Prabhakar vs Union Of India Thru. Directorate Of ... on 1 May, 2025
appears that neither the case relating to the scheduled offence instituted by the CBI nor the case
relating to PMLA instituted by the ED could make any substantial progress during the past 1½
decade.
24. In view of the foregoing discussion, I am of the considered view that the facts of the present case
where the only allegation against the applicant is of providing assistance in generation of the
proceeds of crime and he is not alleged to have been involved in any process or activity after
generation of the proceeds of crime or to have at any point of time been in possession of any
proceeds of crime, do not even prima facie make out the offence of money laundering defined under
Section 3 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act. In these circumstances, continuance of the
proceedings under PMLA against the application would only amount to his persecution.
25. Accordingly, the application filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed. The complaint dated
16.09.2017 filed by the Directorate of Enforcement against the applicant, the cognizance and
summoning order dated 02.04.2018 and the entire proceedings of Sessions Case No. 123 of 2023,
under Section 3 & 4 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 in the Court of Special Judge
(C.B.I.), Court No. III, Lucknow, against the applicant only, are quashed.
(Subhash Vidyarthi, J.) Order Date: 01.05.2025 (Manoj K.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9088688/ 12
