Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on
5 May, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 MADHYA PRADESH 103, (2017) 6 ARBILR 49,
(2017) 2 MPLJ 681, (2017) 3 KER LT 52, (2018) 3 ESC 1675
Author: Sujoy Paul
Bench: S.K. Seth, Sujoy Paul, J.P. Gupta
(1)
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH, PRINCIPAL SEAT AT
JABALPUR.
FULL BENCH
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.K. SETH
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJOY PAUL
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE J.P. GUPTA
A.A. No.14/2017.
Viva Highways Ltd.
Vs.
Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation Ltd.
(Shri Jai Savla, Advocate with Shri Akshay Sapre,
Adv. for appellant.
Shri P.K. Kaurav, Additional Advocate General with
Shri Amit Seth, Government Advocate.)
A.C. No.27/2013
M/s ESSEL Infra Projects Ltd.
Vs.
State of M.P.
(Shri Naman Nagrath, Senior Advocate with
Shri Jubin Prasad, Advocate for the applicant
Shri P.K. Kaurav, Additional Advocate General with
Shri Amit Seth, Government Advocate.)
A.C. No.79/2016
M/s Tapi Prestressed Products Ltd.
Vs.
Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation Ltd.
(Shri Shekhar Sharma for the applicant.
Shri P.K. Kaurav, Additional Advocate General with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 1
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
Shri Amit Seth, Government Advocate.)
JUDGMENT
(05.05.2017) Sujoy Paul, J:
The order of reference dated 31.1.2017 which has occasioned the constitution of this
Full Bench has been passed by a Division Bench in AC No.27/2013 (M/s ESSEL Infra
Projects Ltd. vs. State of M.P.).
2. The relevant facts giving rise to the reference are that the aforesaid arbitration case filed under
Section 11(6) of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short 'Act of 1996') was listed before the
learned Single Judge wherein it is prayed that an appropriate Arbitrator may be appointed as per
the relevant dispute resolution clause in the agreement. During the course of hearing of the said
matter before the learned Single Judge, the respondents have raised an objection as to
maintainability of the application under Section 11(6) of the Act of 1996 on the ground that the
provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983 (Adhiniyam of 1983)
are applicable for the dispute between the parties and; therefore, matter has to be referred to the
Tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam of 1983.
3. During the course of hearing before the learned Single Judge, the parties cited single bench
decision of this court rendered in the case of Jabalpur Corridor (India) Pvt. Ltd. vs. M.P. Road
Development Corporation, 2014 (2) MPLJ 276 and judgment of another Single Bench in the case of
Mrs. Kamini Malhotra vs. State of M.P., AIR 2003 MP 13. The learned single judge opined that there
is a conflict between the aforesaid two decisions and therefore ordered that the matter be placed
before Hon'ble the Chief Justice for constituting a larger bench.
4. In view of aforesaid order of learned Single Judge, the matter was placed before the Division
Bench. Before the Division Bench, it was fairly admitted by the parties that earlier decision in the
case of Mrs. Kamini Malhotra(Supra) was not brought to the notice of the subsequent bench which
decided the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). Before the Division Bench, two Division Bench
decisions were placed i.e. in the case of Ashok Infraways Ltd. And another vs. State of M.P. and
another, 2016 (2) MPLJ 685 and State of M.P. and another vs. M/s K.T. Construction (India) Ltd.
and another (A.A. No.5/2009 decided on 27.4.2016). It was argued before the Division Bench that in
aforesaid two Division Bench decisions, the judgment in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) has
been affirmed and confirmed. Since the Single Bench judgment of Jabalpur Corridor was applied
and affirmed in aforesaid two Division Bench judgments, the question of any conflict between
Jabalpur Corridor and Mrs. Kamini Malhotra does not arise.
5. The Division Bench during the course of hearing noticed that between the same parties who were
involved in Division Bench decision rendered in the case of Ashok Infraways Ltd.(Supra) previously
WP No.1122/2015 was filed wherein challenge was made to the order of District Judge, Dewas
passed while deciding an application under Section 9 of the Act of 1996. The said WP was initially
dismissed as not maintainable but subsequently taken up in Review Petition No.191/2015. The
Division Bench in said RP passed an order dated 31.7.2015 holding that contract between the parties
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 2
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
i.e. Ashoka Infraways Ltd. and another vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and another was in the nature
of a "works contract" and; therefore, the provisions of Adhiniyam of 1983 would apply. It was
noticed by Division Bench that the aforesaid order passed in writ petition as well as review petition
was challenged before the Supreme Court in SLP(Civil) No.22890-22891/2015. The Supreme Court
disposed of the aforesaid SLPs by quoting findings recorded by Division Bench of this Court to the
effect that the dispute between the parties pertains to a works contract and shall be referred to the
Tribunal under the provisions of Adhiniyam, 1983. Thereafter, taking note of the fact that an
arbitration appeal under Section 17 of the Act of 1996 was pending before this court, disposed of the
SLP by observing that the aforesaid observation regarding the contract being a works contract would
not come in the way of petitioner Ashoka Infraways Ltd. in prosecuting the appeal under Section 37
of the Act of 1996 which was pending before the High Court.
6. The Division Bench was apprised that subsequently another IA was filed in the SLP which was
again disposed of on 2.9.2015 observing that the learned Single Judge of the High Court shall
consider the said application under Section 11(6) of the Act of 1996 on its own merit without getting
influenced by the earlier orders passed by the High Court on 9.7.2015 and 31.7.2015 i.e. the orders
passed in the writ petition and the review petition. It was pointed out that subsequent to the
aforesaid proceedings before the Supreme Court, the matter has been considered and decided by the
Division Bench in the case of Ashoka Infraways Ltd. In Ashoka Infraways(Supra), it was held that
the agreement between the parties was a "concession agreement" and not a "works contract" relying
on the decision rendered in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra).
7. The Division Bench further recorded that the orders passed by the Division Bench in WP
No.1122/2015 and RP No.191/2015 have not been set aside by the Supreme Court though it was
observed that the High Court should proceed to decide the matter between the parties. The Division
Bench further recorded that this fact assumed importance for the purpose of reference although the
Supreme Court has directed the High Court to decide the appeal under Section 37 of Act, 1996 by
ignoring the findings recorded in WP No.1122/2015 and RP No.191/2015. This direction is confined
to the parties inter se and the order passed in WP No.1122/2015 and RP NO.191/2015 may still be
relied upon in other cases to contend that the agreement of that nature is actually a "works
contract".
8. In the aforesaid factual backdrop, the Division Bench expressed its view that while the Division
Bench in WP No.1122/2015 and RP No.191/2015 has held the agreement between the parties to be a
"works contract", the Division Bench in the case of Ashoka Infraways(Supra) between the same
parties has held that the said agreement is a "concession agreement" and not a "works contract". It
was, thus, apparent before the Division Bench that two divergent views have been taken in aforesaid
two Division Bench decisions and the effect and impact thereof can only be reconciled by a Larger
Bench.
9. In this view of the matter, the Division Bench referred the matter for constituting a Full Bench.
The Division Bench while referring the matter for constitution of Full Bench has taken note of the
findings given by the learned Single Judge who decided the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) in a
subsequent decision referred in the case of M/s Landlord Infrastructure vs. Engineering-in-Chief
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 3
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
(AC No.12/2014 decided on 21.4.2015). It was pointed out to the Division Bench that the findings
given in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) were diluted by the same Hon'ble Judge in the
subsequent case i.e. M/s Landlord Infrastructure(Supra). The observations given by the learned
Single Judge were reproduced by the Division Bench in the reference order dated 31.1.2017. It is
apposite to quote the same which reads as under:
"9. ....Alternatively, it was held that even if the contract in question is considered to
be a work contract, then also, in view of the decision laid down by the Supreme Court
in the case of APS Kushwaha (SSI Unit) vs. The Municipal Corporation, Gwalior and
others, 2011 (13) SCC 258, the dispute has to be resolved as per the provisions of 1996
Act. However, in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), it has not been noticed that
the decision in the case of APS Kushwaha (Supra) is based on the view taken in VA
Tech Escher Wyass Flowel Ltd. vs. MPSEB, 2011 (13) SCC 261 which was held to be
per incurium in L.G. Choudhary's case, and the submission pertaining to works
contract has been dealt with by way of alternative submission only. Therefore, the
decision in the case of Jabalpur Corridor (Supra) is of no assistance to the petitioner
in the facts, as admittedly, in the instant case, the agreement in question is a works
contract."
10. In the light of aforesaid events and the orders of various Benches of this Court, the Division
Bench referred the issues to be decided by Full Bench by detailing them in para 14 to 16 of the
reference order dated 31.1.2017. This is how this matter has travelled to this Full Bench.
11. The Full Bench broadly framed following questions for consideration :
(i) Whether, any agreement by whatever name called, if it falls within the meaning
and definition of work contract as defined under Section 2(I) of the M.P.
Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983 has to be referred for adjudication before
the M.P. Arbitration Tribunal constituted under Section 3 of the 1983 Adhiniyam?
(ii) Whether, in view of statutory provisions of Section 7 of the Adhiniyam of 1983,
the matter has to be referred to the M.P. Arbitration Tribunal constituted under
Section 3 of the 1983 Adhiniym, even in cases where the parties have incorporated a
clause in agreement regarding resolution of dispute by some other forum or under
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996?
(iii) Which of the views taken by the Division Bench of Ashoka Infraways Ltd. is
correct relying on Jabalpur Corridor (India) Pvt. Ltd. ?
(iv) Whether, the substituted definition of work contract in the M.P. Madhyastham
Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983 by Act No.7 of 2017 is clarifactory and is applicable to
the pending or future contracts?
(v) Any other ancillary issues arising out of the reference order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 4
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
12. Contention of the applicants/appellants- In A.C. No.27/2013, Shri Naman Nagrath, learned
senior counsel for the applicants submits that the "works contract" is defined under Section 2(i) of
the Adhiniyam of 1983. The "works contract" is an agreement in writing for execution of three kinds
of work namely, (i) construction; (ii) repair; & (iii) maintenance. He submits that any agreement
which is confined to these three kinds of activities may fall within the ambit of "works contract". He
urged that the definition of "works contract" is a narrow and restricted definition which does not
include the present agreement which is a "concession agreement".
13. To elaborate, it is stated that the present concession agreement is related to establishment of
sports city at Satghari village, Bhopal on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis. The Government of
M.P. (GOMP) was desirous of promoting the development of sports infrastructure in the State of
M.P. with a view to enable the growth of sports in the State. In order to enable more efficient use of
public resources, GOMP has taken decision to support the development of sports infrastructure in
the State through PPP route. The State Government realized that the development, operation and
maintenance of sports infrastructure is not a commercial viably business on its own. The GOMP has
accordingly decided to structure projects for development of sports infrastructure by associating
them with related real state development.
14. Learned senior counsel pointed out that in furtherance of aforesaid objective, the authority has
resolved to develop sports infrastructure on a "build & transfer (BT)" basis for sports infrastructure
and build, own operate and transfer ("BOOT") basis for real state development in accordance with
terms and conditions set forth in the said concession agreement. The reference is made to Clause D
(e) (g) (h) (j) & (k) of this agreement. The attention of the Bench is drawn on the definition of
'construction' mentioned in Clause 1.2.1 (f) of Article 1 of the agreement. He also relied on Article 3
of the agreement, which deals with "grant of concession". On the basis of various clauses of this
article, it is urged that the petitioner obtained license or lease to construct, develop, operate and
maintain the project for a period of 99 years. Emphasis is placed on the words "on lease" mentioned
in the Clause 3.1.1. Clause 3.1.2 is relied upon to show that authority is under an obligation to
facilitate and assist the concessionaire in obtaining all approvals and applicable permits from
various government authorities/bodies. It is further submitted that clause 3.2.1 makes it clear that
concessionaire has exclusive right and authority during the concession period to investigate, study,
design, engineer, procure, construct, finance the project as specified in schedule 'A'. The
concessionaire can enter into further contracts with other contractors/bodies. Shri Nagrath,
contends that concessionaire by no stretch of imagination can be treated as a contractor, on the
contrary, the contracts are being given to other contractors by the concessionaire. The agreement
contains the provision for grant of lease and sub-lease. The obligations of concessionaire are
mentioned in Article 5 of the agreement. The Article 25 deals with "premium and annual rent". In
consideration of grant of concession, as per clause 25.1.1, the concessionaire shall pay to the
authority the premium whereas as per Clause 25.2, the concessionaire shall pay to the authority an
annual rent of Rs.4,94,000/- at the rate of rupees one per sq.mt. (rounded of) for the area of real
state infrastructure. Article 42 defines "agreement" or "concession agreement". The agreement
includes schedules annexed hereto. The Arbitration Act is defined as Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996. The 'contractor' is defined, which shows that contractor will be a person with whom the
concessionaire has entered into any of the EPC contract, the O & M contract or any other agreement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 5
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
or contract for construction, operation and maintenance of the project or matters incidental thereto.
However, as pointed out, it does not include a persons who had entered into an agreement for
providing financial assistance to the concessionaire. The dispute which can be resolved as per
dispute resolution mechanism mentioned in Article 38 is also defined which shows that any dispute,
difference or controversy of whatever nature howsoever arising, under or out of in relation to this
contract (including its interpretation) between the parties, and so notified in writing shall be
attempted to be resolved amicably in accordance with procedure laid down in this chapter. Clause
38.4 is relied upon to submit that this clause makes it clear that intention of the respondents was to
reserve their rights to send the dispute for adjudication/resolution to a statutory regulatory
body/commission which may be constituted at a later point of time. Hence, it is urged that the
respondents were conscious about the fact that present statutory body namely Tribunal constituted
under the Adhiniyam of 1983 is not an appropriate body for resolving the disputes arising out of
concession agreement. Any such regulatory authority could be constituted in future which may deal
with such disputes which may arise after constitution of said authority/commission.
15. Shri Naman Nagrath, learned senior counsel for the applicant further relied on certain portions
of the agreement which deals with "project account agreement", which is a tripartite agreement,
substitution agreement etc. He submits that every such agreement in which third party (other than
State or its agency) are involved, a separate dispute resolution mechanism under the Act of 1996 is
prescribed.
16. The argument of the applicants is that the nature of concession agreement clearly shows that it is
out side the scope of "works contract" as defined under the Adhiniyam of 1983. At the cost of
repetition, Shri Nagrath, learned senior counsel submits that "works contract" is confined to (i)
construction; (ii) repairs; (iii) maintenance activities whereas, as pointed out, the concession
agreement is differently worded and is much wider than the definition of "works contract".
17. It is common ground that the judgment passed in Kamini Malhotra (Supra) was related to
construction of a "water tank". On this factual basis, this Court opined that it falls within the
definition of "works contract". The concession agreement was not subject matter of adjudication in
case of Kamini Malhotra(Supra), whereas the concession agreement was considered in extenso in
the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). Hence there is no conflict of opinion between said two
Benches nor non- consideration of judgment of Kamini Malhotra(Supra) will make the order of
Jabalpur Corridor (Supra) as per in curium.
18. Shri Nagrath, learned senior counsel relied on 2010 (2) MPLJ 357 (R.V. Infrastructure Engineers
Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of M.P. and others), and urged that this Court opined that concession agreement
is a "lease", whereas the stand of concessionaire was that it is a "license". Learned senior counsel
submits that although the judgment passed in R.V. Infrastructure Engineers Pvt. Ltd.(Supra) is
presently subject matter of challenge before the Supreme Court, the fact remains that the said
agreement will either be treated as "lease" or a "license" and it cannot fall within the four corners of
"works contract".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 6
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
19. Learned counsel for the parties, during the course of argument, fairly submitted that in the case
reported in 2012 (3) SCC 495 [MPRRDA vs. LG Choudhary], there was a cleavage of opinion
amongst the judges in relation to a terminated contract. One view was that even in the cases of
terminated work contract, the Tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam, 1983 is competent to
decide the dispute whereas the other view is that the said Tribunal would not be competent to deal
with the dispute arising out of a terminated contract. The matter, as informed, is referred to a Larger
Bench and the decision of Larger Bench is still awaited. It is also admitted between the parties that
constitutionality of the Adhiniyam, 1983 is already upheld and it is settled that in case of "works
contract" the dispute can be resolved by the Tribunal constituted under the 1983 Adhiniyam.
20. The further contention of learned counsel for the applicant is that the "Concession Agreement"
is not merely a use of another terminology in place of "Works Contract" but it has a statutory basis
as well. Reliance is placed on Section 80 (IA) of the Income Tax Act wherein the word "Concession
Agreement" is differently dealt with in comparison to the "Works Contract". Shri Nagrath, supplied
copy of a railway contract to the Bench during the course of hearing wherein the certificate issued by
the concessionaire is recognized by the railway administration.
21. It is an admitted fact between the parties that during pendency of these matters, Section 2(i)
which defines "works contract" has been amended by notification dated 17.01.2017. It is also not in
dispute that constitutionality of the amended definition of "works contract" is not the subject matter
of challenge in the present matters.
22. Shri Nagrath and Shri Jai Savla submits that a conjoint reading of "Statement of Object and
Reasons" and amended definition of "works contract" makes it clear that it is prospective in nature.
The "Statement of Object and Reasons" shows that in order to overcome the effect of the order
passed in the matter of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), the amendment was brought into force by issuing
the notification dated 17.01.2017.
23. The stand of the applicants is that even this amendment in the definition of "works contract" will
not bring the "concession agreement"
within its purview. Shri Nagrath submits that mere use of word "substitution" does
not mean that it is essentially retrospective in nature. Reliance is placed on Bhagat
Ram Sharma Vs. Union of India, 1988 SCC (Suppl)-30. He placed heavy reliance on
(2015) 1 SCC-1 (Commissioner of Income Tax (Central)-I, New Delhi vs. Vatika
Township Pvt. Ltd., wherein general principles relating to retrospectively of a statute
were laid down by the Supreme Court. The argument is that while deciding the
question of retrospectivity, the court has to keep into mind the aspect of fairness and
hardship.
24. The case of Mahalakshmi Oil Mills Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh- (1989) 1 SCC-164, is relied upon
to contend that use of the word "means" in the definition of "works contract" makes it exhaustive
and subsequent use of word "includes" will not make it further extensive. Reliance is placed on P.
Kasilingam and others Vs. P.S.G. College of Technology and others, 1995 supp-2 SCC-348 to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 7
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
contend that in the manner the word "means and includes" are used in the definition of "works
contract" under the 1983 Adhiniyam, it has to mean an hard and fast definition which includes only
such work which are related to construction, repair and maintenance. The agreement of applicant is
having a different feature and, therefore, even this amended application will not bring the
concession agreement within the purview of "Works Contract".
25. Shri Nagrath placed reliance on the order of Supreme Court dated 12.10.2015 whereby SLP (C)
No.381/2014 was dismissed against the order passed by this Court in the case of Jabalpur
Corridor(supra). He contended that it is not a case of simple dismissal of SLP without assigning any
reason. Indeed, the Apex Court opined that the SLP is dismissed on merits also. Hence, the order of
Supreme Court aforesaid is differently worded and has a different impact which shows that the
correctness of the order passed by this court in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), cannot be
questioned.
26. Shri Jai Savla appearing in AC No.79/16 contended that in his case, there exist State support
agreement and substitution agreement etc. Clause-38.1 deals with the right and title which shows
that the applicant is a licensee. He submits that section 7 of the Act of 1983 talks about "dispute".
The "dispute" is defined in section 2(d) of the Adhiniyam of 1983. He submits that in the present
cases, the claim of the applicants is not related to any ascertained money valued at Rs.50,000/- or
more and, hence, the dispute existing between the present parties does not fall within the ambit and
scope of section 2(d) of the Adhiniyam. It is a common ground that in the present cases, if
applicant/ appellant ultimately succeed, they will get some extension of period to operate/ function
which shall be in terms of further days and not in terms of any ascertained money. Shri Nagrath, in
addition to aforesaid, urged that the definition of "dispute" was earlier wider which included any
kind of differences between the parties which definition was amended w.e.f 24.4.1990 and it is now
restricted to the claims of "ascertained money". His contention is that this amendment shows that
the legislature intended to restrict the meaning of "dispute" and, therefore, no useful purpose would
be served in relegating the parties to approach the tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam of
1983.
27. Shri Shekhar Sharma, learned counsel for the applicant appearing in AC No.79/16 contended
that Article 366(29-A) deals with the "works contract". As per the judgment of Supreme Court in
(2004) 8 SCC-1 (Zile Singh vs. State of Haryana and others), the amendment in the definition of
"works contract" will not relate back to the date of original definition. During the course of
arguments, he contended that the judgment of Viatech(supra) cannot be treated as over ruled in the
light of judgment of Supreme Court in State of W.B Vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd and others, (2004)
10 SCC-201. Lastly, it is urged that the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of M/s APS
Kushwaha and Ravikant Bansal (supra) will still hold the field.
28. Apart from this, it is common ground that the tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam of 1983
cannot be treated to be an efficacious alternative forum. As per Section 17-A of the Adhiniyam, the
tribunal cannot grant any interim relief. It is also common ground that the agreement talks about
the "concession period", escrow account, fee notification, State support agreement, substitution
agreement etc. These features are not available in "works contract". Hence, the view taken in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 8
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
Jabalpur Corridor (supra) is in consonance with law. Reliance is also placed on State support
agreement filed along with A.A.No.14/07.
29. Shri Jai Savla relied on Union of India Vs. Indusind Bank Ltd., (2016) 9 SCC 720, to contend
that the amended definition of "works contract" will not have any retrospective effect. He submits
that at best the amended definition of "works contract" can be made applicable to those agreements
which are signed after 7.12.2016, the date when the bill for amending the definition 'works contract'
was introduced.
30. Shri Akshay Sapre appearing for the appellant contended that the full bench can look into the
vires/constitutionality of the amended definition of "works contract". He argued that the timing of
introducing the amended definition is important. Amendment is being introduced recently and its
validity can be gone into in the present case. Reliance is placed on the judgment of Supreme Court in
the case of Indira Sawhney vs. Union of India, 1992 Suppl. III SCC 217. In addition, he placed
reliance on the judgments reported in 2013 (5) SCC 1, State of Punjab v. Salil Sabhlok & Others,
1996 (7) SCC 637, Indian Aluminium Co. & Others vs. State of Kerala & others, and 2009 (13) SCC
165, State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Narain Singh.
31. Contention of respondents- Shri Purushendra Kourav, Amit Seth and Shri Dhurv Verma
appeared on behalf of the respondents and opposed the said contentions. Shri Kourav submits that
even unamended definition of "works contract" is wide enough to include all matters relating to
execution of work. He relied on the dictionary meaning of "work" as given in the Black's Law
Dictionary. By placing reliance on "Statement of Object and Reasons" behind insertion of new
definition, it is urged that amendment in the definition is clarificatory in nature. It does not create
any new burden or liability on the parties. Such clarificatory notification has retrospective
operation. Moreso when the legislature has chosen to use the word "substitution" in place of
"amendment". He relied on certain portion of the book "Principles of Interpretation of Statute by
Justice G.P.Singh".
32. Shri Kourav, learned Additional Advocate General relied on the findings given in the case of
Kamini Malhotra and D.D.Sharma(Supra) wherein the respective Single benches have opined that
the definition of "works contract" under the Adhiniyam is a wide definition whereas in Jabalpur
Corridor(Supra) a contrary finding is given that it is a restrictive definition. It is submitted that the
judgment of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) is passed in ignorance of the earlier view taken by the
benches of similar strength and, therefore, the judgment of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) is a per
incurium judgment. Moreso, when the earlier judgment in the case of D.D.Sharma(supra) was
brought to the notice of the bench hearing the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra).
33. Shri Kourav further relied on the Adhiniyam of 1983 to contend that "dispute" is required to be
decided by the tribunal within four months. Hence, it cannot be said that the remedy under the
Adhiniyam is not an efficacious remedy. He submits that in the case of APS Kushwaha(supra) the
Supreme Court simply followed the judgment of Viatech(supra).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 9
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
However, since the judgment of Viatech(supra) is held to be per incuriam in the case of
L.G.Choudhary(supra), the judgment of APS Kushwaha is of no assistance to the applicants. He
further submits that the nature of activity of construction, maintenance, repair required to be
carried-on by the applicant brings it within the four corners of 'works contract'. If a different
nomenclature is used (concession agreement), it will not change the nature of the agreement.
34. By taking this bench to relevant clauses of "Concession agreement", it is urged that ultimately
activity of the applicants is in relation to the development, operation and maintenance of supportive
infrastructure which is related with Real Estate Development. Hence whether it is called "BT" or
"BOOT", in fact, it falls within the ambit of "works contract". Reliance is placed on Larsen and
Toubro Ltd. Vs. State of Karnataka-(2014) 1 SCC-708 wherein the Apex Court had an occasion to
deal with the words "works contract". It is common stand on the part of the respondents that
reliance on taxing statute is totally irrelevant.
35. Learned counsel for the State contended that the applicants do not have any choice of forum. No
legal, vested or statutory right of applicant is taken away by amending the definition. As per Section
7 of the Adhiniyam of 1983 coupled with the full bench judgment of this Court reported in 2007(4)
MPHT-444 [Shri Shankarnarayan Construction Co. vs. State of M.P.], it is clear that the appropriate
remedy for the applicants is before the tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam of 1983.
36. Respondents relied on AIR 1954 SC 340 (Kiran Singh and others vs. Chaman Paswan and
others) to submit that the question of jurisdiction can be raised at any point of time. This can be
raised at the appellate stage or even at the stage of execution proceedings. Lack of jurisdiction
nullifies every thing. It is also urged that in view of judgment of Supreme Court in AIR 2000 SC
2587 (Kunhayammed & ors. vs. State of Kerla), it is clear that when SLP is dismissed in limine, the
findings given by the Supreme Court does not mean that the order of the High Court got a stamp of
approval on merits or it got merged in the order of Apex Court on the basis of doctrine of merger.
Such findings on merits can be presumed only when order is passed after grant of leave and SLP is
converted into a civil appeal.
37. In rejoinder submission, Shri Nagrath reiterated his earlier stand. In addition to that, he relied
on 2003(2) MPLJ-46 (MP Housing Board vs. Satish Kumar). The point raised is that the word
"dispute" as defined in section 2(1)(d) of the Adhiniyam does not take within its fold the disputes
which are not related with "ascertained money".
38. In support of the oral submissions, written submissions were filed.
39. We have heard the parties at length and perused the record related to the said submissions.
40. Before dealing with rival contentions, it is useful to quote the unamended and amended
definition of "works contract" hereinbelow in juxtaposition. Underlined portion of amended
definition shows that this portion is inserted by way of amendment w.e.f. 17.1.2017.
Un-amended Amended
"2(i). "Works-contract" means an "2(i) "Work-contract" means an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 10
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
agreement in writing for the agreement in writing or a letter of
execution of any work relating to intent or work order issued for the
construction, repair or maintenance execution of any work relating to
of any building or superstructure, construction, repair or maintenance
dam, weir, canal, reservoir, tank, of any building or superstructure,
lake, road, well, bridge, culvert, dam, weir, canal, reservoir, tank,
factory work-shop, powerhouse, lake, road, well, bridge, culvert,
transformers or such other works of factory, work-shop, powerhouse,
the State Government or Public transformer or such other works of
Undertaking as the State the State Government or public
Government may by notification, undertakings or of the Corporations
specify in this behalf at any of its of the State as the State Government stages, entered into by the
State may, by notification, specify in this Government or by an official of the behalf at any of its
stages, entered State Government or Public into by the State Government or by Undertaking or its
official for and any official of the State Government on behalf of such Public or by public
undertakings or Undertaking and includes an Corporation or by any official of the agreement for the
supply of goods State Government for and on behalf or material and all other matters of such
Corporation or public relating to the execution of any of undertakings and includes an the said
works. agreement for supply of goods or material and all other matters relating to execution of any
of the said works and also includes the services so hired for carrying out the aforesaid works and
also include all concession agreement, so entered into by the, State Government or public
undertakings or Corporation, wherein an State support is involved or not,".
41. In the fitness of things, we deem it apposite to deal with the contentions in the light of questions
framed by the Full Bench.
As to question No.(i) & (iii)
42. Since these questions are interrelated, it is apt to deal with these questions simultaneously. In
the case of Kamini Malhotra (Supra), the learned single Judge considered the definition of 'works
contract'. In addition, the meaning of word "building" was also considered. It was held that the
definition of works contract is in wide spectrum. Its a definition of wide amplitude and application.
The relevant portion of this judgment reads as under:
"14. Learned counsel for appellant has submitted that the use of word 'means' in
clause (i) of section 2 of Adhiniyam, clearly indicates that the defination is a hard and
fast definition and therefore except for the works specified in the said clause, no other
work could be treated as 'Works Contract'. In other words the said definition excludes
all other works, which are not specified in the said definition.
15. Learned counsel for appellant in the above context referred to P. Kasilingam and
others vs. P.S.G. College of Technology and others, AIR 1995 Sc 1395 wherein, it has
been observed that the use of word 'means' indicates that the definition is a hard and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 11
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
fast definition and no other meaning can be assigned to the expression than is put
down in definition. In Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corportion Ltd.
Chandigarh vs. Presiding Officer, Labour Court Chandigarh and others. (1990) 3 SCC
682 it has been observed by the Apex Court that a definition is an explicit statement
of full connotation of a term. It has further been observed that when a statute says
that a word or phase shall 'mean' certain things or acts, the definition is a hard and
fast definition and no other meaning can be assigned to the expression than is put
down in definition.
16. Since, as per section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam 'Work Contract' means an agreement
in writing for the execution of any work specified therein; it is clear that a work to
constitute and to be construed as 'Works Contract' must be strictly covered by the
works specified in the said definition and that no other work should be treated as
'Works Contracts'.
17. Learned counsel for the respondents in the above context submitted that, Water
Treatment Plant, essentially consists of building and water tanks. It was therefore
submitted that the name "Water Treatment Plant" used in the contract between the
parties, by itself would not exclude the said work executed by the appellant, from the
category or definition of 'Works Contract'. It has been submitted that the Water
Treatment Plant was construction of such buildings and tanks, the details of which
are given in (Annexure R-3). It was submitted in the above context that all the
components of Water Treatment Plant basically consisted of building or storage
tanks. In the above context photographs (Annexure R-4) to (Annexure R-9) are also
filed, to indicate the nature of work and construction relating to the Water Treatment
Plant executed by the appellant.
18. It has further been submitted by the learned counsel for respondents that section
2(i) of the Adhiniyam provides that a 'Works Contract' means an agreement in
writing for the execution of any work relating to construction, repair or maintenance
of any building or superstructure, dam, weir, canal, reservoir, tank, etc. Learned
counsel for respondents emphasised that thus the definition of 'Works Contract'
covers 'any' work relating to construction, repair or maintenance of 'any' building or
superstructure, which clearly indicates that all buildings, or superstructures or
constructions are to be covered by the said definition of 'Works Contract'. It was
therefore submitted that, since the Water Treatment Plant basically includes
construction or building and water, storage plant, it was fully covered by the
definition of 'Works Contract'.
19. In the above context learned counsel for respondents submitted that, the word
"any" has been explained in Black's Law Dictionary and it has been stated therein
that the word 'any' has a diversity of meaning and may be employed to indicate 'all' or
'every' as well as 'some' or 'one' and its meaning in a given statute depends upon the
context and subject matter of statute. It is often synonymous with 'either', 'every' or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 12
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
'all'. The Supreme Court in Lucknow Development Authority vs. M.K. Gupta, AIR
1994 SC 787 had considered the meaning and purport of word 'any' in the context of
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 and has quoted the above definition of the said word
in Black's Law Dictionary and has observed that its meaning in a given statute
depends upon the context and subject matter of the statute.
20. In the instant case, it is clear that the word 'any' in section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam
appears to have a very wide spectrum, because it relates to the execution of any work
relating to construction, repairs or maintenance of 'any' building or superstructure,
tank, canal, reservoir, etc. the repetition of word 'any' in the said definition prior to
the word 'Work' as well as before the nature of construction, e.g. building,
superstructure, etc., clearly indicates the intention of legislature to provide for its
wide amplitude and application. Therefore, it appears that the definition of 'Works
Contracts' as given in section 2(i) of the Act, applies to all works of construction,
repairs or maintenance of all types of buildings, superstructures, reservoirs, tanks
etc.
21. Therefore, all types of buildings, tanks whatever be its technical nomenclature,
would be covered under the said definition of 'Works Contract'. In Ghanshim Das vs.
Debi Prasad and another, AIR 1966 SC 1998 the Supreme Court with reference to
U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, observed:
"The word building has not been defined in the Act an is, therefore, to be construed in
its ordinary grammatical sense unless there is something in the context or object of
the statute to show that it is used in a special sense different from its ordinary
grammatical sense. So construed according to the dictionary meaning, the existence
of a roof is not always necessary for a structure to be regarded as a building.
Residential, buildings ordinarily have roofs but there can be a non-residential
building for which a roof is not necessary. A large stadium or an open air swimming
pool constructed at a considerable expense would be a building as it is a permanent
structure and designed for useful purpose."
22. As noticed earlier, the use of word 'any' building etc., used in section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam
appears to be a very wide connotation and 'any' work relating to building appears to have been
intended to be included in the definition of 'Works Contract'. As noticed earlier, in the instant case
basic work constituting Water Treatment Plant, included construction of building as well as of
storage tanks and reservoirs. Necessary ancillary, gadgets and implements for purification and
cleansing of water would also have to be constructed. But such ancillaries would not change the
basic nature of work to be executed by the appellant, which essentially was the construction of
buildings and storage tanks. Therefore, the work undertaken to be executed by the appellant was
covered within the meaning and definition of 'Works Contract'."
(Emphasis Supplied) As per the view taken in the case of Kamini Malhotra(supra), the
nomenclature of agreement is immaterial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 13
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
43. In the case of D.D. Sharma(Supra), another Single Judge considered the definition of 'works
contract' and opined that it is elaborate, exhaustive and inclusive. While deciding the case of D.D.
Sharma(Supra), the learned Single Judge considered earlier judgment delivered in M.C.C.
No.850/2005 (M/s Technogem Consultant Pvt. Ltd. vs. G.M. M.P.R.R.D.A.). In D.D. Sharma
(Supra), it was held that even if the State has formed a society for execution of a work, that would
not make such society, a distinct legal entity from the State thereby loosing all the attributes of the
State. It was further held that the words "all other matters relating to execution of any of the said
work" mentioned under Section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam are wide enough and brings within its ambit
even the consultancy services. The relevant portion of this order in the case of D.D. Sharma(Supra)
reads as under:
"9. Now the crucial question which has been raised by the applicant in this petition is
that the agreement and work assigned to the applicant does not fall within the
definition of 'Works Contract', may be examined.
To assess the nature of contract entered into between the parties it would be
necessary to refer certain clauses of the agreement which provides the works to be
done under the supervision consultancy for the work of construction/upgradation of
rural roads in Madhya Pradesh under the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna
scheme. Clause 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.6 and 7.1 are relevant, which provides construction,
supervision to check quality of materials and works, measurement of works,
scrutinize the claim raised by the contractor and held the management to clear the
payment. The petitioner was to monitor progress of the work with certain services as
enumerated in clause 4.6 and to submit various reports as enumerated in Clause 7.1
of the scheme. The aforesaid all the works are related to the works contract. Clause 2
of the terms of reference provides objectives for providing consultancy services,
which reads thus:
2. Objectives- The objectives of the proposed Consultancy Services are:
i. Proper management of civil works contract as 'Engineer' in terms of civil works
contract including field measurements and quality assurance work.
ii. Comprehensive supervision of project implementation activities carried out by the
Contractors to ensure complete compliance with the drawings, technical
specifications and various stipulations contained in the Contract Documents. iii.
Efficient construction supervision by personnel who are experienced in the modern
methods of construction supervision and contract management.
iv. Ensure high standards of quality assurance in the supervision/execution of work.
v. Completion of the work within the stipulated period of completion. Consultants
will specially be responsible for quality and early completion.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 14
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
10. the definition of Woks Contract under Section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam is elaborate
and includes an agreement for supply of goods or material and all other matters
relating to the execution of any of the said works. Meaning thereby that all other
matters relating to the execution of works contract are included in the definition of
works contract. The aforesaid definition is exhaustive and inclusive in nature. The
work assigned to the applicant as per the contract were supervision of construction
and the applicant had to carry out checking and verification of all the works as per
the working drawings and regular inspection of contractors equipment, plant and
machinery.
Applicant was also entitled to direct the contractor to carry out all such works or to do all things as
may be necessary to avoid or reduce the risk affecting the safety of life of workers, or adjoining
property etc. the applicant was under an obligation to inspect the works on completion before taking
over by the respondents. The applicant was also to report in respect of quality of material and work.
The applicant was to inform the progress as per the working plan and was to prepare all reports and
documents. In nutshell the applicant was to supervise construction, to report in respect of quality
and progress of work and was to measure the work after completion of works. Meaning thereby the
applicant was deeply concerned with the work and works contract and in absence of works contract
or that of contractor the applicants existence cannot be presumed. The entire work of applicant was
related to the works contract and the contract of applicant falls within the purview of matters
relating to the 'execution of works contracts'. M/s Technogem Consultants Pvt. Ltd. (supra) the
learned Judge considering this aspect held thus:
18. Mere perusal of aforequoted definition of "works contract" in Section 2(i) and in
particular the words underlined would go to show that if the State Government or its
official enters into a contract with any person for construction, repairs and
maintenance of road then it becomes a works contract, as defined in Section 2(i).
Similarly, definition of "works contract", also includes an agreement in relation to all
other matters relating to execution of any of the said work i.e., road.
In other word, if in execution of main work as in this case road, any other agreement is entered into
by State Government with any person for accomplishing execution of road work then the said
agreement would also be regarded as "works contract"
within the meaning of Section 2(i) ibid.
19. In my considered view, therefore, the agreement in question (Annexure P-1) being
in the nature of providing all kind of consultancy services by the petitioner to State
Government which are necessary for construction and development of road and
hence, it becomes a "works contract"
as defined under Section 2(1) ibid. In other words, it is a contract which falls in second category of
"works contract" in its inclusive definition namely "all other matter relating to execution of any of
the said work" i.e., road."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 15
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
It is apparent that in this case the learned Single Judge considered the effect of existence of other
agreements also which are entered into for accomplishment of work which is related with activities
related to a 'works contract'.
44. In the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), the judgment of Kamini Malhotra(Supra) was not
considered. However, the judgment passed in the case of M/s Technogem Consultant Pvt.
Ltd.(Supra) and D.D. Sharma(Supra) were relied upon by the state. The learned Single Judge did
not discuss the aforesaid judgments in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). It needs no emphasis
that an order passed by a previous bench of same strength is binding on the subsequent bench
unless the earlier judgments are distinguishable or there exists any other judgment on the same
point which is rendered by more number of judges of the High Court or there exists a judgment of
Supreme Court on that point.
45. True it is that in Kamini Malhotra (Supra), this Court was considering a works contract in
relation to construction of a water tank. Concession agreement was not subject matter of
adjudication in the case of Kamini Malhotra(Supra). However, in Kamini Malhotra(Supra), this
Court opined that the definition of works contract is of wide spectrum/amplitude. Almost similar
view was taken in the case of Technogem (supra) and D.D. Sharma(Supra). Thus, in our view, to the
extent interpretation of definition of 'works contract' is concerned, in Kamini Malhotra, Technogem
and D.D. Sharma(Supra), it was laid down that the definition is very wide.
46. In Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), the learned Single Judge held that the expression "works contract"
as defined in the 1983 Adhiniyam has a "restrictive meaning and has special and limited
conotation". It is further held that definition aforesaid does not include detail and design. In our
considered view, this finding in Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) is diametrically opposite to the
interpretation given by previous Benches in Kamini Malhotra, Technogem and D.D. Sharma(Supra).
Detail and design etc. are essential part of activity of 'construction'.
47. In Jabalpur Corridor (Supra), the reasons for holding that concession agreement is not a works
contract are - the concession agreement does not include detailed design, financing and operation of
the contract, the works contract is a lump sum contract wherein the contractor has to quote the
amount for execution of the work based on details furnished by the employer, there is no necessity
for creation of any escrow account in works contract, in works contract the payment is made against
the running account bills prepared by the contractor and submitted to the employer periodically
whereas in concession agreement, the Concessionaire has to utilize and arrange the funds, the
concessionaire under the agreement after completion of construction recovers the amount invested
by him for completion of the project by way of toll, no State support agreement is executed in case of
a works contract whereas it takes place in a case of concession agreement. The Concessionaire is not
liable to pay value added tax, sales tax and other taxes under the concession agreement which are
otherwise payable under the works contract. The Bench considered that 17 concession agreement
were entered into between the parties in case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). A EPC contract was also
entered into. On the basis of these "salient features" the Bench came to hold that concession
agreement cannot be treated as a works contract. In addition, it was held that parties have clearly
understood the agreement to be a concession agreement and decided to resolve their dispute as per
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 16
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
the Act of 1996.
48. In the case of Ashoka Infraways Ltd. vs. State of M.P., 2016 (2) MPLJ 685, the Division Bench
relied upon and followed the judgment rendered in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). The view
of the Division Bench is mainly based on the dicta of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). In addition, it was
held that the Bench is reinforced in its decision due to the use of the term "concession" used at
several places in the agreement itself. The Bench noticed that the words "concession area",
"concession period", "concession agreement", etc. are repeatedly used in various paragraphs of the
concession agreement. Hence, it was held that the concession agreement is not 'a works contract'.
49. Reverting back to the unamended definition of 'works contract', it is noteworthy that works
contract means an agreement which must be in writing for the execution of any work relating to
construction, repair or maintenance of any building or super structure or other entities mentioned
in the said definition. In the definition, it was made clear that other matters relating to execution of
any of the said work are also included. In our considered view, whether a concession agreement or
any agreement by whatever name called is a works contract or not will depend whether essential
ingredients of works contract are available in the said agreement.
The essential ingredients in the definition of "works contract" are that the agreement must be in
writing, it must be for execution of "any work"
relating to construction, repair or maintenance of any building, super structure or
other entities mentioned in the definition. The words "any work relating to
construction, repair or maintenance" are very wide. If activity of construction, repair
or maintenance is involved, nature of construction, repair or maintenance is
immaterial. If aforesaid essential ingredients of works contract are available in the
agreement and in addition thereto certain other elements are added in the agreement
which are not included in the definition of "works contract", it will not take out the
agreement outside the purview of works contract. If present agreement is tested on
the anvil of aforesaid principle, it will be clear like noon day that the agreement
fulfills the said requirement i.e. there exists an agreement in writing for execution of
work relating to construction, repair and maintenance of building and other entities.
In addition, the Concessionaires can operate the contract. Apart from this, it is
noteworthy that the definition of 'works contract' is totally silent about the mode and
method of payment. It is also silent as to how the work relating to construction,
repair or maintenance should be carried out. The definition of 'works contract'
contains the word "construction", "repair"
and "maintenance". These words can be further divided and bifurcated. The definition of word
"construction" in the concession agreement mentioned above is an example of the same. Its a matter
of common knowledge that there cannot be any construction activity without undertaking the
exercise of investigation, engineering, design, procurement, etc. The aforesaid ancillary activities are
essential part of a construction activity. Likewise, the word repair or maintenance can be subdivided
in various sub heads. However, such division or elaboration will not change the basic nature of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 17
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
activity. Thus, we are not able to agree with the view taken in Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) that
definition of works contract has a restrictive meaning and has a limited conotation. The design and
finance etc. are also essential parts of construction activity.
50. In Jabalpur Corridor(Supra), it was held that there are certain elements which are special to the
concession agreement and such "salient features" are absent in works contract. In our view, the
requirement of maintaining account of a particular nature (whether it is Escrow Account or any
other account), the method of payment, requirement to pay taxes under various Statutes are not
relevant for determining whether concession agreement is a 'works contract' or not. If agreement
satisfies the requirement of a 'works contract', on the basis of parameters laid down in the definition
of 'works contract' it can be safely concluded that said agreement is a 'works contract'. As per the
definition of 'works contract', the 'salient features' aforesaid are not decisive. In this regard reference
may be made to the judgment of Supreme Court reported in 2014 (1) SCC 708, Larsen and Toubro
Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka. The Apex Court considered the term "works contract" used in Art. 366
(29A)b of the Constitution. It is laid down that even if in a contract besides the obligations of supply
of goods and material and performance of labour and services, some additional obligations are
imposed, such contract does not cease to be a 'works contract'. The additional obligations in the
contract would not alter the nature of contract so long as the contract provides for a contract of work
and satisfied the primary description of works contract. It is apt to mention that this view is
subsequently affirmed by the Constitution Bench in 2014 (7) SCC 1 [Kone Elevator India Pvt. Ltd. vs.
State of Tamil Nadu]
51. As analyzed, the present agreements satisfy the primary descriptions, of the works contract. If in
addition to these primary description, applicant are engaged in other activity like operation of
project or maintaining a particular type of account etc. or signed other contracts also, this will not
take away the agreements outside the scope of 'works contract'. The requirement of payment of tax
is a different facet and as per Section 2(i) of the Adhiniyam it will not determine the nature of
agreement. Similarly, mode of payment and method of arranging and utilizing money will not
determine the nature of agreement. The definition of 'works contract' alone will determine whether
a particular agreement falls within its ambit or not. For this reason, the argument of Shri Naman
Nagrath based on relevant provisions of IT Act and railway contract must fail.
52. Similarly, in the case of R.V. Infrastructure Engineers Pvt. Ltd. (supra), this court had no
occasion to test the agreement on the anvil of definition of works contract. In the said case, the
question was whether the particular agreement is a lease or licence within the meaning of Transfer
of Property Act and Easement Act. The question was relating to payment of stamp duty and
registration under the Indian Stamp Act and Registration Act. The aforesaid judgment is of no
assistance to the applicants.
53. In the case of Kunya Ahmed(Supra), it was held that while hearing a SLP, the Supreme Court is
not exercising its appellate jurisdiction. It is merely exercising its discretionary jurisdiction to grant
or not to grant leave to appeal. The petitioner is still outside the gate of entry though aspiring to
enter the appellate arena of Supreme Court. Whether he enters or not would depend on the fate of
his petition for special leave. It is further held that neither the principle of resjudicata nor the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 18
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
principle of public policy analogous thereto, would bar the trial of identical issues in a separate
proceedings before the High Court merely on the basis of an uncertain assumption that the issues
must have been decided by the Supreme Court at least by implication. In no uncertain terms, it was
made clear that it is not correct or safe to extend the principle of resjudicata or constructive
resjudicata to such an extent so as to found it on mere guess work. In view of this judgment, it
cannot be held that the order of this court in Jabalpur Corridor (supra) has got a seal of approval
from the Supreme Court. The order of Supreme Court shows that leave was not granted and SLP
was dismissed before its conversion in to a civil appeal.
54. On the basis of foregoing analysis, it is clear that any agreement by whatever name called, if it
falls within the meaning and definition of "works contract" as per Adhiniyam of 1983, it must be
treated as a works contract. In that case, the appropriate forum is the Tribunal constituted under
Section 3 of Adhiniyam of 1983 if differences between the parties are covered u/s 2(d) of the
Adhiniyam of 1983.
55. The aforesaid discussion further shows that nomenclature of agreement is immaterial for
determining whether it falls within the ambit of 'works contract'. By applying an artistic linguistic
engineering, an agreement can be worded in a unique or a different manner. It may have a different
nomenclature but these factors will not determine its real nature. In Ashoka Infraways(Supra), the
Division Bench paid much emphasis to the repeated use of word "concession". The Division Bench
further relied on the judgment of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra). We are unable to agree within the
reasoning given in Ashoka Infraways (Supra) for the reasons stated above. In addition, it is well
settled that question of jurisdiction goes to very root of the matter and this legal question needs to
be examined on the basis of interpretation of enabling provisions. The jurisdiction cannot be
assumed by consent of parties. See AIR 1954 SC 340 (Kiran Singh vs. Chaman Paswan). For the
aforementioned reasons, in Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) and in Ashoka Infraways(Supra), the Benches
have committed an error in holding that the "concession agreement" is not a "works contract".
Hence, these orders to the said extent are overruled.
As to question No.(ii) :
56. Section 7 of the Adhiniyam, 1983 reads as under:
"7. Reference to Tribunal (1) Either party to a works contract shall irrespective of the
fact whether the agreement contains an arbitration clause or not, refer in writing the
dispute to the Tribunal.
(2) Such reference shall be drawn up in such form as may be prescribed and shall be
supported by an affidavit verifying the averments.
(3) The reference shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Every reference shall be accompanied by such documents or other evidence and
by such other fees for service or execution of processes as may be prescribed. (5) On
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 19
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
receipt of the reference under sub-section (1), if the Tribunal is satisfied that the
reference is a fit case for adjudication, it may admit the reference but where the
Tribunal is not so satisfied it may summarily reject the reference after recording
reasons therefor."
Sub-section (1) makes it clear that the aggrieved party to a works contract may refer its dispute in
writing to the Tribunal irrespective of the fact whether there exists any agreement between the
parties which contains an arbitration clause or not. Indisputably, the Adhiniyam of 1983 was held to
be intra vires. A Full Bench of this Court in 2007 (4) MPHT 444, (Shri Shankarnarayan
Construction Co. vs. State of M.P.) held as under:
"Thus, if a works contract, as defined in Section 2(1)(i) of the 1983 Adhiniyam
contains an arbitration clause, either party to the woks contract will have to refer the
dispute to the Arbitration Tribunal as constituted under Section 3 of the 1983
Adhiniyam and cannot refer it to any other arbitrator for arbitration. The 1983
Adhiniyam is, therefore, a law for the time being in force relating to arbitration
pursuant to an arbitration agreement between the State Government or its
Undertaking and the contractor and is saved under sub-section (5) of Section 2 of the
1996 Act from the provisions of Part-I of the 1996 Act which are inconsistent with the
provisions of the 1983 Adhiniyam."
57. In the said judgment it was held that the jurisdiction to decide a 'dispute' in a case of a works
contract is with the Tribunal constituted under the Adhiniyam of 1983. In the case of Kiran Singh
(Supra), the Apex Court held as under:
"6. The answer to these contentions must depend on what the position in law is when
a Court entertain a suit or an appeal over which it has no jurisdiction and what the
effect of Section 11 of the Suit Valuation Act is on that position. It is a fundamental
principle well-established that a decree passed by a Court without jurisdiction is a
nullity and that is invaldity could be set up whenever and wherever it is sought to be
enforced or relied upon, even at the stage of execution and even in collateral
proceedings. A defect of jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary or territorial or whether,
it is in respect of the subject-matter of the action, strikes at the very authority of the
Court to pose any decree, and such a defect cannot be cured even by consent of
parties."
(Emphasis Supplied)
58. In view of statutory mandate contained in Section 7(i) of the Adhiniyam, the parties to a works
contract needs to approach the Tribunal for resolution of their 'dispute'. However, whether this
mandate will be applicable in cases of terminated contract or not will be decided by the Supreme
Court in a reference made in the case of L.G. Choudhary(Supra). The curtains will be finally drawn
on this issue by the Supreme Court. Since the said question is pending before the Supreme Court, we
are not inclined to deal with the said aspect and the present order shall not be construed as an order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 20
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
dealing with aforesaid aspect.
As to question No.(iv)
59. Before dealing with rival contentions, it is apposite to take note of "statement of object and
reasons" behind introduction of M.P. Madhyastham Adhikaran Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016 which
reads as under:
"Statement of Objects and Reasons In Civil Writ Petition No.6557/2013 M/s Jabalpur
Corridor (India) Private Limited and another versus Madhya Pradesh Road
Development Corporation Limited and others, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in
its order dated 4 th December, 2013 has not regarded the concession agreement in
the sense of works-contract, due to which dispute under a concession agreement is
settled under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (Nos. 26 of 1996). Various
departments and public undertakings are spending huge amount of money for
payment of fees to arbitrators appointed under the said Act and for conducting
meeting of the arbitrators. Also there is no uniform system for settlement of such
disputes. Therefore, it is proposed to subsitute the definition of 'works-contract' in
the Madhya Pradesh Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983 (No. 29 of 1983) so
that the "concession agreement" is included in the terms "works-contract'.
(Emphasis Supplied)
60. The parties are at loggerheads on the question of applicability of the amended provision. It is apt
to mention that while deciding issues no.
(i) and (iii) this Bench has already held that unamended definition of works contract is wide enough
to include the concession agreement if it fulfills the necessary ingredients of a works contract. It is
common ground on behalf of applicants/appellants that mere use the word "substitution" will not
make the provision retrospective. The word "substitution" must be seen as per the scheme of the
Statute.
61. There cannot be any quarrel about this preposition. The golden rule of interpretation of a Statute
is that interpretation must depend on the text and the context. Neither can be ignored. Both are
important. That interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation match the contextual.
A Statute is best interpreted when we know why it was enacted. (See: 1987 (1) SCC 424, R.B.I. vs.
Peerless General Finance Co. Ltd.). It is well settled that adopting the principle of literal
construction of the Statute alone, in all circumstances, without examining the context and scheme of
the Statute, may not subserve the purpose of the Statute. In the words of V.R. Krishna Aiyer, J, such
an approach would be "to see the skin and miss the soul", Whereas "the judicial key to construction
is the composite perception of deha and the dehi of the provision. (See: 1977 (2) SCC 256, Board of
Mining Examining vs. Ramjee followed in 2013 (3) SCC 489, Ajay Maken vs. Adesh Kumar).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 21
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
The statement of object and reasons shows that the reason for bringing this amendment is that this
Court in the case of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) has not regarded the concession agreement in the
sense of 'works contract' due to which the dispute under the concession agreement is settled under
the Act of 1996. The basic reason for introducing the amendment is to clarify that the definition of
works contract will include concession agreement. No new liabilities are fastened on the parties by
bringing this amendment.
62. Shri Nagrath, learned senior counsel placed reliance on the judgment of Supreme Court in the
case of M/s Mahalaxmi Oil Mills(Supra). In the said case, the question was whether tobacco seed
and tobacco cake will falls within relevant entry of the Excise Act. The Apex Court noted that the
expression "means" as well as "includes" were used. It was held to be exhaustive. In the said case, in
the first part of the definition, tobacco seed and cake was not mentioned. In the second part of
definition, leaves, stalks and stems were mentioned but there was no mention about the seed.
Tobacco seeds did not fall within the definition. Hence, Apex Court accepted the contention of the
State that in absence of mentioning of words tobacco seeds in the definition clause, it will not be
covered by the definition. In the present case, the amended definition is differently worded. The
definition includes the services so hired for carrying out the aforesaid work and it also included the
'concession agreement'. On plain reading of the amended definition, we are unable to hold that it
does not include concession agreement. The general principles laid down in the case of Vatika
Township(Supra) are clear. In the said case, it is held that one established rule of interpretation is
that unless a contrary intention appears, a legislation is presumed not to be intended to have a
retrospective operation. As noticed, the present amendment in the definition of works contract is
clarificatory in nature and in statement of object and reasons and in Section 2 of amending
provision, it is made clear that the definition is "substituted". At the cost of repetition, by way of
amendment, respondents have neither imposed any new obligation and new duties nor attached any
new disability on the applicants. The amendment is in the nature of explaining a formal legislation.
Hence, Vatika Township(Supra) is of no assistance to the applicants. In the case of P.
Kasilingam(Supra), it was held that the words 'means and includes' indicates an exhaustive
explanation of meaning. The expression 'private college' was considered by the Apex Court in the
said case. In that case law making authority deliberately refrained from including professional and
technical colleges. In the present case, in the amended definition of 'works contract' the 'concession
agreement' is included and, hence, said judgment is of no help to the applicants.
63. In our view, since intention behind the amendment is to clarify that concession agreement will
also fall within the definition of works contract, it will be an amendment by which earlier definition
is "substituted" and not "superseded". In other words, there is a difference between "supercession"
and "substitution" of a provision. (See AIR 1969 SC 504, Koteshwar Vitthal Kamad vs. K. Rangappa
Baliga). Such substitution is judicially recognized by Supreme Court in AIR 2004 SC 5100, Zile
Singh vs State of Haryana and in AIR 1996 SC 2181 (State of Rajasthan vs. Mangilal Pindwal). A Full
Bench of Karnataka High Court, in its recent judgment, reported in AIR 2014 (Karnataka) 120 (The
Hassan Cooperative Milk Producers Societies Union Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka) opined that when
amendment is made by substitution of a provision, it has the effect of replacing the old provision by
the substituted provision and in absence of repugnancy, inconsistency and absurdity, it must be
construed as if it is incorporated in the Act right from ab initio. Hence, in the present case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 22
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
substitution of definition, it will be presumed that the amended definition is in force from the date
unamended definition came into being.
64. The appellants also relied on 2016 (9) SCC 720, Union of India vs. Indusind Bank Ltd. and
another to bolster their submission that amendment in the definition cannot have any retrospective
effect. The said judgment is of no help to the applicants . In the said case, it was held that the
amendment was remedial in nature and not clarificatory or declaratory of the law. Certain
agreements covered by unamended provision were made void for the first time. It was found that
rights and liabilities that have already accrued between the parties are sought to be taken away. In
this backdrop, it was held that amended section will not apply retrospectively. In the present case,
no legal statutory, vested or constitutional right of the applicants is taken away or altered by the
amendment in the definition nor any fresh liability has been created.
65. This is trite law that right of preferring appeal or avail legal remedy is a substantive right
whereas right relating to forum is procedural in nature. It is equally well settled that in contrast to
Statutes dealing with the substantive rights, Statutes dealing with merely matters of procedure are
presumed to be retrospective unless such a construction is textually inadmissible. See AIR 1927 P.C.
242 (Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs. CIT Delhi), AIR 1975 SC 1843 (Gurbachan Singh vs.
Satpal Singh), AIR 1990 SC 209 (Hitendra Vishnu Thakur vs. State of Maharashtra), AIR 1994 SC
2623. Lord Denning, in Blyth vs. Blyth, 1966 (1) ALL ER 524 opined that the rule that an act of
Parliament is not to be given retrospective effect applies only to Statute which affect vested rights. It
does not apply to Statute which only alter the form of procedure or admissibility of evidence, or the
effect which the court gives to evidence. The said principle is followed by this court in the case
reported in 2016 (1) MPLJ 48, [Mescot Hospital & Research Centre vs. State of M.P.].
66. In view of foregoing analysis,we are constrained to hold that the amendment by Act No.7 of 2017
is clarificatory in nature and is applicable to pending and future contracts.
67. We are not oblivious of the fact that this order may create inconvenience in certain cases where
parties may be required to resolve their dispute before a forum constituted under 1983 Adhiniyam.
However, inconvenience etc. cannot be a ground to interpret a definition or to provide a redressal
forum which is otherwise not available as per law [see AIR 1965 SC 1449 (Raja Soap Factory and
others vs. S.P. Shantharaj and others) Para 9]. In view of 1999 (9) SCC 559, State of H.P. vs. Nurpur
Private Bus Operator Union, the doctrine of prospective overruling cannot be utilised by the High
Court. In 2001 (1) SCC 534, Raymonds Ltd. vs. MPEB, it was again held that doctrine of prospective
overruling can be invoked only in matters arising under the constitution and that it can be applied
by the Supreme Court of India.
68. Shri Nagrath urged that in the concession agreement it was made clear that the present dispute
will be decided by the arbitration proceedings as per the Act of 1996 and Regulatory Body etc. may
deal with future disputes. Suffice it to say that no clause of agreement can prevail over the statutory
provisions of the Adhiniyam of 1983. If a dispute falls within the ambit of Section 2(i)(d) & (i) as per
Section 7 of the Adhiniyam, the Tribunal constituted under the 1983 Adhiniyam alone will have
jurisdiction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 23
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
As to question No.(v) :
69. The applicants/appellants advanced an alternative submission. It is contended that even if
concession agreement is treated to be a works contract, the remedy under the Adhiniyam of 1983
can be invoked only when there exists a "dispute" between the parties.
70. It is common ground that only claim of ascertained money valued at Rs.50,000/- or more falls
within the ambit of definition of "dispute". In the present case, if applicants succeed, they will get
some additional days to operate their projects. How much they will earn during those additional
days is not quantifiable in terms of money. Hence, the remedy under the Adhiniyam cannot be
invoked and the parties may be directed to settle their dispute under the provisions of Act of 1996.
The said contention is advanced on the basis of Satish Kumar Riazada(Supra). Shri Nagrath, learned
senior counsel contended that the amended definition of dispute brings within its fold only claims
regarding 'ascertained money'. Thus, a dispute regarding interpretation of any provision of
agreement etc. cannot be a subject matter of "dispute". He submits that the amendment in the
definition of "dispute" shows that the Legislature intended to restrict the meaning and confined it to
the "disputes" relating to claim of ascertain money.
71. Shri Amit Seth, learned counsel for the State opposed the same by contending that before the
Concessionaire submits his bid, he undertakes an exercise by which he determines the gain in terms
of money. On the basis of this determination only, he decides to proceed further and prepare his bid.
It is further submitted that in order to compute and ascertain the sum of money in lieu of work
executed, the average toll collection for a specified period, the cash flow chart, the financial identical
rate of return (FIRR) and the yearly cash flow statement (YCFS) etc. are formed basis for
ascertaining sum of money in terms of concession period. The said mechanism is provided in the
terms of contract agreement itself. Reliance is placed on the order passed in WP No.3057/2016
(Ashoka Infraways Ltd. and another vs. State of M.P.) decided on 28.7.2016.
72. The aforesaid point raised by the parties requires serious consideration. For ready reference, the
unamended and amended definition of "dispute" are reproduced in juxtaposition.
Amended [as by Madhya Pradesh Madhyastham Adhikaran (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1990],
definition of "dispute" under the Madhya Pradesh Madhyastham Adhikaran Adhiniyam, 1983-
Unamended w.e.f. 7.10.1983 Amended w.e.f. 21.4.1990
2(d) "dispute" means any 2(d) "dispute" means claim
difference relating to any of ascertained money valued
claim valued at Rupees at Rupees 50,000 or more
50,000 or more, arising out relating to any difference
of the execution or non- arising out of the execution
execution of a works contract or non-execution of a works
or part thereof. contract or part thereof.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 24
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
The unamended definition of dispute includes "any difference"
relating to "any claim" valued at Rs.50,000/- or more. In our view, the words "any
difference"" and "any claim" are much wider than the words used in the amended
definition which confined the dispute to the "claim of ascertained money". The
Legislature has definitely restricted the definition of dispute by consciously
employing the words dispute means "claim of ascertained money". In unamended
definition, any difference relating to any claim which was valued at Rs.50000/- or
more arising out of the execution or non-execution of works contract or part thereto
was recognised as a dispute. Whereas, in the amended definition 'dispute' is confined
to "claim of ascertained money". There is a remarkable difference in the language
employed in both the definitions. In amended definition, the law makers have not
chosen the words "claim of ascertainable money. Indeed, they consciously used the
word "ascertained". The words "ascertainable" and "ascertained" have different
meaning. "Ascertainable" means an amount which can be ascertained by any process
of reasoning, formula, procedure, investigation, etc. whereas "ascertained" is the
outcome of an exercise already undertaken for quantification of the amount. Hence,
claim of "ascertained money" will arise only when such claim in terms of money has
already been "ascertained".
73. The Legislature has chosen to use the words "claim of ascertained money" and not the words
claim of "ascertainable" money. The word "ascertain" is defined in Black's Law Dictionary as under:
"Ascertain. To fix; to render certain or definite; to estimate and determine; to clear of
doubt or obscurity. To insure as a certainty. To find out by investigation. U.S. v.
Carver, 260 U.S. 482, 43 S.Ct. 181, 182, 67 L.Ed. 361. Sometimes it means to "assess";
or to "hear, try and determine".
In Webster's Dictionary, the meaning of word "ascertain" reads as under:
"ascertain 1 To learn with certainty about; find out. 2 Obs. To make certain;
determine; define. See synonyms under DISCOVER. KNOW [ <OF acertener, a- to
(<L ad-) + certain. See CERTAIN ] -ascer-tain'a-ble adj. -as'cer-tain'a-ble-ness n.
-as'-cer-tain'ably adv. -as'cer-tain'ment n."
In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases, Seventh Edition, Volume 1, it is mentioned
that the word "ascertained" has two meanings, (1) "known", (2) "made certain". It is further
expressed that where money to be paid, has "to be ascertained" in a certain way. It is further
observed that the words "to be ascertained" are very strong words, and they look very like a
condition precedent" (per Crompton J., Braunstein vs. Accidential Insurance, 31 L.J.Q.B.24. In P.
Ramanatha Aiyar's The Law Lexicon, The Encyclopaedic Law Dictionary with Legal Maxims Latin
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 25
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
Terms and Words & Phrases, 2nd Edition, 1997, same meaning is given.
In 'Corpus Juris Secundum', Vol. VI published by American Law Book Company, it is mentioned
that 'ascertained' preterit and past participle of the verb "ascertain". It has been defined as meaning
determined; made certain; and, under certain conditions, has been held to imply knowledge and
gained from evidence rather than from exercise of the senses. It is further observed that it is a
condition precedent rather than a submission to the arbitration.
74. The meaning of 'ascertain'/ascertained given in various dictionaries mentioned hereinabove
shows that it is an activity undertaken by which a claim is fixed or made definite. In other words,
claim is learnt with certainty or it is made definite or determined. The Stroud's Dictionary makes it
clear that where "ascertained" is used in relation to a claim of money to be paid, it has to be
ascertained in a particular way. "To be ascertained" were held to be very strong words and were
treated to be a condition precedent.
75. We find substantial force in the arguments of Shri Nagrath and Shri Savla that even if the
present agreement is treated as a works contract, the Tribunal will have no jurisdiction to decide the
difference between the parties unless it falls within the statutory definition of "dispute" under the
Act of 1983.
76. Shri Amit Seth submitted that money can be ascertained on the basis of average toll collection
for a specified period or on the basis of cash flow chart, financial identical rate of return (FIRR) and
yearly cash flow statement (YCFS). We do not see much merit in the said contention. As the
applicants have based their claim to operate the project for a specified period, if they succeed in
their claim, they will get extra days for operating the project. For example, if a Concessionaire who is
operating a toll plaza succeeds, what he will get will be in terms of extension of days and not in
terms of money which is ascertainable or ascertained. During extended period of operation of
projects, how much will be the vehicular movement and how much toll will be collected cannot be
ascertained at this point of time by any process of reasoning. Similarly, while operating a sports
complex, how much the Concessionaire will earn cannot be determined/ascertained by any guess
work. For this reason, the claim of the applicants is in terms of extension of days to operate the
project and they are unable to putforth a claim of ascertained money. However, at this stage, it must
be made clear that when a claim is ascertainable and yet the concessionaire has not ascertained the
claim in order to wriggle out of definition of "dispute", the matter would be different and in such
cases the forum for adjudication would be the Tribunal under the Adhiniyam of 1983. Hence, each
case needs to be examined in this regard.
77. The respondents have placed reliance on the judgment of Indore Bench in WP No.3057/2016
(Ashoka Infraways Ltd. vs. State of MP). In this judgment, the court has reproduced relevant parts
of minutes of Additional Work Approval Committee dated 5.6.2006. The said reproduced portion
shows that claim of the Concessionaire was in terms of more days whereas the approval was given
for lesser number of days. For example, the Concessionaire claimed 1542 extra days whereas the
Committee decided to give extra days to the extent of 1194 days. In para 8, this court calculated and
taken into account extended number days. Thus, in our view, no principle of law is laid down in this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 26
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
order which shows that the amount in terms of money can be ascertained when claim of the
concessionaire is regarding grant of extra number of days to operate the project.
78. In AIR 1964 Madras 108 (Thanjavur Permanent Bank Ltd. vs. Dharmasamvardhani Ammal) ,
the words "ascertained claim" were considered. The Division Bench opined as under :
"Ascertained sum" clearly means a sum which has been determined and quantified. It
is not the appellant's case that its claim on account of alleged misappropriation by the
respondent's husband of the bank's money has been established, and, if so, quantified
or ascertained. So long as the liability, if any, of the respondent's husband is not
established and ascertained in a precise sum, we do not see how the appellant could
be permitted to claim a set off."
In 1971 (3) SCC 23 (Badri Prasas vs. State of MP), the Apex Court considered the meaning of words
'ascertained goods'. It is held that "it has to be ascertained which trees fall within that description.
Till this was ascertained, they were not 'ascertained goods' within Section 19 of the Sale of Goods
Act". No doubt, these judgments are arising out of different Statutes. Still one thing is clear that the
word "ascertained" means the amount/good is quantified, fixed or determined. In our view, in
absence of any such claim of ascertained money by the applicants, their claim does not fall within
the ambit of dispute as per Section 2(d) of the Adhiniyam of 1983.
79. In C.R. No.136/1988 (Progressive Construction Pvt. Ltd. vs. MPSEB) decided on 24.6.1996, this
Court expressed its view that if a law prescribes a thing to be done in a particular manner, it has to
be done in the same manner and other methods are forbidden. Following the said principles in
Satish Kumar Raizada(Supra), this court considered the word "dispute" in the Adhiniyam and
opined that the Tribunal can decide only such disputes which are covered by this definition. The
"dispute" under this definition must be for "ascertained money". It means the sum which is "known"
or "made certain" or "fixed" or "determined" or "quantified". Since in the said case, the reference
was relating to fixing the rates of work it was held to be not relating to any "ascertained sum of
money". We are in respectful agreement with the view taken by this court in Satish Kumar
Raizada(Supra). In absence of claim of ascertained money, the cases of present applicants do not fall
within the ambit of dispute and for this reason they cannot be relegated before the Tribunal
constituted under the Adhiniyam of 1983. Thus, even if the concession agreement are works
contract, in our view, the remedy before the Tribunal under the Act of 1983 is not available. The
parties cannot be left remedy less and hence in our view the applicants'/appellant may pursue their
remedy under the Act of 1996.
A conjoint reading of section 2(d) and section 7 of the Adhiniyam makes it clear that a reference to
the Tribunal can be made and entertained only when it is in relation to "the dispute". This ancillary
issue is answered accordingly.
80. So far contention of Shri Akshay Sapre is concerned, suffice it to say that in 2000 (4) SCC 285
[Molar Mal (Dead)] Through LRs. vs. KAY Iron Works (P) Ltd., the Apex Court held that if the
constitutionality of a provision is not under challenge, the court has to proceed by treating it to be an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 27
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
intra vires provision and interpret the same. In the present proceedings which are arising out of
different sections of Act of 1996, we are unable to hold that we can still examine and decide the
constitutionality of notification by which the definition of works contract is substituted. The other
judgments cited by Shri Sapre are not relevant in the facts and circumstances of this case.
81. Shri Shekhar Sharma by placing reliance on the judgment of Kesoram Industries Ltd (Supra)
contended that the judgment of Supreme Court in Viatech Escher Wyass Flowel Ltd.(Supra) cannot
be treated to be overruled. We are afraid that such finding cannot be given by this Court in the teeth
of specific finding given in this regard in the case of L.G. Choudhary (Supra). The Apex Court held
that the judgment of Viatech Escher Wyass Flowel Ltd. (Supra) is per incurium. In the light of
judgment of L.G. Choudhary (Supra), the judgment of M/s APS Kushwaha (Supra) is also of no
assistance. The judgment of Ravikant Bansal (Supra) cannot hold the field. In view of judgment of
this Court reported in 1988 AIR (MP) 111 (DB) (Spedra Engineering Corporation vs. State of M.P.),
it is clear that the Adhiniyam of 1983 is intra vires and its provisions are required to be read as such.
Similarly, in view of judgment reported in 2008 (7) SCC 487 (State of M.P. vs. Anshuman Shukla),
whether or not there exists different arbitration clause giving power of resolution of dispute to any
authority, the jurisdiction to decide the dispute will remain with the Tribunal constituted under the
Adhiniyam of 1983.
82. On the basis of foregoing analysis, we may summarize our conclusions as under:
(i) If an agreement by whatever name called falls within the definition of "works
contract" and difference between the parties is covered in the definition of 'dispute' as
defined under the Adhiniyam of 1983, it has to be referred for adjudication before the
Tribunal constituted under Section 3 of the Adhiniyam of 1983.
(ii) In view of statutory provision of Section 7 of the Adhiniyam of 1983, even in cases
where the parties have incorporated a clause in such agreement regarding resolution
of dispute by some other forum or under the Act of 1996, the forum subject to (i)
above, would be the Tribunal under the Adhiniyam of 1983. This conclusion,
however, will presently not include the cases of terminated contract, which aspect is
pending consideration before a Larger Bench of the Supreme Court. The decision of
Larger Bench will draw the curtains on this aspect.
(iii) The judgment of Jabalpur Corridor(Supra) reported in 2014 (2) MPLJ 276 and
Ashoka Infraways Ltd.(Supra) reported in 2016 (2) MPLJ 685 are overruled.
(iv) The substituted definition of "works contract" is clarificatory in nature, hence it
will be retrospective in operation.
(v) The words "claim of ascertained money" have a definite connotation and therefore
only such difference arising out of execution or non-execution of a 'works contract'
which are related with claims of above nature will be covered under Section 2(d) of
the Adhiniyam of 1983.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 28
Viva Highways Ltd. vs Madhya Pradesh Road Development ... on 5 May, 2017
82. This reference is decided accordingly.
83. Registry shall place these matters before the appropriate Bench expeditiously.
(S.K. Seth) (Sujoy Paul) (J.P. Gupta)
Judge Judge Judge
mkl/ys/as/dm/sk
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113283980/ 29
