Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1
March, 2025
Author: S.A.Dharmadhikari
Bench: Sushrut Arvind Dharmadhikari
1
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
AT JABALPUR
BEFORE
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE SURESH KUMAR KAIT,
CHIEF JUSTICE,
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE SUSHRUT ARVIND DHARMADHIKARI
&
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE VIVEK JAIN
ON THE 1st OF MARCH, 2025
WRIT PETITION No. 13864 of 2019
VIVEK KUMAR SHARMA
Versus
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND OTHERS
Appearance:
Shri Anshuman Singh - learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Amit Seth - Addl. Advocate General for the respondent/State.
Shri Sanjay Agarwal - Senior counsel with Shri Rahul Gupta, Shri Aditya
Khandekar, Shri Akshay Sapre and Shri Mukhtar Ahmad, learned counsel for
the respondent/Interveners.
Shri Kaushalendra Nath Pethia, learned counsel for the respondent
No.5/N.H.A.I.
WITH
WRIT PETITION No. 26802 of 2018
ANAND
Versus
THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND OTHERS
Appearance:
Shri Anuvad Shrivastava - learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Amit Seth - Addl. Advocate General for the respondent/State.
"Reserved on : 09.01.2025"
"Pronounced on : 01.03.2025".
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 1
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
ORDER
Per: Hon'ble Shri Justice S.A.Dharmadhikari A. BACKGROUND FACTS LEADING TO PRESENT
REFERENCE TO FULL BENCH
1. The State of Madhya Pradesh, in exercise of powers available under Sec. 41(3) issued the
impugned Gazette notification on 24.09.2015, through which around initially 53 species of forest
produce (used interchangeably for trees & plants) were exempted from the operation of the rigours
of regulatory provisions under the Transit Rules. This notification initially comprised 53 species of
forest produce, which included a large number of those species, which are stated to be present in
abundance in the dense forests of Madhya Pradesh in various districts. Subsequently through
another notification dated 11.04.2017, the aforesaid notification was amended to exclude another
9-10 species of forest produce from the rigours of Transit Rules.
2. A writ petition came to be instituted before the Indore Bench of this Court titled as 'Anand vs
State of M.P. and Ors.' (W.P. No. 26802/ 2018), laying challenge to the impugned notification dated
24.09.2015 exempting 53 species. In the said writ petition, when the State failed to file a reply
timely, this Court stayed the operation and effect of impugned notification dated 24.09.2015.
Subsequently, however on application for modification instituted at the instance of certain parties
(private paper mills), the aforesaid stay order was modified subsequently vide dated 14.08.2019,
permitting the applicant paper mill company to transit the forest-produce required for production of
the finished materials (paper and paper products) in the same fashion as it was being done earlier
prior to the issuance of the impugned notification.
3. Subsequently in a separate writ petition instituted before the Principal seat of this Court (Vivek
Kumar Sharma v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., WP CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
No. 13864 of 2019), vide its order dated 12.04.2022, a similar challenge was laid to the impugned
exemption notification. In view thereof vide its order dated 12.04.2022, writ petition pending before
the Indore Bench was transferred to this Court, with the direction for analogous hearing of all the
writ petitions. Resultantly before us are the following writ petitions for consideration, all of which
revolve around the validity or interpretation of impugned notification dated 24.09.2015 : W.P. No.
26802/ 2018 (Anand v. State of M.P. and Ors.), W.P. No. 13864 of 2019 (Vivek Kumar Sharma v.
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.).
4. A Division Bench of this Court, presided by Hon'ble the then Chief Justice vide its order dated
04.12.2024 posted the present dispute for consideration before the larger Bench, in view of order
dated 13.01.2016 passed by the Indore Bench of this Court in an earlier petition styled as WP No.
7491/ 2015, relying upon the orders and directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union Of India & Ors., AIR 1997 SC 1228.
5. Pertinently in the aforesaid order dated 13.01.2016 passed by the Division Bench, the validity of
impugned notification was never delved into nor adjudicated on merits. Thus the present reference
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 2
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
is constituted squarely for determining the constitutionality and validity of the impugned
notification dated 24.09.2015. The Court shall also examine the validity of amending notification
issued subsequently to the impugned notification in April 2017, wherein 9 more species of trees/
forest produce were included over and above 53 species, taking the tally of exempted species to '62
species'. Though the amending notification of April 2017 has not been challenged, however since the
original notification is assailed, it will torpedo the amending notification if quashed by this Court.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 "(cid:128)(cid:129)(cid:130)(cid:131)(cid:132)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:135) (cid:136)(cid:135)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:128)(cid:129)(cid:136)(cid:135)(cid:132)(cid:137)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:138) (cid:128)(cid:139) (cid:140)
(cid:128)(cid:129) (cid:128)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:139) (cid:132)(cid:141) (cid:138) (cid:128)(cid:129)(cid:132)(cid:141) (cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:138) (cid:134) (cid:141) (cid:139) (cid:142)"
A pond equals ten wells, a reservoir equals ten ponds, A son equals ten reservoirs,
and a tree equals ten sons !!!
- Extracted from Verse No. 512, Chapter 154 of Matsya Purana.
A tree therefore is stated to give life to ten families.
*** "The damages due to climate change or the adverse effects pose an existential
threat, and it's not that it is far away, its right now looming on our heads; if
unattended, it can cause immense, irreversible damage in the foreseeable future."
- Mr. Justice K.V. Viswanathan, Judge, Supreme Court of India in the 4th Justice H.R. Khanna
Memorial National Symposium held on 07th July 2024 organized by Dharmashastra National Law
University (DNLU), Jabalpur.
B. FOREST COVER IN MADHYA PRADESH: SUMMARY OF FSI
REPORTS FROM 2019-2023
6. Before moving ahead to discussion on various constitutional and environmental paradigms, a
brief reference can be made to the facts and figures recorded by Forest Survey of India in its
biannual reports on status of forest cover in India, with State wise descriptions. Forest Survey of
India (for short, 'FSI') is a nodal organization established under the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Government of India (for short, 'MoEF') whose principal mandate is to conduct survey and
assessment of forest resources in the country. Started in the year 1965 on a smaller scale, it was
formally CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 reorganized in the year 1981, succeeding its
predecessor Pre-Investment Survey of Forest Resources (PISFR).
7. Therefore the reports which we shall be making reference to hereinafter of FSI possesses an
element of authenticity in as much they have been prepared under the umbrella and oversight of the
MoEF itself. The policies and reports of MOEF have attracted a lot of engagement and attention of
this court, as also subject matter of emphatic arguments by various contesting parties.
8. Madhya Pradesh is a forest-rich State ranking first in the country in terms of the Recorded Forest
Area (for short, 'RFA'), stretching over a total of 94,689 sq. km of the total geographical land area of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 3
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
the State (30.72 percent of its total geographical area). Out of this 61,886 sq. km is reserved forest,
whilst 31,098 sq. km is protected forest and 1705 sq. km is unclassified forest as in the year 2019. 10
national parks, 25 wildlife sanctuaries and 8 tiger reserves along with 19 notified Eco-sensitive
Zones are comprised in this forest cover of the State. However the actual forest cover (that under
self-sustaining tree plantation with biodiversity, flora and fauna) as per the FSI Report of 2019 is
77,482.49 sq. km, which is 25.14 percent of the State's geographical area.
9. The eastern patch of Madhya Pradesh from southern to southeastern and to eastern portions,
comprising the districts between Harda, Hoshangabad at the bottom to Tikamgarh, Chhatarpur at
the top possesses the major forest cover of the state, housing majority of national parks, sanctuaries
and reserved forests. To the contrary, the western part of Madhya Pradesh, comprising districts like
Ujjain, Shajapur, Indore, Ratlam, etc. and areas bordering Rajasthan and Gujarat have a very scarce
forest cover. The areas of northern Madhya Pradesh comprising districts falling in the Chambal
division of CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Gwalior, Shivpuri, Shivpur, etc., have discrete
patches of Moderate Dense Forest (for short, 'MDF') spread sporadically.1
10. The distribution of density of forest in the State of MP is as follows:
a. 6676.02 sq. km under very dense forest;
b. 34,341.40 sq. km under moderately dense forest (MDF); and c. 36,465.07 sq. km
under open forest.
Class Area % of GA
VDF 6,676.02 2.17
MDF 34,341.40 11.14
OF 36,465.07 11.83
Total 77,482.49 25.14
Scrub 6,001.91 1.95
11. These are figures which may vary to certain extent in reports of other
environmental and wildlife institutes (government or private), but for lending
authenticity to our judgment, we have picked up and referred to extracts from FSI
Reports.
12. The forests in Madhya Pradesh are broadly classified under the headings of
'tropical moist deciduous forest', 'tropical dry deciduous forests', 'tropical thorn
forests', 'littoral swamp or hill forests'. This description is being offered to show the
stretched expanse of and incalculable biodiversity of trees, plants, shrubs and herbs
in different types/ classes of forests of Madhya Pradesh.
13. Cumulative & combined reading of FSI Reports from 2019 to 2023 prepared
biannually demonstrates that between 2019 and 2023, there had Figure no. 11.15.3 at
page 146 of SFI report 2019 CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 been a net
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 4
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
reduction of 420 sq. kms of forest cover in the State of Madhya Pradesh. This figure
encapsulates within itself an increase of 363 sq. km of very dense forest area, but
corresponding severe/ sharp decrease of 630 sq. km approx and decrease of 104 sq.
km approx of moderate dense forest and open forest area, which takes the net figure
to 420 sq. km. Correspondingly there has been an increase of non-forest areas of
3,200 sq. km area approx in the non-forest area of the State. These figures clinchingly
point out that where on one hand every year forest cover is admittedly shrinking
swiftly, on the other hand non-forest area is getting compounded by stretching its
arms in the State of M.P.
14. The reasons that were attributed for the loss of forest cover and increase of
non-forest area in various FSI reports have been highlighted as follows:
● The Harvesting of short rotation plantations, ● Shifting cultivation practices, ●
Human activities such as encroachment, and excessive felling & cutting of trees for
timber and wood inside the forest areas. ● Natural calamities like storms, floods, and
landslides, Titles given to beneficiaries under the Forest Rights Act 2006.
15. From the above, therefore both human intervention, activities as well as natural
processes are reasons behind the fast-decreasing forest cover of MP. It is estimated
that if the forest cover keeps decreasing at the pace it is happening in Madhya
Pradesh, then in the next 50 years, almost half of the current forest cover would be
wiped off/ disappear from the notified forests of the State of M.P. Judicial notice can
therefore be taken of the above facts and it can be safely assumed that the spectre of
environmental degradation is 'existential' and 'not futuristic'; it is right in front of the
current generation, staring at us eye to eye, sounding an alarming call that the
environment has to CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 be at the forefront and
priority, whilst framing or implementation of any of the developmental policies by
the State.
C. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION IN THE PRESENT REFERENCE
16. Issues for consideration, ancillary and incidental to the principal issue of validity of the
impugned notification, which this Court shall be answering, are broadly as follows:
a.) Whether the challenge to the impugned notification can be repelled on the
grounds of delay and laches for belated challenge after 4 years of its issuance?
b.) Whether the scheme of Section 2(4) of the Forest Act permits to separate
exemption differentially for government as well as the private lands?
c.) What is the interrelation between Articles 41(1), (2) on one hand and 41(3) on the
other; the nature and character of powers of exemption available under Section
41(3)?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 5
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
d.) Whether the impugned notification dated 24.09.2015 is valid and Constitutional;
the impact of Reports, Recommendations and Policies of MoEF and MoA,
Government of India on the validity of the same?
e.) Whether the impugned exemption notification suffers from the vice of 'manifest
arbitrariness', resultantly being unconstitutional and invalid?
f.) Whether the annulment or quashing of the impugned exemption notification
would lead to revival of previously issued exemption notifications of 2005 and 2007;
the directions in respect thereof;
D. CONTENTIONS OF VARIOUS PARTIES AND INTERVENERS:
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
17. It would be condign to point out that though there was a potent contest made to
the impugned notifications before the Indore Bench in W.P. No. 26802 of 2018
(Anand v. The State of Madhya Pradesh) on behalf of the PIL petitioner and some of
the intervener environmentalists before it, however after the aforesaid writ petition
was transferred to Jabalpur, there has been no representation on behalf of various
environmentalists, petitioners before this Court. This is despite the fact that public
notice about the reference proceedings was disseminated widely by also being placed
on the homepage of the official website of the High Court. We restrain ourselves from
delving into the reasons for the same, which may be attributable also to lack of
financial wherewithal of the PIL petitioners to contest the matter at Jabalpur, instead
of Indore.
18. Apart from the environmentalists and public-spirited citizens, certain
proceedings by way of intervention applications and writ petitions have also been
taken out by the farmers owning private lands (Bhumiswamis) and companies
engaged in agroforestry. (Orient paper mill).
19. The contentions of the private landowners, intervener industrial houses and
companies in support of the impugned notification are briefly as follows:
a. The impugned notification dated 24.09.2015 simply expands its ambit from
previously exempted 9 species, exempted earlier in 2005 to 53 in the year 2015,
without changing the nature and colour of exemption. Since there is no challenge laid
to the previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007, under Sec. 41(3), the same
will immunise any challenge to the subsequently issued notification of 2015. It is the
contention of the farmer petitioners and corporate interveners that therefore
challenge to impugned notification cannot sustain.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 6
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 b. The State has issued the exemption
notification in exercise of its statutory powers delegated under Sec. 41(3) of the
Forest Act, which it is when competent to notify and therefore in the absence of any
challenge to the constitutionality of Sec. 41(3) of the Act or the Transit Rules, 2000,
the baby of the parent (i.e. impugned notification) cannot be challenged. The Forest
Act is an enactment relatable to Entry 17A of List III under Schedule VII and thus
well within the legislative competence of the State to enact and legislate. In view
thereof, the challenge to notification is feeble and not well advised;
c. The challenge to impugned notification is grossly barred by delay and laches, as the
notification was issued as early as in the year 2015, but the petition came to be filed
in 2019, after a delay of 4 years and thus the petition is not maintainable. The
petition is a sponsored litigation, with the petitioners being set up by certain
competitor companies for creating hurdles in the business of transit, trading and
transportation of forest produce by private landowners and corporate houses in and
from the State of Madhya Pradesh;
d. In the MoEF report by a High Powered Committee (for short, 'HPC') headed by
Shri A.K. Bansal ADG (FC), titled as 'The Regulatory Regime Regarding Felling &
Transit Regulation for Tree Species Grown on Non Forest/ Private Lands', coupled
with recommendations of the MoEF, titled as 'Guidelines for felling and transit
regulations' of November 2014 (for short, 'MoEF recommendations of 2014'), the
State of M.P. has simply acted upon the said reports and recommendations. Whilst
issuing the impugned notification all those species of trees have been exempted, the
plantation of which and forest produce generating from which are utilised widely by
the farmers for CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 their business, trade and
earning, as also supplied to the various corporate and industrial houses for
manufacturing of processed products like paper, rubber, etc. many such consumable
and end products;
e. The impugned notification draws its sustenance from the A.K. Bansal report of
2012 as well as the MoEF recommendations of 2014 of liberalising the regulatory
regime pertaining to transit and transportation of forest produce of all those trees
and timbers, which are of foreign origin, are grown on private lands and used for
local businesses and earnings by small farmers and corporate/ industrial houses;
f. Even if the impugned notification of 2015 is set aside by this Court exempting 53
species, the result is the revival of previous notifications of 2005 and 2007,
permitting exemption of 9-12 species from the ambit and applicability of Transit
Rules framed by the State. Therefore no useful purpose will actually be served by
quashing the 2015 notification, except the fact that the number of species exempted
by the State Government shall be reduced again from 53 in number to previously
existing 9 -12 in number as issued in 2005/ 2007.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 7
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
20. The contentions on behalf of the State Government led by the Additional
Advocate General (for short, 'AAG'), Mr. Amit Seth, Senior Advocate in defence of the
impugned notification were broadly as follows:
a. The exemption notification is issued in exercise of delegated powers under Sec.
41(3) r/w Rule 3 of the Transit Rules, and till the constitutionality of both is
challenged specifically, the challenge to impugned notification cannot survive and
should be rejected on the said ground itself;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 b. Referring to the departmental note sheets
showing internal deliberations within the forest department of senior-level officers of
the Government, it is stated that exemption notifications have not been issued
mechanically, but after deliberations upon the A.K. Bansal Report, the MoEF
Recommendations of 2014 & the National Agro-forestry Policy. Only those species
have been exempted, which in the 'informed opinion' and 'satisfaction' of the State
Government were of such nature, of which private cultivation, plantation and
removal be encouraged by private landowners, farmers and Bhumiswamis. The State
had also taken into consideration the National Agroforestry Policy framed by the
Ministry of Agriculture in Cooperation, Government of India in 2014, and the
National Forest Policy, 1988. These 53 species have been exempted with the objective
of encouraging and expanding tree plantation in complementarity and integrated
manner with crops and livestock to improve productivity, employment, income and
livelihood of rural households, especially the small tenure holder farmers.
c. Placing reliance upon the A.K. Bansal Report, it was stated that liberalisation and
relaxation from regulatory transit regime ensures facilitative role by the Government
and all those species which farmers can easily grow on their land in non-forest areas
for making an earning for themselves have been liberated from the regulatory checks
by the State. This has been done after a lot of deliberations, consultations and after
calling for views from multiple stakeholders for effectively utilizing non-forest private
lands for afforestation and plantation purposes.
d. The writ petitions are based on misplaced presumptions and assumptions that
owing to impugned notification exempting various species, forests CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 are being cut on large scale deforestation is being encouraged
by the State Government and illegal trading is being encouraged. To the contrary, the
exemption is operational strictly in non-forest private lands, and not within or from
the notified forest area.
e. Referring to detailed status report filed with the reply, it has been stated that there
is sufficient manpower, resource control and management, strict regulation and
checking being undertaken of any forest produce originating within the notified
forest area and the State has ensured that illegal felling of trees doesn't happen for
the purposes of illegal transportation of forest produce from within the forest area.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 8
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
f. The exemption in its operation and effect meant only for transportation and transit
outside the forest areas of the State, within the rural and urban areas, qua the forest
produce generated out of plantation affected on private lands, by private landowners
and farmers. Therefore the writ petition makes a false cry about illegal deforestation
or illegal felling of trees, when forests of the State are completely insulated and
immunized from outside interference by unscrupulous traders or offenders engaging
in deforestation activities.
E. MAINTAINABILITY OF THE INSTANT WPs ON GROUND OF
DELAY & LACHES
21. A preliminary objection was raised about delay on the part of PIL petitioners and
environmentalists interveners in challenging the impugned notification of
September, 2015 through writ petitions filed after inordinate delay of more than 3
years. In the same breath, it was also argued that the Indore bench had already
repelled the challenge to the said notification earlier through its judgment dated
13.01.2016 Passes in W.P. No. 7491/ 2015 (Satyadev Singh CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Tiwari v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.), which was
well known publicly and therefore petitioner deliberately waited for 2 to 3 years to
file a similar writ petition with the same reliefs for reasons best known to them.
22. We have had an occasion to glean through the judgment passed by the Indore
bench of this Court in W.P. No. 7491/2015 (Satyadev Singh Tiwari v. The State of
Madhya Pradesh & Ors.). The said judgment nowhere deals with the validity or
tenability of the impugned notifications exempting 53/62 species from the ambit of
the provisions of the FCA, 1980. The constitutionality or otherwise of the impugned
notification from the standpoint of the assail being premised upon it being ultra vires
the Transit Pass Rules or the Forest Act, 1927 has not at all been examined in the
aforementioned judgment. To the contrary, the judgment simply disposed of the writ
petition directing the State to issue transit passes following the guidelines laid down
by the Supreme Court laid down in the proceedings of T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulpad v.
Union of India, AIR 1997 SC 1228. This summary disposal was despite a specific relief sought for
quashing of the impugned notification prayed for in the writ petition. Therefore the aforesaid order
of Indore Bench cannot be any impediment to infer any delay or laches on the part of the petitioner,
as the said judgment never delved into or adjudicated the same. Besides the petitioners were also
not a party to the said writ petition, nor has the State contested this factual position of adjudication
of the vires on merits.
23. However, even otherwise we must pen down our reasons why in a case like the present, even if
delay and laches are alleged to be existing in the institution of the writ petition, the same would not
deter this Court from entertaining the petition. Our reasons flow as follows.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 9
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
24. Principles of Limitation Act, 1963 do not apply to the constitutional Courts like High Court
exercising original inherent jurisdiction conferred under CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
Article 226 of the COI. Delay is not an inviolable legal rule, but a rule of practice, which must be
supplemented with sound exercise of judicial discretion after an individualized analysis of each case
and entertaining claims whilst scrutinizing the competing interests of justice. The Supreme Court
has on occasions more than one held in umpteen judgments that in cases where the litigant is
incapacitated to approach the Courts, has no easy access to the doors of justice or the cause is one
(like 'cause of environment' in the present case), which needs two broad shoulders to be carried
onto, the Courts in all such cases must be liberal in overlooking delay and laches in the institution of
writ petitions. Especially in cases of environmental injury, consideration of justice demands that
there must be adjudication on merits by the Court, rather than a summary dismissal based solely on
procedural grounds of delay. The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the matter of
Kashinath G. Jalmi (Dr) v. The Speaker, (1993) 2 SCC 703, after analyzing several precedents held
that the delay and laches cannot be used to expel a claim made on behalf of the public. The Courts
must be driven and governed by the objective of promoting the larger public interest and ought to
examine the merits of the matter, where it is found that consideration on merits might have a
cascading effect on a sizeable section of citizens. Recently the Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court in the matter of In Re:
Sec. 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2880 had an occasion to
examine the maintainability of writ petition (a petition pertaining to validity of Sec.
6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955) in the face of preliminary objections about delay and
laches, raised by the Union, on the premise that after decades, the law was laid
challenged to by the writ petitioners, when it has withstood the test of time. Carving
out an exception in petitions involving vires/ constitutionality of a statute or the
Rules enacted thereunder, especially in the backdrop of constitutional provisions, the
Court held that a rigid CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 approach should not
be adopted by the Courts as changing social dynamics and societal circumstances
necessitate reconsideration of even a status quo, even when the challenge is brought
after a considerable lapse of time. Paras 65 and 66 from the judgment of the
Constitution Bench in the matter of In Re: Sec. 6A of the Citizenship Act 1955 (supra)
can be quoted thus:
"65. Another vital circumstance where the doctrine of delay and laches would not be
applicable strictly is in matters where the vires of a statute are challenged vis-à-vis
the Constitution. This Court has, in the due course of time, accepted the idea of
transformative constitutionalism, which conceptualizes the Constitution not as a still
document cast in stone at the day of its formation but as a living and dynamic body of
law, capable of constant updation and evolution as per changing societal mores.
Should this Court deny a constitutional challenge solely based on delay, it would
effectively establish an arbitrary cut-off beyond which laws could no longer be
re-examined in light of changing circumstances. Such a rigid approach cannot be
countenanced as changing societal circumstances sometimes necessitate a
reconsideration of the status quo--even when the challenge is brought after a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 10
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
considerable lapse of time.
66. To instantiate, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Navtej Singh Johar v. Union
of India, held Section 377 of the Penal Code, 1860 to be ultra vires of the
Constitution, regardless of the fact that the provision was a part of the statute for over
a century. The Court took note of the norms of contemporary society and declared
them to be unconstitutional. If the doctrine of laches were to be applied strictly, time
would run in favour of a constitutionally invalid statute, which CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 cannot be allowed in the larger interests of justice and the
transformative nature of the Constitution."
(emphasis supplied)
25. In the present case, applying the above tests, the present PILs & petitions raise vital questions
touching upon the environmental concerns which are relatable to life of every citizen of the State (at
least, if not the whole country), as it relates to barrier free, unbridled permission for movement of
62 species of trees, plants whose forest produce are completely liberated from regulatory control of
the State, having the potential of adversely affecting forest cover of the State. There is a perceived
threat of a glaring nature to the pristine and virgin forest cover of the State, if regulatory control
over such large number of species is lifted and therefore instead of being an in personam dispute
between two warring parties, questions raised in the present proceedings directly or indirectly
affects a large section of people.
26. The present petition also raises vital public policy issues having wide environmental
ramifications; balancing of the necessity of promoting tree plantation and agroforestry over private
lands on one hand; whilst ensuring that it doesn't lead to unchecked felling of trees in the forest
areas, using the impugned exemption notification as a shield by the commercial traders, timber
merchants and other entities having vested financial interests in the business of forest produce.
Therefore doctrine of laches ought not to be applied strictly to throw out the present claim at the
very threshold, especially when the Division Bench of the Indore Bench in the matter of Satyadev
Singh Tiwari v. The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. (supra), never attempted even to delve in the
said issue, despite the validity of the exemption notification being expressly put under challenge.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
27. In view of the above, the Court is inclined to overrule the preliminary objections of delay and
laches raised by the defendants and various intervenors in unison & we do so.
F. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS, DPSP's & ENVIRONMENTAL LAW
28. Art. 21 enjoins every person residing in the country with the 'right to life'. Art. 48A of the
Constitution of India is an illuminating constitutional provision and a harbour of environmental
principles which have developed in the country over the last few decades. It reads thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 11
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
"Article 48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and
to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country."
29. Avoiding reference to multiple precedents on the above provisions, reference may be made to
certain judgments at the core of the dispute before us about interrelation of a healthy environment,
forests, wildlife with the right to life of the citizens of the country.
30. In A.P. Pollution Control Board v. Prof. M.V. Nayudu (Retd.) & Ors., (1999) 2 SCC 718, the
Supreme Court equated environmental concerns with human rights concerns, tracing both of them
to Article 21 as environmental aspects concern life of any human being. The Court pronounced it to
be its bounden duty to render justice by taking all aspects into consideration, whenever
environmental breach is alleged in any human activity being undertaken. With a view to ensure that
there is neither danger to the environment nor to the ecology and at the same time sustainable
development is ensured, it was held that the Court can refer scientific and technical aspects for
investigation and opinion to expert bodies created under various enactments, or to committees of
experts constituted by it comprising senior, CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 experienced and
imminent individuals from the society having exposure to environmental issues.
31. The aforesaid view has been followed consistently and taken forward recently in the two
landmark judgments of Himachal Pradesh Bus-Stand Management and Development Authority v.
Central Empowered Committee and Ors., (2021) 4 SCC 309 and M.K. Ranjitsinh & Ors. v. Union of
India & Ors., (2024) 3 S.C.R. 1320. In the latter judgment, tracing India's commitment under
international conventions, especially The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), it was stated that India under international treaties, conventions and various
agreements is bound to enforce and effect obligations pertaining to environmental conservation and
protection. Underscoring, the spirit behind Article 48A, it was stated that even though being one of
the Directive Principles of State Policy under Chapter IV of the Constitution, non-justiciable in
nature, nonetheless it indicates and acknowledges the importance of the natural world and five
elements of nature constituting it. The thought that originates from Article 48A attains immortality
under Article 21 and thus Article 48A, 21 and 14 have assumed the importance of providing a
fundamental right to a clean environment and the fundamental right against the adverse effects of
climate change. Climate change is a serious threat and people have a right against the adverse effects
of climate change. The inability of underserved communities to adapt to climate change or cope with
its effects violates the right to life as well as the right to equality under Article 14. If environmental
degradation leads to acute food and water shortages in any particular area, it is the poorer
communities and the backward citizens who suffer the most as richer ones always have resources
arranged around them in such exigencies. In such circumstances, the right to equality therefore
undoubtedly becomes CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 vital for the poorer communities and
backward citizens who have to lay a fight everyday for arranging two square meals a day.
32. The Supreme Court in the matter of M.K. Ranjitsinh & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. (supra)
accordingly whilst propounding the State's affirmative obligation to prevent environmental harm
and to ensure overall well-being stated that it is a constitutional compulsion for the States to ensure
that legislative and policy decisions are being taken in such a well-deliberated, well anticipated and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 12
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
calibrated manner that citizens are protected against adverse effects of climate change and that any
negative impact of human activity/ development is mitigated to the maximum on the environment.
Vide Paras 26, 27, 29 & 35, the Supreme Court held thus:
"26. The right to equality may also be violated in ways that are more difficult to
remedy. For example, a person living in say, the Lakshadweep Islands, will be in a
disadvantageous position compared to person living in say, Madhya Pradesh when
sea levels rise and oceanic problems ensue. Similarly, forest dwellers or tribal and
indigenous communities are at a high risk of losing not only their homes but also
their culture, which is inextricably intertwined with the places they live in and the
resources of that place. In India, the tribal population in the Nicobar islands
continues to lead a traditional life which is unconnected to and separate from any
other part of the country or world. Indigenous communities often lead traditional
lives, whose dependence on the land is of a different character from the dependence
which urban populations have on the land. Traditional activities such as fishing and
hunting may be impacted by climate change, affecting the source of sustenance for
such people. Further, the relationship that indigenous communities have with nature
may be tied CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 to their culture or religion. The
destruction of their lands and forests or their displacement from their homes may
result in a permanent loss of their unique culture. In these ways too, climate change
may impact the constitutional guarantee of the right to equality.
27. The right to equality under Article 14 and the right to life under Article 21 must be
appreciated in the context of the decisions of this Court, the actions and
commitments of the state on the national and international level, and scientific
consensus on climate change and its adverse effects. From these, it emerges that
there is a right to be free from the adverse effects of climate change. It is important to
note that while giving effect to this right, courts must be alive to other rights of
affected communities such as the right against displacement and allied rights.
Different constitutional rights must be carefully considered before a decision is
reached in a particular case.
29. Of late, the intersection between climate change and human rights has been put
in sharp focus, underscoring the imperative for states to address climate impacts
through the lens of rights. For instance, the contribution of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights to the 2015 Climate Conference in Paris
emphasized that climate change directly and indirectly affects a broad spectrum of
internationally guaranteed human rights. States owe a duty of care to citizens to
prevent harm and to ensure overall well-being. The right to a healthy and clean
environment is undoubtedly a part of this duty of care. States are compelled to take
effective measures to mitigate climate change and ensure that all individuals have the
necessary capacity to adapt to the climate crisis.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 13
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
35. India faces a number of pressing near-term challenges that directly impact the
right to a healthy environment, particularly for vulnerable and indigenous
communities including forest dwellers. The lack of reliable electricity supply for many
citizens not only hinders economic development but also disproportionately affects
communities, including women and low-income households, further perpetuating
inequalities. Therefore, the right to a healthy environment encapsulates the principle
that every individual has the entitlement to live in an environment that is clean, safe,
and conducive to their well-being. By recognizing the right to a healthy environment
and the right to be free from the adverse effects of climate change, states are
compelled to prioritize environmental protection and sustainable development,
thereby addressing the root causes of climate change and safeguarding the well-being
of present and future generations. It is imperative for states like India, to uphold
their obligations under international law, including their responsibilities to mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions, adapt to climate impacts, and protect the fundamental
rights of all individuals to live in a healthy and sustainable environment."
(emphasis supplied)
33. Therefore the interdependence and interrelation of fundamental rights of human beings and
environmental concern arising out of any governmental policy decision is well established and
embedded in Indian jurisprudence. Any policy framed by the government must withstand strict
scrutiny of judicial review - of being the least damaging policy for the environment and giving
environment primacy over interests of humans, apart from balancing the same equally.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 G. THE 'PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE' AS FACET OF
ARTS. 21 AND 48A OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
34. We have discussed how Art. 21 guarantees a pollution-free environment, and that presence of
forests is necessary for enabling the citizens to enjoy their 'right to life' in a pollution-free
environment in the preceding section. 'Precautionary Principle' has been accepted as one of the
insegregable facets of environmental jurisprudence, whereunder the State is mandated to protect,
improve the environment and safeguard the forests. It requires the government to anticipate,
prevent, preempt and remedy or eradicate all the possible causes of environmental degradation
including to act sternly against the violators. Recently the Supreme Court whilst examining whether
lands covered under special order issued by the Government of Haryana under Sec. 4 of Punjab
Land Preservation Act, 1900 can be treated as 'forests lands' had an occasion to discuss the contours
of 'Precautionary Principle' in the matter of Narinder Singh vs. Divesh Bhutani, (2022) 15 S.C.R.
1066.
35. The roots and origins of 'Precautionary Principle' were elaborately explained earlier in the
judgment of A.P. Pollution Control Board v. Prof. M.V. Nayudu (Retd.) and Ors. (supra), which
replaced the previously existing 'assimilative capacity concept'. The 'assimilative capacity concept'
assumed that science could provide policymakers with the information and means necessary to
avoid environmental harms, which were predictable and that cure was always available for any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 14
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
possible environmental harm. However in the 11th principle of the UN General Assembly Resolution
on World Charter for Nature, the emphasis got shifted to 'Precautionary Principle'. This was
reiterated in the Rio Conference of 1992 vide Principle No. 15 and thereafter being followed and
adhered to consistently, invariably and has been CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 now
embedded as one of the basic determining prescriptions in environmental and forest cases.
36. The Precautionary Principle encapsulates within itself the special principle of burden of proof in
environmental disputes, where it is upon the proponent of change (who proposes to change the
status quo) to show and prove that the State actions proposed do not lead to injurious effects on the
environment. Also termed as reversal of the burden of proof in environmental cases, the proponents
of any action having adverse environmental implications are required to shoulder the evidentiary
burden of showing that their proposal doesn't harm the environment in incurable, irreparable and
irreversible ways. Even if the environmental risk arising out of the proposed action by its
proponents are uncertain, but 'non-negligible', then 'Precautionary Principle' warrants and justifies
implementation of regulatory action. It is towards this end that the Government, various policy
makers and even the Courts exercising the judicial review must always be geared to. 'Precautionary
Principle' therefore mandates Constitutional Courts to predict the 'non-negligibility' of the
environmental harm and to encourage regulatory action if the 'non-negligibility' is manifest/
foreseeable in such an environmental harm arising out of any human activity or governmental
decision. The governance by the State must also be sufficiently indicative of adoption of
'Precautionary Principle' in their approach.
37. The purpose of undertaking such an extensive discussion about 'Precautionary Principle' in the
present proceedings is to highlight whenever the Court is called upon to choose one of the two
possible views, one tilting towards the 'environmental perspectives' and other towards the 'rights
perspective' (exercise of fundamental/ constitutional rights by the citizens) then by virtue of
'Precautionary Principle', the Court is constitutionally CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
obligated and mandated under Art. 21 r/w 48A to lean towards the former (environmental view), as
opposed to the latter. Courts must encourage implementation of all such regulatory actions that are
designed at facilitating precaution and prevention in matters of environment. If timely precaution
and prevention is resorted to in environmental concerns, then the possibility of a desperate quest for
remedies and solutions to environmental damage at a later stage is always averted. The oft quoted
saying 'Prevention is always better than cure', we keep hearing at a doctor's place in the context of
human health applies on all fours to the environment as well. Prevention is always preferable over
post-problem solutions.
H. PUBLIC TRUST DOCTRINE & OBLIGATION OF THE STATE AS 'ETERNAL TRUSTEE' OF ALL
THE NATURAL RESOURCES
38. Other than 'Precautionary Principle', another doctrine that firmly embedded its feet over the
years especially in the last few decades is the 'Public Trust Doctrine'. The State holds all the natural
resources, including the natural elements present on earth (soil, water, land, fire, forests and flora,
fauna) as a trustee, and not as the owner on behalf of each of its residents, inhabitants and citizens.
The duty to preserve and judiciously use the natural resources in a way that they are always
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 15
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
available in their pristine and purified form for the posterity is the responsibility of the State as a
trustee of all these natural resources. Though discussion shall be undertaken separately about the
scheme of Forest Act, 1927 hereinafter in the later part of the judgement, however it is condign to
mention that Sec. 41(1) of the Forest Act makes the Parliamentary intent luminescent that forests,
forest produce, trees and all the natural resources comprised therein are held by the State as a
trustee and not as an owner. Sec. 41(1) reads thus:
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 "41. Power to make rules to regulate transit
of forest produce.--(1) The control of all rivers and their banks as regards the floating
of timber, as well as the control of all timber and other forest-produce in transit by
land or water, is vested in the [State Government], and it may make rules to regulate
the transit of all timber and other forest-
produce."
39. The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the matter of Natural Resources Allocation, In
re, Special Reference No. 1 of 2012, (2012) 10 SCC 1, had an occasion to expand upon the Doctrine of
Public Trust, duties and responsibilities of the State as a 'perpetual trustee' of the same. It was held
that natural resources have not been placed under the ownership of the sovereign State: because
they neither belong to one State nor to any individual, but they belong to the whole community at
large, with the entire human race as its ultimate beneficiary. Loss of natural resources is a collective
loss of the whole community and advantages of their preservation and conservation ensures also to
the whole community and not to any single individual. It was held that the doctrine enjoins upon the
Government to protect the natural resources for the enjoyment of the general public rather than to
permit their use for private ownership or commercial purposes. The following restrictions on the
State and governmental authority are ingrained by virtue of public trust doctrine:
a. The property subject to the trust must not only be used for a public purpose, but
must be held available for use by the general public and for the futuristic generations;
b. The property may not be sold, even for a fair cash equivalent or for private
commercial interests, even if the revenue generated for the State is extremely
alluring;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 c. The property must be maintained to
protect the people's common heritage like streams, lakes, marshlands, forests, and
surrendering this right to private entities/ individuals only in those rare cases where
abandonment of the right is consistent with the purposes of the Trust.
40. In the landmark judgments of M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath and Ors. (1997) 1 SCC 388,
Intellectuals Forum v. State of A.P., (2006) 3 SCC 549, and Fomento Resorts and Hotels Ltd. v.
Minguel Martins, (2009) 3 SCC 571, the Supreme Court held time and again that natural resources
like forests have such a great importance to the people as a whole that it would be wholly unjustified
to make them a subject of private ownership. In cases involving environmental issues, the Public
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 16
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
Trust Doctrine has a much wider and broader application warranting strict judicial review of
attempts by the sovereign State of parting with natural resources for private or commercial gains.
The judiciary therefore acts as the bulwark whenever private interests for their commercial pursuits
start staring for the utilization or exploitation of natural resources. The Public Trust jurisprudence
has therefore come a long way over the last few decades and has become deeply embedded in the
environmental jurisprudence of our country.
41. The discussion undertaken above therefore leads us to the inescapable conclusion that impugned
notification granting exemption from regulatory control to large number of species, which are found
equally in abundance in the natural deciduous forests of the State must be tested strictly on the anvil
of the aforementioned 'Precautionary Principle' and from the standpoint of State as a 'trustee' on
behalf of its citizens.
I. THE BACKGROUND AND SCHEME OF THE FOREST ACT 1927 AND FOREST
CONSERVATION ACT 1980 CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
42. The scale of deforestation had increased substantially during the British Rule in India, as export
business of various categories of forest produce and timber had received a fillip during the British
regime. Also because development in the form of laying down of railway tracks, digging of mines,
underground constructions, etc. were being undertaken in the whole peninsula of the Indian colony,
therefore forests in India were the softest target with trading of wood in large amounts for various
construction and developmental activities. However when the hue and cry against deforestation
increased, the first national forest policy was announced by the English Government in October
1894 for protecting the fast depleting forest cover in the country.
43. This policy framework of the British eventually led to the enactment of Indian Forest Act, 1927,
the primary objective of which was to implement the envisioned policy of 1894. The aims, objective
and purpose of the Forest Act states that the Act has been enacted to consolidate the law relating to
forests, the transit of forest-produce and the duty leviable on timber and other 'forest-produce'.
44. We shall refer to and discuss Sec. 2 in the next part of the judgment. Proceeding ahead, Sec. 5
titled as "Bar of accrual of forest rights" puts an absolute embargo over any fresh clearings for
cultivation or for any other purpose in any forest area, after the issuance of notification under Sec. 4,
notifying the land as a reserved forest. In the same vein, Sec. 26 titled as "Acts prohibited in such
forests", with Sec. 26(1)(a) prohibiting any fresh clearing and treating such an activity as an offence
punishable with both imprisonment as well as fine. Sec. 30 titled as "Power to issue notification
reserving trees, etc." also vests the power with the State Government to prohibit the removal of any
forest-produce in the notified forest area. Sec. 39 occurring under Chapter VI titled as of the "Power
to impose duty on CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 timber and other forest-produce",
empowers the Central Government to levy/ impose duty on timber and other forest produce,
whereunder the Central Government has been authorised to levy and realise duties on all timber or
other forest produce. This is followed by Chapter VII titled as "Of the control of timber and other
forest-produce in transit", which empowers the State Government to make Rules to regulate transit
of forest produce. It is in this chapter, Sec. 41 occurs which we shall be discussing separately.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 17
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
45. Sec. 45 occurring under Chapter VIII titled as "Certain kinds of timber to be deemed property of
Government until title thereto proved, and may be collected accordingly", by way of a deeming
fiction treats all timber and wood present within the boundaries of the forest area as the property of
the Government, unless and until any person establishes his right entitled thereto as provided in the
chapter. Sec. 52 which occurs under Chapter IX titled as "Seizure of property liable to confiscation"
is a penal provision, enacted for checking illegal transportation or illegal trading of 'forest-produce'
against the provisions of Forest Act, 1927. It reads thus:
"52. Seizure of property liable to confiscation.-- (1) When there is reason to believe
that a forest-offence has been committed in respect of any forest-produce, such
produce, together with all tools, boats, carts or cattle used in committing any such
offence, maybe seized by any Forest-officer or Police-officer.
(2) Every officer seizing any property under this section shall place on such property
a mark indicating that the same has been so seized, and shall, as soon as may be,
make a report of such seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence
on account of which the seizure has been made:
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Provided that, when the forest-produce with
respect to which such offence is believed to have been committed is the property of
Government, and the offender is unknown, it shall be sufficient if the officer makes,
as soon as may be, a report of the circumstances to his official superior."
46. The aforesaid provision has been enacted as a deterrent measure for checking illegal
transportation, storage or trading of 'forest-produce', where under each and every equipment and
means used for such illegal use of 'forest-produce' is seized and eventually confiscated. The
enactment of this provision is indicia of the Parliamentary intent of according high sanctity to
reservation and protection of 'forest-produce'. There are other penal provisions of like nature
pertaining to confiscation, prosecution of the offenders dealing illegally with 'forest-produce' or
timber and woods enacted under the Forest Act, which all speak abundantly against the illegal
movement of timber and wood, being watched strictly by various authorities. The scheme of the
Forest Act therefore is not only limited to the preservation and conservation of the forest area as
notified under the enactment, but also each and every ingredient constituting such a forest, viz. the
'forest-produce', 'timber', 'wood and trees' present within its confines.
47. Sec. 69 occurring under Chapter IX, titled as "Presumption that forest- produce belongs to
Government" reads thus:
"69. Presumption that forest-produce belongs to [Government].-- When in any
proceedings taken under this Act, or in consequence of anything done under this Act,
a question arises as to whether any forest-produce is the property of the
[Government], such produce shall be presumed to be the property of the
[Government] until the contrary is proved."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 18
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 The interpretation of the Transit Rules therefore cannot be
in any manner inconsistent with the larger scheme of the Forest Act, 1927.
48. The Supreme Court had an occasion to test and interpret the scheme of various penal and
confiscatory provisions of the Forest Act, 1927 in the matter of State of Madhya Pradesh vs Uday
Singh, (2020) 12 SCC 733. Whilst examining the powers of confiscatory authorities under Secs. 52,
52A, 52B, 54 to 60 and the legislative intent behind them, it was held that various amendments
affected by the State of Madhya Pradesh to the Forest Act are infused with a salutary public purpose,
viz. protection of forests against degradation, a goal mandated by Article 48A r/w 21 of the
Constitution of India. The diversity of penal measures serves as a stringent deterrent against all
those activities that threaten the pristine existence of forests in Madhya Pradesh, and therefore the
provisions under Chapter IX titled as "Penalties and Procedure" must receive a purposive
interpretation. This is to suppress grave evils that happen within the confines of forests and natural
environments posing serious danger to them and an outcome of avarice of humankind. Statutory
interpretation made by the Courts must therefore remain eternally vigilant to the daily assaults on
the environment. This chord of interpretation sounded by the Supreme Court in the matter of State
of MP v. Uday Singh (Supra) is the guiding light for this Hon'ble Court, whilst interpreting various
statutory provisions of the forest act and the Transit Rules involved in the present matter, especially
when human intervention is involved. Para 30 of the above judgment reads thus:
"30. The Madhya Pradesh amendments to the Forest Act, 1927 are infused with a
salutary public purpose. Protection of forests against depredation is a constitutionally
mandated goal exemplified by Article 48-A of the Directive Principles and the
fundamental duty of every CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 citizen
incorporated in Article 51-A(g), By isolating the confiscation of forest produce and
the instruments utilised for the commission of an offence from criminal trials, the
legislature intended to ensure that confiscation is an effective deterrent. The absence
of effective deterrence was considered by the legislature to be a deficiency in the legal
regime. The State Amendment has sought to overcome that deficiency by imposing
stringent deterrents against activities which threaten the pristine existence of forests
in Madhya Pradesh. As an effective tool for protecting and preserving environment,
these provisions must receive a purposive interpretation. For, it is only when the
interpretation of law keeps pace with the object of the legislature that the grave evils
which pose a danger to our natural environment can be suppressed. The avarice of
humankind through the ages has resulted in an alarming depletion of the natural
environment. The consequences of climate change are bearing down on every day of
our existence. Statutory interpretation must remain eternally vigilant to the daily
assaults on the environment."
Forest Conservation Act, 1980
49. Whereas the predominant purpose of Forest Act, 1927 was to regulate the transit and trading of
'forest-produce' with the realization of revenue from the same, when its provisions were found
inadequate in meeting increasing deforestation in the post-independence decades, the Parliament
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 19
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
enacted Forest Conservation Act, 1980 as an independent legislation aimed primarily at
conservation of forests and all matters connected therewith or ancillary, incidental thereto. Sec. 2
titled as "Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purpose"
reads thus:
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 "2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests
or use of forest land for non-forest purpose.-- Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force in a State, no State Government or other
authority shall make, except with the prior approval of the Central Government, any
order directing--
(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression "reserved forest" in
any law for the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall cease to
be reserved;
(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-forest
purpose.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section "non-forest purpose"
means the breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for any
purpose other than reafforestation."
50. Sec. 2(ii) accompanied with the Explanation is a widely worded clause, which includes any
purpose of clearing of any forest land which treats the activity of clearing of any forest land as an
activity aimed at 'non-forest purpose'. Therefore it would be safe for the Court to presume that
unnatural felling of trees or timber, unnatural extraction or generation of forest- produce within the
forest areas clearly constitutes 'non-forest purpose' under Sec. 2(ii) of the FCA, 1980. The Act is a
short enactment of only five sections and therefore any non-forest activity can be read in only within
the meaning of Sec. 2(ii).
J. PARLIAMENTARY INTENT OF 'FOREST PRODUCE' UNDER SEC.
2(4) OF THE FORESTS ACT CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
51. Sec. 2 titled as 'Interpretation Clause' is the definition clause of the enactment, whereunder Secs.
2(4) and 2(6), defines 'forest-produce' and timber as follows:
"2. Interpretation clause.--In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the
subject or context, --
(1) ....
(4) 'forest-produce' includes--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 20
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(a) the following whether found in, or brought from, a forest or not, that is to say:--
timber, charcoal, caoutchouc, catechu, wood-oil, resin, natural varnish, bark, lac,
mahua flowers, mahua seeds [kuth] and myrabolams, and
(b) the following when found in, or brought from, a forest, that is to say:--
(i) trees and leaves, flowers and fruits, and all other parts or produce not
hereinbefore mentioned, of trees,
(ii) plants not being trees (including grass, creepers, reeds and moss), and all parts or
produce of such plants,
(iii) wild animals and skins, tusks, horns, bones, silk, cocoons, honey and wax, and all
other parts or produce of animals, and
(iv) peat, surface soil, rock, and minerals (including limestone, laterite, mineral oils,
and all products of mines or quarries);
*** CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 (6) "timber" includes trees when they have fallen or
have been felled, and all wood whether cut up or fashioned or hollowed out for any purpose or not;
and"
52. From the above definition, it is thus clear that there are two categories of 'forest-produce'
included under the enactment of the Forest Act, 1927, being as follows:
a. Those mentioned under Sec. 2(4)(a), viz. timber, charcoal, caoutchouc, etc., whose
source or origin is irrelevant for being treated as a forest- produce. Implying that
irrespective of the forest-produce having originated from the notified areas of forest
or not, they shall be treated as 'forest-produce' regardless of the fact that they are
grown even on private land.
b. The second category of 'forest-produce' under Sec. 2(4)(b) is that which shall be
treated as such, only when the source and origin of the said produce is from the
forest, like trees, leaves, flowers, plants, wild animals, etc. If this category as specified
under Sec. 2(4)(b) has not originated from within the forest area, then it shall not be
treated as a 'forest-produce'.
53. Likewise the definition of timber under Sec. 2(6) is also an inclusive one, which includes all
categories of trees and woods, irrespective of their source or origin, regardless if they have been
brought from within the forest area or not.
54. As stated above in the previous section, there are two different categories of forest produce
mentioned under Sec. 2(4) : first, which are treated so irrespective of their source or origin and the
second, which are treated so only when their source or origin is shown to be from within the forest
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 21
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
area CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 and not otherwise. Sec. 2(4)(b) employs the phrase
'that is to say' whilst defining both the categories of forest produce. The expression 'that is to say' is a
vital phrase, which indicates that the definition of forest produce is not exhaustive, but enumerative
and wide enough to encompass everything whatever is incidental or ancillary to the words/
expressions that make up the definition of forest produce.
55. The phrase 'that is to say' has been employed at many places in the Constitution of India,
especially in the entries of Schedule VII and a common expression employed for defining inclusive
generic terms. In the matter of Bhola Prasad v. The King-Emperor, (1942) 4 FCR 17, the Federal
Court (in the pre-independence period) was called upon to interpret the said phrase, as occurring
under the Entry 31 of the Provincial List in the GOI Act, 1935. Entry 31 of the Provincial list, that fell
for interpretation, read thus 'Intoxicating liquors and narcotic drugs, that is to say, the production,
manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, opium and other
narcotic drugs.' It was held that the phrase 'that is to say' has been employed with the intent of
making the definition explanatory or illustrative and not delimiting or restricting the scope of the
phrase with only the words that are employed thereunder. In other words, the said phrase cannot be
interpreted to circumscribe the scope of the definition, nor can the definition be limited to the words
used in the definition clause. Recently the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court made the
following observations in the context of interpretation of the phrase 'that is to say' employed by the
statute or the constitutional provision in the matter of State of U.P. v. Lalta Prasad Vaish, 2024 SCC
OnLine SC 3029. Vide paras 54 and 55, the Court held as follows:
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 "54. The next question is whether the phrase
'that is to say' used in Entry 8 limits or explains the scope of the entry. The
interpretation of the phrase 'that is to say' has fallen for the consideration of this
Court earlier in numerous cases. This Court has adopted both views.
Benches have interpreted the expression as a limiting as well as an explanatory device. In Bhola
Prasad v. The King Emperor, the Federal Court dealt with the meaning of the phrase 'that is to say'
in Entry 31 of the Provincial List in the 1935 Act. Entry 31 of the Provincial List read as "Intoxicating
liquors and narcotic drugs, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession, transport,
purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors, opium and other narcotic drugs." The issue was whether
the Provincial Government had the competence to issue a notification prohibiting the possession of
intoxicating liquor. The Federal Court held that the Provincial Government had the competence to
prohibit though Entry 31 does not expressly grant the power to 'prohibit'. The Court noted that the
words that follow the phrase 'that is to say' were explanatory or illustrative and not words of either
amplification or limitation. However, in other judgments dealing with taxing provisions, this Court
has held that the expression 'that is to say' is employed to exhaustively enumerate. While
interpreting the expression 'that is to say', it must not be lost that it features in the legislative list
which must be interpreted widely and to include all ancillary items. The interpretation of taxing
statutes (which must be construed strictly) and legislative entries in the Seventh Schedule(which are
required to be construed widely and liberally) cannot be the same. This was noticed by the
Constitution Bench in State of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society (1954) 2 SCC 152.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 22
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
55. In State of Punjab v. Devans Modern Breweries (2004) 11 SCC 26, the levy of tax on the import
of potable liquor manufactured in other States was challenged. Justice SB Sinha in his dissenting
opinion, considered the scope of the words 'that is to say' in Entry 8 of List II. Relying on the
decisions in CST v. Popular Trading and Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner of
Commercial Taxes (Appeals), the learned Judge held that the expression 'that is to say' in Entry 8 of
List II is descriptive, enumerative and exhaustive and circumscribes the scope of the said entry to a
great extent." However, the opinion did not consider the decisions in Bhola Prasad (supra) and State
of Bombay v. Bombay Education Society and instead referred to the interpretation of the expression
in taxing statutes. For the above reasons, the expression 'that is to say' in Entry 8 of List II cannot be
interpreted to circumscribe the scope of the entry. The words that follow 'that is to say' are
illustrative and explanatory of the scope of the provision. The expression does not limit the scope of
the entry. Thus, the scope of Entry 8 of List II cannot be limited to the 'production, manufacture,
possession, transport, purchase and sale' of Intoxicating Liquor."
(emphasis supplied)
56. The coalesce of the above discussion is that 'forest produce' shall include everything which may
have the characteristics or attributes of the various defining words/ expressions employed
thereunder. Illustratively if any material or product has the characteristics of wood-oil or resin or
natural varnish or bark, even though not having the same nomenclature, it shall fall within the
definition of forest produce. Any material existing or found within the confines of the forest having
the characteristics of Mahua CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 flowers, Mahua seeds,
Myrobalans, etc. shall be treated as forest produce, even if they have a different nomenclature or
scientific name. The definition of 'forest produce' therefore cannot remain confined to the various
nomenclatures specified or mentioned under the definition clause, but goes much beyond.
57. The interpretation of Sec. 2(4) defining forest produce fell for interpretation before the Division
Bench of the Orissa High Court in the matter of Kasi Prasad Sahu v. State of Orissa & Anr., AIR 1963
Ori 24, wherein validity of the Orissa Timber and Forest Produce Transit Rules, 1958 requiring a
permit from the authorised forest officials for transit of mahua flowers and other forest produce was
challenged. Explaining the scheme of Sec. 2(4), the Division Bench of the High Court held that the
Parliament has made it absolutely clear that Mahua flowers shall be deemed to be forest produce
under the Forest Act, regardless whether they were brought from a forest land or not and even if
grown on private lands, they would still be treated as a forest produce. Once it is a forest produce,
the Government therefore possesses ample powers under Sec. 41 to regulate by rules the
transportation, storage and transit of forest produce as defined under the Forest Act, even though
the said produce may not have stricto sensu generated or originated from within the confines of the
forest. Rebuttable presumption under Sec. 69 of the Forest Act also gets attracted to such 'forest
produce' wherein it is presumed to be treated as a government property.
58. The contention of the various parties of attempting to distinguish between the forest produce
grown on private land vis-à-vis that originating or generated from within the forest areas, therefore
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 23
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
sans substance. In the context of Sec. 2(4)(a), such a distinction is completely irrelevant and in the
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 case of Sec. 2(4)(b), the burden/ onus is upon the person
claiming that it is not a forest produce to show that the said material or product has not originated
or generated from within the forest areas.
K. ANATOMY OF SEC. 41 OF FORESTS ACT
59. Sec. 41 in the above backdrop may be quoted thus:
"41. Power to make rules to regulate transit of forest produce.--
(1) The control of all rivers and their banks as regards the floating of timber, as well as the control of
all timber and other forest-produce in transit by land or water, is vested in the [State Government],
and it may make rules to regulate the transit of all timber and other forest-produce.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may--
(a) prescribe the routes by which alone timber or other forest- produce may be imported, exported
or moved into, from or within 7 [the State];
(b) prohibit the import or export or moving of such timber or other produce without a pass from an
officer duly authorised to issue the same, or otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of
such pass;
(c) provide for the issue, production and return of such passes and for the payment of fees therefore;
(d) provide for the stoppage, reporting, examination and marking of timber or other forest produce
in transit, in respect CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 of which there is reason to believe that
any money is payable to the 8 [Government] on account of the price thereof, or on account of any
duty, fee, royalty or charge due thereon, or, to which it is desirable for the purposes of this Act to
affix a mark;
(e) provide for the establishment and regulation of depots to which such timber or other produce
shall be taken by those in charge of it for examination, or for the payment of such money, or in order
that such marks may be affixed to it, and the conditions under which such timber or other produce
shall be brought to, stored at and removed from such depots;
(f) prohibit the closing up or obstructing of the channel or banks of any river used for the transit of
timber or other forest- produce, and the throwing of grass, brushwood, branches or leaves into any
such river or any act which may cause such river to be closed or obstructed;
(g) provide for the prevention or removal of any obstruction of the channel or banks of any such
river, and for recovering the cost of such prevention or removal from the person whose acts or
negligence necessitated the same;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 24
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(h) prohibit absolutely or subject to conditions, within specified local limits, the establishment of
saw-pits, the converting, cutting, burning, concealing or making of timber, the altering or effacing of
any marks on the same, or the possession or carrying of marking hammers or other implements
used for marking timber;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
(i) regulate the use of property marks for timber, and the registration of such marks; prescribe the
time for which such registration shall hold good; limit the number of such marks that may be
registered by any one person, and provide for the levy of fees for such registration.
(3) The State Government may direct that any rule made under this section shall not apply to any
specified class of timber or other forest-produce or to any specified local area.]"
(emphasis supplied)
60. The subject matter of regulatory powers of the State Government available under
Sec. 41 is therefore 'forest produce', as defined under Sec. 2(4) r/w 2(6). The
regulatory powers of the State Government are very wide and encompass every
material or a product having the attributes or characteristics of a forest produce,
irrespective of it having been cultivated, grown on a private land or not. The
regulatory powers of the State Government would within their ken include the 'power
to prohibit' as well. This is in line with the elaborate discussion undertaken by us
about the role of the State as a trustee on behalf of the public at large of all the
natural resources under Sec. 41(1) of the Forest Act. As a trustee forest (& forest
produce) under Sec. 41(1), the State is therefore obliged to put in place all the
regulatory measures enshrined under Sec. 41(2).
61. For the aforementioned reasons, we hold that Sec. 41(3) is in the form of an
exception to the dispensation under Secs. 41(1) and 41(2). Exception because it
empowers the State Government to exempt any specified class of timber or other
forest-produce or to any specified local area. Being an exception to the norm, Sec.
41(3) must therefore be interpreted strictly and rigidly. This is CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 because the State in a way is absolving itself of the role of a
trustee by liberating the exempted class of forest produce or timber completely from
its regulatory control.
62. We hold that there are two inbuilt limitations on the exercise of powers of
exemption available with the State Government under Sec. 41(3):
a. The power is discretionary and such a discretion cannot be invoked ordinarily, but
exceptionally and sparingly, when the necessity for exercise of such discretion of
exemption exists. The existence of power to exempt is one thing and exercise that
power is entirely different when exigencies for its exercise exist;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 25
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
b. The usage of word 'may direct' indicates the mandatory precondition of existence
of the exigency, viz. compelling circumstances as a precursor to exercise of discretion
of exempting any timber or other 'forest produce' from the rigour of the Rules
enacted by the State.
63. Apart from being interpreted rigidly or strictly, the Court can always read in the
requirement of necessary material and existence of compelling reasons for exercise of
exceptional powers to exempt any forest produce or timber from the operation of
regulatory provisions framed under Secs.
41(1) and 41(2) by the State. The decision of the State must be guided by sufficient data, survey
research & empirical study, coupled with circumstances born out by record that warrant liberation
of any specified class of forest-produce or timber from its regulatory regime. If Sec. 41(3) is not
interpreted in the manner as above stated, then it will become a fountain of unbridled, unfettered
powers vested with the State Government of exempting any/ every timber or forest produce from its
regulatory control and supervision as has happened in the present case. Therefore an interpretation
which serves the Parliamentary intent and purpose behind the CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 enactment of the Forest Act must be preferred over an interpretation which
defeats the objective of its enactment.
L. TRANSIENT CHARACTER AND TEMPORARY NATURE OF THE EXEMPTIONS GRANTED
UNDER SEC. 41(3)
64. Having discussed the scheme of the Forest Act, 1927, we also propose to examine the nature of
the exemption provision of Sec. 41(3). As stated above Sec. 41(3) is in the form of an exception to the
general scheme of the Forest Act, as an specific standalone provision enabling the State to grant
exemption to various species of timber or forest produce from the application of the Rules. Even if
the argument of the State is accepted that the expression 'any Rules' employed under Sec. 41(3) shall
be construed as 'all' and 'every', by applying the principle of literal interpretation, even then it is all
the more reason to construe the limited scope of Sec. 41(3) as exception to the norm of regulation of
forest produce by the State.
65. Apart from being an exception, the powers under Sec. 41(3) possess a clearly 'transient
character', to be exercised for achieving a 'temporal objective'. Meaning thereby that whatever
exemption is being granted by the State, it is presumed to be existential only for a limited duration,
for meeting a temporary necessity, which requires some immediate resolution. By necessary
corollary, therefore the exercise of powers of exemption under Sec. 41(3) cannot be allowed to
assume permanency or perpetuity as permanency or be allowed to become generalised in nature.
66. Besides, we also hold that there are two prongs for invocation of exemption powers under Sec.
41(3) which can be read implicitly in the scheme of Sec.
41. They are firstly the necessity for granting an exemption and secondly the causal connection of
the necessity with the purpose for which relaxation from regulatory control by the State is granted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 26
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
67. 'Necessity Test' : Whenever exemption is proposed to be granted, the burden lies on the State to
justify the compelling reasons, exigencies and circumstances that require exemption of certain
species of trees, plants or timber. This necessity is further subclassified into two different
considerations. Firstly, the timeframe for which such an exemption is conceived of and secondly, the
necessity of such exemption is premised upon a rational reason reasonably justifying the exemption
of such trees or timber for being so exempted. Sans this necessity & rational basis completing the
State to resort to Sec. 41(3), the State clearly cannot cryptically, without any application of mind
proceed to exclude any tree, plant or timber from the applicability of the plenary Rules enacted
under the Act. In short, therefore the State must meet the 'necessity test' before resorting to
exemption powers under Sec. 41(3), whenever such a decision is being subjected to judicial review
by the Constitutional Courts.
68. 'Causal connection of such a necessity with the ultimate decision of exemption': Whereunder not
only the State must demonstrate the necessity, but it must also demonstrate that the only redress
available to the State for meeting such a necessity or addressing the compelling circumstances (say
the demand in the market or problems being faced by the private landowners) is to grant exemption
in place of regulation envisaged under Sec. 41(2); the 'causal connection test' must show that the
regulation under Sec. 41(2) may be more injurious to the cultivation, trading and transportation of
the forest produce then exempting it altogether. The advantages and disadvantages have to be
weighed wisely & judiciously in a way that the necessity for exemption outweighs entirely the
necessity of regulation of such forest produced by the State as its eternal trustee.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
69. That both the prongs or preconditions as discussed above must be shown to be existing
premised upon a tangible material or data produced by the State before the Court reviewing its
decision of exempting the species. The State cannot wash off its hands from justifying its decision of
exemption under Sec. 41(3), especially from the standpoint of the above two prongs/ preconditions;
the necessity test and its causal connection with the decision of exemption as the only available
redress to the problems being faced by the State. In the absence of the above, clearly the decision of
the State would fail to withstand judicial scrutiny taken under Sec. 41(3).
70. Apart from the above, even if the decision of exemption is reasonable, meeting both the
preconditions of its exercise as discussed above, such an action can't have a permanent character,
but will be purely transient (short lived) in nature. It may be reasonable on the date of its issuance,
but cease to be so after a particular frame of time, when either one of the two prongs/ preconditions
disappear with the passage of time. For example there may be a necessity at a particular point of
time to grant exemption to the 'forest produce' of Mahua trees by the State from its regulatory
regime owing to abundance of Mahua in any particular region during any timeframe and its demand
in the market. However the said necessity may disappear after two- three years in the very same
region, very same locality owing to shortage of or depletion of Mahua trees in the forest areas of the
said region/ localities or for the pressing demands of preservation of the said species of tree.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 27
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
71. Ergo, an exemption which may be justifiable today, necessary and reasonable, may become the
inverse after a certain passage of time. Therefore, by its very nature the powers available under Sec.
41(3) are volatile in nature and not everlasting. If such a transient character and temporal
reasonableness is not attributed to powers of exemption exercisable CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 under Sec. 41(3), then it will override and defeat the very purpose of
enactment of Secs. 41(1) and 41(2) r/w Sec. 69, whereby State as a public trustee has the primary
responsibility to subject all the categories of forest produce as defined under Sec. 2(4) to its
regulatory control and keep their transportation, trading under a complete check and supervision. It
is only by interpreting the exemptions granted under Sec. 41(3) to be transient and temporal as
against being permanent or perpetual that the real Parliamentary intent behind its enactment would
be achieved, otherwise not.
72. Whilst affording such an interpretation to Sec. 41(3) this Court has been guided by the
Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the State of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries
Ltd. 1964 SCC OnLine SC 121 : (1964) 52 ITR 443 : (1964) 6 SCR 846 : AIR 1964 SC 1179 : (1964) 1
SCJ 555, wherein the various provisions of Bhopal State Agricultural Income Tax Act, 1953 were
challenged on the ground of having been introduced to achieve a temporary object, which could not
have been allowed to assume permanency. Vide Para 6, the Constitutional Bench in the aforesaid
Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. matter (Supra) held as follows:
"6. The reorganized State of Madhya Pradesh was formed by combining territories of
four different regions. Shortly after reorganisation, the Governor of the State issued
the Madhya Pradesh Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order,
1956, so as to make certain laws applicable uniformly to the entire State and later the
legislature by the Madhya Pradesh Extension of Laws Act, 1958, made other
alterations in the laws applicable to the State. But Bhopal remained unamended and
unaltered : nor was its operation extended to other areas or regions in the State.
Continuance of the laws of the old region after the reorganisation by Section 119 of
the CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 States Reorganisation Act was by itself
not discriminatory even though it resulted in differential treatment of persons,
objects and transactions in the new State, because it was intended to serve a dual
purpose -- facilitating the early formation of homogeneous units in the larger interest
of the Union, and maintaining even while merging its political identity in the new
unit, the distinctive character of each region, till uniformity of laws was secured in
those branches in which it was expedient after full enquiry to do so. The laws of the
regions merged in the new units had therefore to be continued on grounds of
necessity and expediency. Section 119 of the States Reorganisation Act was intended
to serve this temporary purpose viz. to enable the new units to consider the special
circumstances of the diverse units, before launching upon a process of adaptation of
laws so as to make them reasonably uniform, keeping in view the special needs of the
component regions and administrative efficiency. Differential treatment arising out
of the application of the laws so continued in different regions of the same
reorganised State, did not, therefore immediately attract the clause of the
Constitution prohibiting discrimination. But by the passage of time, considerations of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 28
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
necessity and expediency would be obliterated, and the grounds which justified
classification of geographical regions for historical reasons may cease to be valid. A
purely temporary provision which because of compelling forces justified differential
treatment when the Reorganisation Act was enacted cannot obviously be permitted to
assume permanency, so as to perpetuate that treatment without a rational basis to
support it after the initial expediency and necessity have disappeared."
(emphasis supplied) CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
73. A similar view of transient character and temporal nature of certain statutory provisions has
been followed in multiple other judgments by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. A similar view has been
followed in the context of legislations, which may be valid when they were enacted, but later on
become unreasonable and discriminatory when the rationale of classification provided therein
becomes non-existent. Refer to Satyawati Sharma v. Union of India & Anr., (2008) 5 SCC 287 (Para
32), Malpe Vishwanath Acharya & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Anr., (1998) 2 SCC 1, etc.
74. Manifest arbitrariness also encompasses the aspect of transient character or temporary nature of
any subordinate legislation when the exempting provision enacted under Sec. 41(3) ceases to serve
the purpose for which such an exemption was granted. In such circumstances it becomes obligatory
for the Courts to wipe out the said parcels of subordinate legislation. The test of temporal
unreasonableness (in the case of forest produce) in provisions granting exemptions granted under
Sec. 41(3) therefore must require scrutiny and be examined in two different timeframes - first, when
the provision was originally notified and secondly when such provision comes to be challenged on
the ground of having outlived its utility or disappearance of any of the two preconditions (the
necessity test & the causal relationship with the necessity). If the said subordinate legislation
outlives its utility, it gets vitiated by 'temporal unreasonableness' and resultantly rendered
manifestly arbitrary.
M. OTHER ACTS & RULES RELATING TO FOREST PROTECTION & CONSERVATION
APPLICABLE IN MADHYA PRADESH
75. Apart from the Forest Act, 1927 and FCA, 1980 there are hosts of other legislations, designed at
conservation of forests and tree wealth effective in the State of MP. The description of some of them
is provided below.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 i.) Madhya Pradesh Vriksho Ka Parikshan (Nagriye Kshetra)
Adhiniyam, 2001
76. This is an enactment providing for protection and conservation of trees against deforestation,
applicable and implemented in urban and municipal areas of the State. Through its various
provisions it places restrictions & regulates illegal refelling of trees and ensuring their replantation.
The provisions under this enactment obligate any person who intends cutting down trees either on
his private land or on the government land to duly compensate for the same by planting a higher
number in lieu thereof at the designated place. Vide Secs. 17 to 20, illegal felling of trees or their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 29
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
transportation has been made an offence punishable with imprisonment up to two years as also
imposition of fine.
ii.) M.P. Lok Vaniki Adhiniyam, 2001
77. M.P Lok Vaniki Adhiniyam 2001 is an act to regulate and facilitate management of tree-clad
private and revenue areas in the State of Madhya Pradesh, whereunder, if there is a tree clad area;
tree growth in abundance, a management plan has to be prepared under Sec. 3 and it is then taken
under the control of the State Government, through the said management plan. The management
and monitoring of preservation of the said forest is done through the said management plan, which
is a scientific management of the tree-clad area. In exercise of rule-making powers, the State
Government has also framed M.P. Lok Vaniki Rules, 2002.
iii.) M.P. Van Upaj (Vyapar Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 1969
78. M.P. Van Upaj (Vyapar Viniyaman) Adhiniyam, 1969 is an enactment framed by the State for
regulating the trade of certain 'forest-produce' by CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 creation of
State monopoly in such trade. Under this enactment, the trade and business of 'forest-produce' of
certain species gets restricted by the State taking over the control of said species and their
'forest-produce' by notification in the Official Gazette. The Act is however not very much relevant for
the controversy at hand.
N. ORDERS OF THE SUPREME COURT IN THE PROCEEDINGS OF T.N. GODAVARMAN V.
UNION OF INDIA & ORS.
79. During the course of arguments, extensive reliance has been placed upon various orders of the
Apex Court in the proceedings of the case of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, WP
(C) No. 202/1999. Reference has been made on behalf of the farmers and industrial houses and
companies to the two orders dated 12.12.1996 reported as T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union
of India, (1997) 2 SCC 267 and another order reported as T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union
of India, (1997) 3 SCC 312. The initial order dated 12.12.1996 reads as follows:
"1. In view of the meaning of the word "forest" in the Act, it is obvious that prior
approval of the Central Government is required for any non-forest activity within the
area of any "forest". In accordance with Section 2 of the Act, all on-going activity
within any forest in any State throughout the country, without the prior approval of
the Central Government, must cease forthwith. It is, therefore, clear that the running
of saw mills of any kind including veneer or ply-wood mills, and mining of any
mineral are non-forest purposes and are, therefore, not permissible without prior
approval of the Central Government. Accordingly, any such activity is prima facie
violation of the provisions of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980. Every State
Government must promptly ensure total cessation of all such activities forthwith.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 ***
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 30
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
4. There shall be a complete ban on the movement of cut trees and timber from any of
the seven North-Eastern States to any other State of the country either by rail, road
or water-ways. The Indian Railways and the State Governments are directed to take
all measures necessary to ensure strict compliance of this direction. This ban will not
apply to the movement of certified timber required for defence or other Government
purpose. This ban will also not affect felling in any private plantation comprising of
trees planted in any are which is not a forest.
***
5. Each State Government should constitute within one month an Expert Committee
to:
(i) Identify areas which are "forests", irrespective of whether they are so notified,
recognised or classified under any law, and irrespective of the ownership of the land
of such forest;
(ii) identify areas which were earlier forests but stand degraded, denuded or cleared;
and
(iii) identify areas covered by plantation trees belonging to the Government and those
belonging to private persons."
80. The subsequent order in the same proceedings as reported in (1997) 3 SCC 312 reads thus:
"2.....
The inventory should, wherever possible, indicate the origin and source of the timber.
The Committee may for this purpose select suitable persons who would be made
available by the State Government concerned at its request.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 As far as possible, such inventory should be
prepared within eight weeks from today.
(iii) The Committee may, if it considers appropriate, permit the use or sale of any part
of the timber or timber products. Any sale shall be effected through the Forest
Corporation of the State under overall supervision of the Committee.
(iv) The net sale proceeds after deduction of the transaction related costs and
payment of wages to the labour and staff shall be deposited by or through the Forest
Corporation/Forest Department in a designated account.
The modalities will be worked out by the Committee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 31
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(v) The Committee may, through the amicus curiae, apply for such directions from
time to time as it considers appropriate.
(vi) The MOEF will make available as far as possible within a week suitable office
space and provide secretarial and all other related facilities in Delhi (including local
transport telecommunication) befitting the stature of the Committee.
The MOEF will make arrangements for and meet expenses of travel of the Committee. All
arrangements for stay etc. of the Committee (outside Delhi) as may be necessary, would be the
responsibility of the State Government concerned. The Assam Government will make similar office
and other facilities available in Gauhati...
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
4. It is clarified that the directions contained in the order dated 12- 12-1996 and this order would not
apply to minor forest produce, including bamboos, etc."
(emphasis supplied)
81. The coalesce of both the above orders is that the Supreme Court, alarmed by the extent of
deforestation in the country was left with no choice, but to impose a blanket ban on the felling of
trees in the forest area with certain exceptions carved out therein. We have closely perused both the
orders of the Supreme Court extensively relied upon by parties defending the impugned notification.
Nowhere in the impugned orders is there any intent or opinion expressed by the Supreme Court,
with due respect about liberating the 'forest-produce' completely from the regulatory control of the
State or giving blanket powers to the State in exempting species from the regulatory regime of the
State under Sec. 41(3) of the Forest Act. There is no indication, much less expression of any opinion,
even of relaxing the rigours of deterrent provisions being framed by the State enacted to check and
control the illegal transit, storage or trading of 'forest-produce' as defined under Sec. 2(4) of the
Forest Act. The counsels for the parties defending the notification, played around certain sentences,
but however it is the bounden duty of the Court to read the Apex Court order in its entirety and
comprehend the actual import and the opinion of the Supreme Court holistically without being
guided or driven by segregated reference to sentences here and there randomly. What the orders
imply in the humble opinion of this Court is referable to felling of the trees in private lands and their
transit shall not be subjected a ban, but it does not imply that regulatory provisions framed under
Sec. 41(2) shall cease to apply to certain species exempted from the rigors of the Transit Rules.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
82. Ergo, reading the orders in the proceedings of T.N. Godavarman (Supra) passed by the Supreme
Court, it is clear as noon day that nowhere is there any expression of opinion regarding vesting of
blanket, unbridled powers with the State of exempting any species of 'forest-produce' or timber
completely from regulatory control of the State. Such an interpretation of the orders passed by the
Supreme Court would not only be doing violence with the intent of the highest Court of the country
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 32
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
in passing its orders, but also militating against the Parliamentary object behind enactment of the
Forest Act. We have consciously opined so after a lot of deliberations amongst the members of the
Bench.
O. POLICIES OF THE MOEF & MOA, UOI & THEIR CONTEXTUAL
INTERPRETATION
83. Various counsels for the parties defending the impugned notification and the learned AAG have
placed heavy reliance upon following three documents to justify the validity and legality of the
impugned notification:
a. Report of the committee headed by Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC) on the 'Regulatory
Regime regarding Felling and Transit Regulation for Tree Species Grown on Non
Forests/ Private Lands', as released by the MoEF, GOI;
b. National Agroforestry Policy of 2014 as issued by the Ministry of Agriculture and
Cooperation, GOI;
c. Guidelines for 'Liberalizing Felling and Transit Regime for Tree Species grown on
Non-Forest/ Private Land' as released by the MoEF, GOI in November, 2014.
84. In Re: A.K. Bansal Report: The committee headed by A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC) was a broad based
committee, which was constituted by the MoEF to CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 study the
regulatory regime regarding the felling and transit regulations for tree species grown on non forest/
private lands. This committee comprised 8 members and undertook study of the current regulatory
regimes of different states, evaluated their experience in agro and farm forestry and thereafter
proceeded to make recommendations in its report. The sum and substance of the report comprises
regulatory regime applicable in various states to transportation, movement and transit of various
forest produce and exemptions granted by them individually. If this report is seen holistically, it
implies that forest produce grown on non-forest land/ private lands in non- notified areas must be
completely free from the regulatory regime and be liberalized. Apart from this whilst naming various
species, as exempted in various States of the country, the thrust is upon exemption of all those
species, which are generally not available locally or in the nearby forests. Clause 6.7.5 of this report,
titled as "Preferred Agroforestry Species" must be adverted to understand the context in which the
recommendations have been made (Internal Pg. 26 of 42) which reads thus:
"6.7.5 Preferred Agro-forestry Species:
(i) Plantations of preferred species like Eucalyptus, Poplar etc. are one of the main
contributors of timber from non-forestry areas. There is a case for full exemption
from regulatory regime of felling permits and timber transit in all States of such
exotic species not found in natural forests or species with very sporadic distribution
in forests but grown by farmers on large scale. Examples of important other species
under this category are:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 33
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(a) Subabul (Leucaena sp.), Casuarinas, Ailanthus sp; Gmelina sp;
Silver oak (Grevillea robusta) Mulberry (Morus alba), Kadam (Anthocephalus cadamba) Melia sp;
Acacia arabica, Acacia CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 auriculiformis, Acacia mangium;
Acacia lenticularis, Albizzia sp; Azadirachta india, Borassus flabelliformis, Hovea brasiliensis,
Prosopis sp; Butea monosperma, Cedrela toona, Tamarindus india, Grewia oppositifolia, etc. melia
dusra.
(b) Horticultural trees species like Mango, Guava, Coconut, Cashew nut, Citrus, Areca nut,
Artocarpus sp., Zyiphus sp; Ashok , Gulmohar (Delonix regia), Cassia fistula.
(ii) In addition, there should be no restrictions in respect of felling permits and transit of valuable
timber species that farmers can grow in the States that do not have such species in their natural
forests or those districts of any State where such tree species are not natural to the local forests. e.g.
Teak should be freed of all restrictive regime regulations in all states having no teak forests, and
selected districts not having teak forests in states with natural teak forests in other districts. Thus
restrictions should apply only in those districts that have natural teak forests. Species that could be
exempted from regulatory regime under this category as above are as follows:
Teak (Tectona grandis), Terminalia sp; Syzigium cumini, Acacia catechu, Pines,
Bombax ceiba, Schima wallichii, Dalbergia latifolia, Sandal (Santalum album),
Dalbergia sissoo, Padauk (Pterocarpus dalbergioides) etc."
(emphasis supplied) The above Clause 6.7.5 makes it clear that exemption from the
regulatory regime has been contemplated only qua those exotic species, which are
generally not found in natural forests or are having a very rare presence in the local /
regional forests, but grown by farmers on a large scale outside the CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 forest areas. By necessary implication, it implies therefore
that transit regime and regulatory control qua those species that are either present in
abundance or having sufficient visibility in the forest of the State must not be
encouraged for agroforestry on private lands. This inference of ours is bolstered
further by Clause 7 of the Report, titled as "Recommendations regarding Transit
Regime", which reads thus:
"7. RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING TRANSIT REGIME:
Main recommendations of the Committee are as given below:
7.1. Preferred Tree and bamboo species under agro forestry by farmers and not
naturally available in neighbouring forests may be exempted from the transit permit
and felling regulations. As the regulatory mechanism is not uniform across various
States/UTs, there is a need for simple uniform mechanism/ procedure to regulate the
transit rules of forest produce within the State, and also in various States forming a
region. States in a region should work out common strategy in this regard.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 34
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
7.2. Preferred Tree and bamboo species in areas where they are found in the natural
forests/forests may be kept under the limited provisions for felling and transit. The
local Gram Sabha may be authorized to regulate felling and transit of trees/ timber
grown under agro-farm forestry or private lands in the village in respect of such
species. A Special Committee or Standing Committee of Gram Sabha or the Joint
Forest Management Committee (as the case may be) to be constituted for the
purpose. The forest department may initially guide the committee in technical
matters."
(emphasis supplied) CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Thus liberalization of the transit
regime is contemplated and conceived in respect of species which are not naturally available in
neighbouring forests, including trees and bamboo species.
85. In Re: MoEF Guidelines of 2014 :The aforesaid A.K. Bansal Report was forwarded to the MoEF,
which called for suggestions and objections from all the stakeholders and issued the final guidelines
on 18th, November, 2014. These were titled as 'Guidelines for Liberalizing Felling and Transit
Regime for Tree Species grown on Non-Forest/ Private Land'. Even Clause 3 of these guidelines
reiterated verbatim the contents of the A.K. Bansal Report, of granting exemptions from the transit
regime of those species only that are naturally not found in forests present in the State. The
recommendations of the A.K. Bansal Report are found to have been incorporated in totality vide
Clause 3, titled as Guidelines with slight variations of vesting of powers to regulate felling and
transit of trees/ timber so grown on private lands with the jurisdictional Gram Sabha. However the
essential recommendation has been continued of exemption from the transit regime of only those
species not present in the nearby forests. Clause 8 of these guidelines comprises 2 lists, viz List 'A'
(Tree species when exclusively grown on agriculture/ farm land and not naturally available in
neighbouring forests) and List 'B' (Tree species grown on non forest land, where they are found in
the neighbouring forests). These two lists leave no room of doubt about what tree species ought to
be exempted and which ought not to be.
86. In Re: Agroforestry Policy 2014: The Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation framed the
Agroforestry Policy in view of an absence of a dedicated, focussed national policy with a suitable
institutional mechanism. The Agroforestry Policy aims at establishment of institutional setup at
national level to promote agroforestry and recommends a simple regulatory CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 mechanism for transit of agroforestry produced within the State as well as in
various States forming an ecological region. It recommended exemption of all tree species planted
under agroforestry and farmland from State regulations for harvesting and transit. However, having
carefully studied and examined the policy, it is no more than a bunch of recommendations to the
Central Government for introducing a nationwide uniformity in transit regulations framed by all the
States. One of the recommendations being to identify about 20 commonly grown tree species, which
can be grown on farmlands for the economic and ecological benefits of the farming community and
then such commonly grown tree species may notify for exemption from any State regulatory regime,
being so grown on private lands/ non-notified revenue lands.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 35
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
87. Therefore the policies relied upon by the learned AAG may in fact run counter to their
arguments as these policies themselves explicate that only those forest species must be exempted,
which are not found abundantly in the local or regional forests. Be it A.K. Bansal Report or the
MoEF guidelines of 2014, both have consciously placed this rider over exemption of any forest
species. Therefore it would be safe to hold that exemption would be available, if any, to those
species, which were exotic and not found or existent naturally in the local or regional forests. The
term 'local or regional forests' is referable not only to the same district, but also to the same region,
wherein 'State' as a unit may also constitute a region. For example, the forests, flora and fauna of
Bandhavgarh stretching up to Kanha Kisli and Pench forest reserves create a contiguous triangular
corridor, wherein there is huge commonality of species of trees, plants, flora and fauna existing in
them. Therefore the reference to the region would imply even the 'State' as a unit in appropriate
situations, in case of such species which may be existing CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
widely, spread over the whole State in the interconnected, intertwined forest corridors of our State
possessing the highest forest cover in the country.
88. For yet another reason, we are constrained to hold that all the aforementioned reports/
recommendations of policy documents are essentially recommendatory in nature, expressing the
desirability of 'what should be', instead of 'what it is'. Even though at first blush they appear to be
laudable towards promoting a liberalized regime for trading and business of forest produce grown
on private and non-forest lands, however on a closer scrutiny, such a distinction is not borne out by
the express wordings of Sec. 2(4) of the Forest Act as explicated above. Whilst defining 'forest
produce', the Parliament took extreme caution in attributing what should be treated as forest
produce, regardless of its source or genesis. We had in the earlier part of the judgment made
reference to Kasi Prasad Sahu v. State of Orissa & Anr. (supra) to hold that a forest produce like
mahua or timber does not cease to be forest produce within the rigours of Chapter IX of the Forest
Act simply because its grown or cultivated on private land outside the forest area. Likewise in case of
forest produce falling within the definition provided under Sec. 2(4)(b), it would be presumed as a
forest produce, till and until it is shown or demonstrated that the class of material or product
claimed to be falling under Sec. 2(4)(b) has not originated from within the forest area. Meaning
thereby that burden of proof to show that material or product is not a forest produce qua the
ingredients mentioned under Sec. 2(4)(b) is on the person/ transporter carrying it and not on the
State or the forest department. If blanket exemption is granted to a large number of species then it
leads to defeating the very objective of enactment of penal provisions under Chapter VII of the
Forest Act and special provisions like Sec. 69.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
89. Further in view of express provisions of Sec. 69, a presumption is attached to everything falling
within the four corners of the definition clause of 'forest produce' under Sec. 2(4)(b) that it has
originated from within the forest area and belongs to the State. However the said presumption is a
rebuttable one, to be rebutted by showing necessary documents or papers in the said regard. Sec. 69
is wide enough to presume any forest produce as a property of the government, until the contrary is
proved. The word 'any' occurring under Sec. 69 in the context of Forest Act would mean and stand
interpreted as 'every' forest produce. Surprisingly neither the A.K. Bansal report, nor the policy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 36
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
documents of the MoEF have made any reference to the Parliamentary definition of 'forest produce'
under the Forest Act, 1927. We express our dismay the way policymakers frame their policy
overlooking the specific statutory provisions of Forest Act, which would override and supersede such
policies contradicting or running repugnant to it till the enactment itself is suitably amended.
Therefore to the extent recommendations made in the policies of the MoEF or the A.K. Bansal
Report, running contrary to the express provisions of the Forest Act as referred to supra, the Court
shall be reluctant to recognize any legal sanctity attached to them. We accordingly hold so
categorically.
P. SCHEME OF TRANSIT PASS RULES, 2000 & THE NOTIFICATIONS ISSUED THEREUNDER
90. In the backdrop of the above discussion, the time is now ripe now for adverting to the Transit
Rules of 2000 framed in exercise of rule making powers under Secs. 41 and 42 of the Forest Act,
1927. Rule 3 titled as "Regulation of transit of forest produce by means of passes" puts a statutory
embargo over movement, transit or transportation of any 'forest produce' into or outside the State of
M.P., without a transit pass issued in the CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 prescribed format.
Rule 4 titled as "Officers and person to issue passes"
details the competent authorities authorized to issue the aforementioned passes. Rule
4A stands on a different footing than Rule 4B. The distinction between both the Rules
is that whereas Rule 4A deals with 'forest produce' belonging to the Government, that
is claimed by the Government or being transported by the Government, whereas Rule
4B deals with forest produce grown & owned privately. Rules 4(B)(1) and (2) exempts
the requirement of transit pass of transportation of timber and fuel of certain species,
which were 6 in number at the time of enactment of the Rules in the year 2000.
Likewise Rule 4(B)(2) relates to transportation of timber and fuel of trees found over
private lands and the officer competent to issue transit passes in respect thereof.
91. Rule 3 which lies at the heart of present proceedings reads thus:
"3. Regulation of transit of forest produce by means of passes:- No forest produce
shall be moved into or outside the State or within the State of Madhya Pradesh except
in the manner as hereinafter provided without a transit pass in Form A, B or C
annexed to these rules. The Transit Pass will be issued by a Forest Officer or Gram
Panchayat or a person duly authorised under these rules to issue such pass :
Provided that no transit pass shall be required for the removal :-
(a) Of any forest produce which is being removed for bonafide domestic consumption
by any person or in exercise of privilege granted in this behalf by the State
Government or of a right recognised under the Act within the limits of a village in
which it is produced.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 37
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(b) Of such forest produce as may be exempted by the State Government from the operation of these
rules by notification in the Official Gazette.
(c) Of forest produce covered by Money receipts/Rated passes/ Forest produce passes/carting
challan issued by competent authority in accordance with the rules made in this behalf for the time
being in force.
(d) Of minor forest produce from forests to the local market or to the collection Centre or for
bonafide domestic consumption.
(e) Of mineral from forest for which transit pass is not compulsory under these rules."
(emphasis supplied) No transit pass shall be required in view of Clause (b) of Proviso to Rule 3.
Therefore the State Government possesses the powers to exempt any 'forest- produce' from the
operation of the Transit Rules. Clearly such a power has to be confined and read subject to the
provisions of parent enactment of Sec. 41(3), and therefore would be interpreted restrictively by us
as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. We have held that Sec. 41(3) is an exception to the general
rule and therefore for invocation of such an exception, compelling circumstances must be shown to
exist that warrant provision of exemption for being applied to any specific class of timber or other
forest produce under Sec. 41(3). The said principle of interpretation shall apply squarely to Clause
(b) to Rule 3 as well.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
92. Since Rule 4 providing exemptions has been amended way back in 2007, therefore we are not
making reference to it. The challenge in the present petition is confined to the impugned notification
of Sept. 2015. Rule 5 provides for rates of fees for issue of transit pass; Rule 6 the contents of transit
pass, which when read conjointly with Rule 3 makes the intent of regulation clear as noon day. Rule
6 reads thus:
"6. Contents of Transit Pass.- (1) Every transit pass issued under Rule 3 shall specify
:-
(a) The name of the person to whom such pass is granted.
(b) The quantity and description of forest produce covered by it; in case of logs, a list
along with measurement shall be enclosed with the transit pass.
(c) The places from and to which such forest produce is to be conveyed.
(d) The route by which such forest produce is to be conveyed.
(e) The period of time for which the pass is to be in force.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 38
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
(f) The impression of the valid hammer mark.
(2) The transit pass shall be issued in Form A, B or C as annexed to these rules, as
indicated below :-
Form A - To be issued by Forest Officer or the person authorised in this regard.
Form B - To be issued by Gram Panchayat.
Form C - To be issued in lieu of the foreign pass by the officer authorised by the
Divisional Officer, not below the rank of a Forester.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 ....
(4) Transit pass shall be in duplicate and bound in books, which shall be obtainable
from the Divisional Forest Officer. Each book shall bear in identifying number and
the passes in each book should be numbered serially. First page will be the
counterfoil and 2nd page shall be given to the person in charge of the produce."
(emphasis supplied) A conjoint reading of both the Rules 3 & 6 would show that a transit pass so
issued under the Rules shows the ownership of the person to whom it is issued; quantity and
description of forest produce covered by it; place to which it is delivered and the route which it shall
follow along with the impression of valid hammer mark.
93. Proceeding ahead, Rule 16 restricts transportation of forest produce after sunset and before
sunrise i.e., it has to be transported during day hours only. Vide Rule 20, titled as "Forest produce in
transit to be stopped and examined", forest officers at the checking barriers have been authorised to
stop, examine, survey and check at any place any forest produce being transported from one place to
another. The person in charge of such forest produce is obligated under the Rules to furnish the
necessary information as also the production of transit pass, if so required by the checking /
examining inspector / officer at the checking barrier / forest barrier / checking naka. Rule 22 lays
down a penalty for breach of the Rules.
94. The holistic reading of the Transit Rules, 2000 would show that it is a complete Code in itself for
regulating the transit, movement and transportation of forest produce originating from the forest or
private lands within the State of M.P. to outside the State or within the State. Clearly the CITATION
NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Rules aim for regulation, streamlining and transparency in the transit
of forest produce. The officers of the forest department as well as the Gram Panchayat at the village
level have been authorised to ensure effective, efficacious implementation of the Rules, in respect of
which vast powers have also been conferred for stopping any carriage of forest produce, undertake
checking and surveillance whenever so felt necessary or in case of suspicion about the legality of the
forest produce being so transported. If Rule 3 is being seen, it therefore exempts not only the
transportation of forest produce from the mandatory requirement of Transit Pass for the exempted
species of the forest produce therein, but also impliedly liberates them completely from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 39
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
regulatory regime of the entire set of Transit Rules.
95. In other words, the exempting provisions of Proviso (b) to Rule 3 give a 'blanket pass' to the
transportation of timber, fuel and forest produce of the exempted category from the gateway,
bounds and confines of the Transit Rules. The result of operation of the exempting Rule (or the
impugned notification in the present case) is that the only power the forest guard or any competent
authority standing at the check barrier/ forest naka possesses is just to see whether the forest
produce or the timber belongs to the exempted species or not. If he finds that the forest produce
belongs to the exempted species, then he is required to hold his hands back entirely, regardless such
a forest produce belongs to the Government or to any private person.
96. A specific question in the course of hearing was put to the learned arguing counsel for the parties
about the extent of applicability of the Transit Rules to the exempted species, to which a curt answer
came that forest produce of the exempted category can be taken from any place to anywhere into or
outside the State of M.P., without any barrier regulation/ checking by the authorized CITATION
NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 officers of the Forest Department or of the Gram Panchayat under the
regime of Transit Rules.
97. That after enactment of the above Rules in 2000, they underwent amendment on 16th May
2005, whereunder Sub-Rules 1 and 2 of Part B were omitted. Thereafter through another
notification issued on the same day, in exercise of power conferred by Proviso (b) to Rule 3 of the
Transit Rules 2000, the State Government exempted 10 species of the forest produce from the
operation of the Transit Rules. Through a subsequently issued notification on 11th April 2007, the
State Government again exempted two more species from the rigour of the Transit Rules. Through
another amending notification issued on 23.05.2012, one more species was added to the list, taking
the tally total to 12 exempted species.
98. It is then that the impugned notification came into scene on 24.09.2015 issued by the
Government, through which initially straight away 53 (Fifty Three) species of trees, plants were
exempted, whererafter again through a subsequently issued notification on 11.04.2017, 9 more
species of various trees were brought under the exemption knit. Thus as on date with minor
variations, we have been informed that there are around 61 to 62 species of trees and plants, whose
forest produce stands exempted completely. We shall now proceed to examine the validity of the
impugned exemption notification of September 2015 as well as the subsequently issued
amendments adding 9 more species to the same.
Q. VALIDITY OF IMPUGNED NOTIFICATION DATED 24.09.2015 & ITS SUBSEQUENT
AMENDMENTS-
99. On a lighter note, whilst authoring this judgment we were reminded of the recent movie
'Pushpa', which highlighted the syndicate of traders and CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
smugglers engaged in illegal transportation, trading and selling of red sandal- wood in the deep
green forests of Seshachalam, Andhra Pradesh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 40
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
100. The syndicate of smugglers and traders starts yielding so much influence and clout that no
segment of governance is left untouched, from the police to the forest department to the policy
makers and eventually the legislators. It depicts how the monster and mafia of illegal business and
transportation of forest produce can penetrate into the deep forests and in collusion with the State
machinery rob the forest of its natural wealth, with the executive bending to the clout and influence
of such syndicate of 'forest produce' peddlers. Our assumptions are supported by various documents
that constituted part of voluminous pleadings running into more than 1500 pages of the present
batch of matters.
101. At this juncture, we may briefly make reference to some of the documents filed along with the
Intervention Application in W.P. (C) No. 26802/ 2018 as I.A. No. 5384/ 2022 by one Rajveer Singh
Hura, S/o Shri Prem Singh Hura as an environmentalist and Office Bearer of NGO Paryavaran
Prahari. These documents that raised our eyebrows include correspondences exchanged internally
between the officers of the Forest Division of Indore or within the Forest Department. They are as
follows:
a. Letter of April, 2017 addressed by Conservator Forests, Forest Division, Indore to
DFO, Forest Division Indore mentioning about large scale illegal cutting and felling
of lush green & fruit laden old trees and their large scale trading for timber in huge
quantities in timber market of Indore. This letter states that around 100-150 vehicles
everyday have suddenly started carrying thousand 1000-1500 tonnes of timber and
forest produce illegally in all the important markets of Indore, the source CITATION
NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 of which is depressingly unknown. It has also been
directed in the said letter by the CF to the DFO to take necessary legal action in the
matter;
b. Letter dated 16.04.2019 written by Chief Conservator, Forests, Indore Circle to the
Conservator Forests, Indore Division dated 16.04.2019, wherein it was again
mentioned that taking undue advantage of exemption notification to 53 species of
trees, large scale deforestation, illegal felling and transportation of timber is taking
place in the whole Indore Division & various forest areas of the State. It is suspected
that old lush green trees are being illegally chopped off in thousands for being traded
in the timber market by the timber mafia;
c. An Inquiry Report dated 18.07.2019 forwarded by the Chief Conservative Forest,
Indore Circle to Principal Conservative Forest, State of M.P., Bhopal highlighting how
blanket exemption to 53 species is playing havoc to lives of large number of lush
green trees both in the forest as well as non-forest areas of Indore Division. It was
pointed out that the exemption notification has become a license to legitimize
transportation of illegally procured timber, wood and forest produce and trade it
without any checks or control by the forest department, which is severely affecting
the forest cover of the State. In its concluding part, this Inquiry Report prepared by
the CF, Mr. M. Kallidurai, it was recommended that the exemption notification be
accordingly either recalled or modified to revive regulatory control and regime of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 41
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
transit passes over all those species, who are present in abundance in the forests of
M.P. This letter is a clinching piece of evidence that the exemption notification has
legitimised indirectly open loot of forest resources in the State of M.P. in the garb of
trading of privately grown trees and plants.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 d. Though this Court generally doesn't lend
any credence to newspaper reports or articles, however the thread of continuity
emerging from more than 25-30 newspaper reports articles filed along with the
intervention application of one of the intervenors. Referring to 4 to 5 different
leading newspapers in various districts of Malwa region, especially Indore and Ujjain,
it is reported that in the night hours after sunset and before sunrise (contrary to the
mandate of Rule 16), forest produce and timber in humongous quantities in large
convoys of trucks and carriageways is being transported from the districts having
dense forest to city trading centres & markets. There are no identification signs/
marks or impressions on these timbers and forest produce, primarily because they
are exempted from the rigours of the Transit Pass Rules and it is therefore difficult to
identify their source or genesis of origin, whether they are originating from the
private land or from the forest areas. The newspapers can be looked into at least for
information that officials of the forest department are encouraging such
transportation and it has legitimised corruption and sprouted windfall benefits for
the timber mafia. Newspaper reports appeared to be of some of the leading and
widely circulated newspapers as well like Dainik Bhaskar, Patrika, Times of India,
free press etc. However we have not believed the particulars of any information
provided in them, except a general inference about the disappointing state of affairs
prevailing in some parts of the State.
102. The learned AAG representing the State, when confronted with these documents about the
endemic problem arising out of the impugned notification was not able to satisfactorily offer any
explanation. It was simply stated that there are sufficient checks and balances available on the field
for CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 distinguishing between produce of privately grown trees
from that of what is generated in the forest areas. However in the absence of any contest to the inter
departmental correspondences, inquiry reports of its own officers of the forest department, we are
constrained to believe that exemption notification has made the trees, plantation and biodiversity of
the State present in the forest areas extremely vulnerable to the timber mafia. But for the eye
opening documents brought on record by the PIL petitioners and environmentalists, this Court
otherwise would have completely been aloof of the ground reality, and would have held the
impugned exemption notification as completely constitutional, having been issued within the
confines of powers delegated under Sec. 41(3) of the Forest Act.
103. Also the State, despite being asked repeatedly about this in the course of hearing, was not able
to provide any sufficient explanation about the probable adverse effects of exempting such large
number of species from the regulatory regime of the State. The binding dictum of M.K. Ranjitsinh &
Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. (supra) therefore enjoins this Court to hold that till the State justifies
validity of providing exemption on such a wholesale scale by demonstrating that it will not have any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 42
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
adverse effect on the environment, it is not permitted to implement the impugned exemption
notification.
104. The effect and impact of the impugned notifications exempting around 62 -
63 species of trees and plants and their forest produce is therefore palpably writ large. The senior
officials of the forest department have been echoing the concern of illegal deforestation being
amplified for generation, transportation and trading of trees and plants falling under the exempted
category. The Court cannot lose sight of the fact that even though any species may not be exempted,
but if in its appearances and resemblances it is strikingly similar to CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 any of the exempted species, that may also become vulnerable to
deforestation and being placed under the axe/ hammer. One also cannot lose sight of the fact that
the forest officials at the checking point / barrier naaka, possibly in the garb of permitting
transportation of the exempted species may also permit those timber trees, timber and forest
produce, which may have such similar resemblances. The possibility of abuse and misuse of the
exempting provisions not only can be ruled out completely, but can be readily believed to be existing
in many parts of the State. The intervenors as well as the petitioners have highlighted in their
applications supported by annexures how the various trees and plants growing naturally inside the
dense and deciduous forest of the State have become vulnerable to being uprooted or chopped off
with the active involvement of the timber mafia with the forest officials or local representatives of
the Gram Panchayat. We don't wish to elaborate any further except to reiterate that the misuse and
abuse of provisions of exempting notification is not only imminently visible, but also tangible.
105. On the vehement contention of the learned AAG about exemption being available only to trees,
plants species grown over the private land, a specific question was put about the mechanism devised
by the State Government for identifying the source of such forest produce. However no satisfactory
answer available was offered on behalf of the State. On another question as to whether before
exempting 62 - 63 species of trees and plants, was there any study, data collection exercise through
any survey being carried out by the State in terms of the MoEF guidelines of 2014 of finding out how
many of the exempted species mentioned in the impugned notification were growing naturally in the
dense deciduous forest of the State of M.P., no satisfactory answer was offered to this even. We were
at pains in asking the State CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Government to produce any
credible report or any data collected that would demonstrate that the exemption notification
mentioned only those species, which were not present in the local or regional forest of the State. To
the contrary, we found that more than ten species of trees and plants are those, which are growing
abundantly and constitute the dense, wild & deciduous forest cover of the State. Some of them by
way of illustration, were Gulmohar, Ashok, Amrud, Jamun, Jungle Jalebi, some of the species of
bamboo, which can be seen constituting the forest cover of the State. Jungles of Balaghat and Betul
are famous for their indigenous species of trees like Mango, Jamun, whilst those of Mandla and
Dindori comprise diverse richness of Bamboos as part of their forest cover. Therefore the minimum
the State was obligated to have produced a credible document pointing out the description of
natural distribution of diversity of species of trees in the localised forests of the State (both notified
and non-notified); and to have informed the Court dispassionately without driven by any vested
interests as to which all species amongst the exempted lot of 62-63 species were present in the local
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 43
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
forests of the State. However such an exercise appears to have never been undertaken as except
relying blindly upon the National Agro Forestry and the MoEF recommendations of 2014, there is
no other credible material placed independently of its own by the State. The submissions of the State
were therefore completely piggyback on the recommendations of the MoEF, which have been made
generically for all the States in the country.
106. In the above factual scenario, clearly therefore the power of exemption available under Sec.
41(3) seems to have been unmindfully exercised, without undertaking any study or research survey
of the species so exempted vide the impugned notifications. In a way therefore the State has acted
contrary to the very recommendations of the MoEF on which it seeks to place reliance upon
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 and not in consonance thereto. This amounts to gross
abdication of its constitutional duty as a trustee of natural resources, as envisaged under Article 48A
of the Constitution of India read with Sec. 41(1) of the Forest Act, 1927. As an eternal trustee and
custodian of the natural resources and forests of the State, the State Government was duty bound to
have diligently examined before exempting 62-63 odd species as to whether such exempted species
are also the ingredients of our forests or not. The diligence stemmed also from the Precautionary
principle we had discussed at length in the preceding paragraphs, resting on the broad shoulders of
the State.
107. The arbitrary manner in which notifications came to be issued in quick succession from the
year 2005 onwards points out clinchingly of the immense pressure of the timber mafia on the State
authorities, with the environment and forest as its mute victims. The issuance of impugned
notification mechanically, without studying and examining the fundamental aspect of impact of
such exemptions on the existing forest cover of the State provokes the conscience of this Court,
which has been compounded by dissatisfactory answers given by the State in the present
proceedings. It has been almost 10 years from the date impugned exemption notifications were
issued and an additional obligation with State is enjoined upon was to have examined the impact
and correlation of the impugned notification with the fast depleting forest cover of the State. The
State ought to have analysed and assessed whether there exists any causal connection between the
fast depleting forest cover and the impugned exemption notification, in as much as perceivably the
exemption notification has triggered, encouraged and enhanced the deforestation activities in the
State. The State has even failed to carry out such post audit analysis and assessment after issuing the
impugned exemption CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 in the last one decade. What is more
appalling is frequent additions and improvements of the said exemption list now and then.
108. As stated supra, the impugned notification of 2015 also grants blanket exemption from the very
applicability of Transit Rules, 2000 to all the 62-63 species.
109. The circumstances warranting applicability of 'exception/ exemption clauses' also can never be
presumed to be existing till eternity. They are by their very nature temporal in nature having a fixed
life. The power to exempt available to the State is not only circumscribed by the existence of
compelling circumstances, but also the life of the existence of such compelling circumstances.
Meaning thereby that such compelling circumstances cannot be presumed to be existing forever or
till infinity, but for a limited duration, say two or three years. It cannot be argued that an exception
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 44
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
once created shall exist forever, lest the very purpose of creating an exception stands defeated.
Likewise an exemption once provided, by necessary corollary will also not be held to be existing
forever but a duty is cast upon the State and the exemption authorities to review the life of such
exemption at regular intervals, say every two years or three years. If the exempting provision is
presumed to be carrying an endless life, then it becomes repugnant to the principal charging
provision putting in place the regulatory regime. Therefore the power available to the State
Government under Sec. 41(3) is a transitory, temporal power, having a fixed life/ duration, which is
determined by the existence of compelling circumstances, exigencies that necessitates the exercise of
powers of exemption by the State Government under Sec. 41(3) r/w Proviso (b) to Rule 3 of the
Transit Rules, 2000. Therefore not only the State is obligated to review at regular intervals the
exemptions issued under Sec. 41(3) for various species, but also to examine CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 and demonstrate that the necessity for renewal/ continuation/ extension of
such exemption exists to the same degree and to the same extent as it was existing before.
Illustratively a species of tree may be available in the forest areas, as also being grown on private
lands (for example, Subabul, Gulmohar and Eucalyptus trees). It might happen that owing to
exemption being provided to these species of trees or timber, their exploitation in the forest areas
may also start, leading to their aggravated depletion or degradation in the forest areas.
110. If the State finds after two or three years of granting exemption that such an exemption is
annihilative of the existence of such species in the forest areas, leading to their depletion or decrease
in their presence with the misuse of the exempting provisions by the public at large, then the
exemption may be revoked. This is called periodic audit and scrutiny of the necessity of the
exemption notification. When a question was put to the State counsel about the life of exemption
provided to the 62-63 species vide the impugned notification, the answer was very amusing, viz. till
the State Government feels it appropriate. Accordingly we hold and direct that State as an eternal
trustee of the natural resources on behalf of the public at large is duty bound to examine, review and
assess the necessity of continuing/ extending/ renewing the operation of exemption notification qua
any species at least every three years before continuing the said species in the exempted category
under Sec. 41 (3). Apart from the absence of any study or survey behind issuance of the impugned
notification, there is no document brought on record that shows even on date all the 62-63 species
deserve exercise of exceptional powers of exemption under Sec. 41(3) of the Forest Act after 10 years
of their exemption by the State. That this is yet another reason for our holding that the CITATION
NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 impugned notification granting exemption can't be allowed to continue
or hold the field in the State.
111. For all the above mentioned reasons we hold that the impugned notification dated 24.09.2015
and the amendments affected vide the subsequently issued notification of April, 2017 are ultra vires
the provisions of Secs. 41(1), (2) & (3), being manifestly arbitrary having been issued without any
compelling reasons or circumstances for exempting such large number of species of trees and
plants. Both the notifications are therefore held to be invalid and liable to be struck down by this
Court.
R. IMPUGNED NOTIFICATION OF EXEMPTION BEING
'MANIFESTLY ARBITRARY'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 45
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
112. The Supreme Court in the matter of Cellular Operators Association of India & Ors. v. Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India & Ors., (2016) 7 SCC 703 held that in order to pass the scrutiny of
Article 14, the provision under challenge must be shown to have been drafted as a result of
intelligent care, deliberations and due application of mind as statutorily expected by the authority.
In the absence of such intelligent care, deliberation or diligence of consideration of relevant factors
and material by the decision-making authority, it is always susceptible to challenge on the ground of
being manifestly arbitrary and ultra vires the provisions of the parent enactment, conferring such
power to take such administrative decision or pass subordinate legislation. In the landmark
judgment of Shayara Bano v. Union of India & Ors., (2017) 9 SCC 1, the test for manifest
arbitrariness was systematically reiterated. A legislation or any subordinate legislation would
become manifestly arbitrary under Article 14 when the enacting authority acts capriciously,
irrationally, with oblique or without adequate determining principle. When something is done in an
excessive and disproportionate CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 manner, contrary to the
provisions, purpose and objective for which such a power is conferred by the parent enactment, such
a piece of executive action or subordinate legislation becomes manifestly arbitrary. Such a test of
manifest arbitrariness can be resorted to for invalidating legislation or a Parliamentary/ State
enactment as well under Article 14.
S. REVIVAL OF EARLIER NOTIFICATIONS OF 2005 & 2007 ON ANNULMENT OF IMPUGNED
NOTIFICATION
113. There was a lot of argumentation over the effect of annulment of the impugned notification of
September, 2015. It was argued that even if the impugned notification is annulled, the impact would
be automatic revival of the previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007 under the provisions of
Transit Rules, 2000. While on the proposition of law that annulment of the impugned notification
shall automatically revive the validity of the previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007, there
is no quarrel, for other reasons we shall decline this relief even to the landowners and the industrial
corporates.
114. in view of what we have held above about the nature of 'exempting provision' of Sec. 41(3) and
character of the notifications issued thereunder being temporal and transitory, even though the
annulment of the impugned notification ideally should lead to automatic revival of the previously
issued notifications of 2005 and 2007, however this Court is appropriate cases has the powers to
mould the relief sought for by the petitioners and issue appropriate directions to avoid perpetration
of injustice or loss to environment attributable to final reliefs claimed by the claimants. The power
of the Writ Court to mould the relief suitably under Art. 226 of the Constitution needs no
elaboration and is settled by a host of precedents of this Court as well as the CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Supreme Court wherever it is so necessary to prevent injustice being
perpetuated owing to reliefs being granted by the Court eventually.
115. Therefore, even though the validity of the previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007
would revive (since they were substituted by the impugned exemption notification), we deem it fit to
restrain the State Government from enforcing them by staying their operation and effect by keeping
them in abeyance for a period of 6 months from the date of this judgment. During this period of 6
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 46
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
months, if the State intends to come out with any fresh exemption notification of any number of
species, then it shall undertake a State wide study and survey by a High Powered Committee (for
short, 'HPC') constituted by it for finding out which all species proposed to be exempted are present
substantially/ significantly in the local and regional forests of the State. By forest we mean not only
notified forest, but the forests as defined and interpreted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
matter of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India, (supra). Therefore, if any species
proposed to be exempted (or exempted under 2005 & 2007 notifications) by the State is found
present substantially/ visibly in the local or regional forests of the State by necessary implication, it
cannot remain exempted from the regulatory regime of the Transit Pass Rules, even though it may
lead to incidental hardships to all those who intend to trade or transport the forest produce of such
species.
116. The mandate of the HPC as proposed above shall be primarily to ascertain whether any of the
exempted species is present substantially/ significantly in the forests, national parks, sanctuaries of
Madhya Pradesh and if it is so found to be present in noticeable dimensions, the State must show
dissidence in exempting such a species. This is then clearly to avoid misuse or abuse of such
exempting provisions or to avoid the possibility of the forests being CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 subjected to deforestation of such species of trees and plants. However to
the contrary, if any of the 12-13 exempted species are alien to the forests of Madhya Pradesh, or
having very little / insignificant presence, in a way that its exemption shall not disturb its presence
in the ecological balance in the forests of the State, then the State would be justified in granting
exemption under Sec. 41(3) r/w proviso (b) to Rule 3 of the Transit Pass Rules. However even for
granting exemptions to such species, are alien to forests of M.P., the HPC as proposed by this Court
must record detailed findings and elaborate conclusions on the basis of concrete empirical study,
survey and research undertaken by it on the field and not within the four walls of their offices on the
basis of hearsay or speculative informations.
117. The HPC as aforementioned, which this Court directs the State Government must at least be of 7
members, comprising necessarily of the following:
a. 2 Senior Officers not below the rank of Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
(PCCF) or Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (ACCF);
b. Chief Wildlife Warden (CWW) or any officer equivalent to the said rank, handling the
department/ directorate of wildlife in the State of Madhya Pradesh;
c. 2 eminently qualified & nationally renowned environmentalists having distinctive name and
reputation in the field of botany or horticulture, who have study, knowledge and understanding
about the forest cover and resources of the State of Madhya Pradesh, OR/ AND who had been in the
past been part of the committees constituted by the MoEF, GOI for study about the status of forest
cover of other States;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 d. A nominee of the GOI, any senior government official not
below the rank of Joint Secretary, Union of India as nominated by the MoEF in the said regard;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 47
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
e. Any other member / members or publicly elected representative in the State of M.P., which the
State Government may feel appropriate to nominate in the committee of members having
knowledge, understanding and exposure to the field of environment and forests.
118. That the HPC so constituted hereinabove by the State Government shall undertake a detailed
reason-wise/ district-wise study about the status of current forest cover and diversity and variety of
species present therein, especially those which are proposed to be exempted or already exempted in
the 2005 and 2007 notifications from the provisions of Transit Rules. The said exercise may be
carried out within a period of 6 months from the date of this order. If for any reason it is found that
the aforesaid exercise of research and study by the HPC is likely to take more time, the State
Government can always move this Court seeking appropriate extension of time necessary for
completing the said exercise effectively and sincerely.
119. It is after the preparation of the aforesaid research and survey report by the HPC that the State
Government may either come out with a new exemption notification under Sec. 41(3) r/w Proviso
(b) to Rule 3 of the Transit Pass Rules or may consider continuing the implementation of the
previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007 with modifications as it deems fit in light of the
research, empirical study and survey report prepared by it.
120. In view of what we have observed above in the present judgment, therefore it would be
obligatory for the State to periodically review and assess the necessity of continuing the exemption
and relaxation of any species of trees and plants after at least every three years, on the basis of the
satisfaction CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 arrived by it about the existence of compelling
circumstances, exigencies & desirability for continuing the exemption/ relaxation in favour of the
species notified by it.
T. CONCLUSIONS
121. In view of the discussion undertaken by us, our conclusions to various submissions & issues
arising in the present reference are as follows:
a. Right to life is deeply entrenched in the protection and conservation of
environment, forests, and all the natural resources of the State, as a facet of Article 21
r/w 48-A of the Constitution of India. Judicial review of any legislative action or
subordinate legislation must be guided by the well settled concepts of Precautionary
Principle, public trust doctrine, when questions about utilization or exploitation of
natural resources or forest wealth are concerned;
b. The Precautionary Principle, as one of the basic features of environmental
jurisprudence, mandates that Courts must lean towards that interpretation of any
statutory position, which furthers and advances the precautionary approach towards
the environment, forests, and natural resources. Whilst doing so, the Court must be
mindful that the State cannot treat the environment, natural resources and forests, as
part of its sovereign wealth under its commercial use, rather all these resources are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 48
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
held as a trustee on behalf of the general public;
c. Whilst interpreting any decision, policy, or legislative action or statutory provisions
relating to the environment and forests, the Court must always advance that
interpretation which aligns with the famous Latin maxim 'Res Commune' - 'Res Extra
Commercium', meaning 'things owned by no one and subject to use by all as a
community resource' -
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 'things outside of commercial intercourse'.
The interest of the community in the protection and preservation of the environment,
natural resources, and forests, therefore always triumphs over that of the private
commercial interest of any individual or section of individuals, since all the natural
resources are held in public trust by the community at large;
d. The Courts are duty-bound to acknowledge the necessity and enforce the
regulatory measures envisaged under the enactment. In view thereof Sec. 41(2) is a
norm and being a repository of regulatory powers of the State as a public trustee of all
the natural resources (including forests) under Sec. 41(1);
e. Under Sec. 41(2), regulatory measures will include even the 'power to prohibit'
whenever deemed necessary by the State as a trustee, restraining the public at large
or any member from the general public from undertaking any activity that may
adversely affect the existence and presence of all these natural resources. Sec. 41(3)
is, therefore, an exception to the norm of the State's power to enforce its regulatory
regime;
f. The power to exempt available to the State under Sec. 41(3) is circumscribed by two
inherent limitations; firstly, the 'necessity test' and secondly the 'causal connection
test,' which must be met by any exemption granted to any species of trees, plants, or
forest produce or any area of the State, before liberating it from the regulatory regime
envisaged under Sec. 41(2) of the Forest Act;
g. The exemption granted under Sec. 41(3) cannot be a blanket one or so broad-based
in nature as to defeat the very objective and Parliamentary CITATION NO.
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 intent behind Secs. 41(1) & (2). In other words, the exception
cannot substitute the norm -- an inalienable duty of the State to enforce the
regulatory regime or regulating the generation, transit, transportation, and
possession of forest produce;
h. The powers of exemption under Sec. 41(3) are always subject to judicial review, to
be justified by demonstrating ample material, compelling circumstances backed by
data, research, surveys, and empirical studies to show why exceptional powers under
Sec. 41(3) are being invoked for granting exemptions; qua any timber or forest
produce, or any species of trees, plants, or for any area in the State. The bigger the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 49
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
ambit of exemption, the larger and heavier the duty to justify it, supported by equally
persuasive, convincing material at the disposal of the State. If the State fails to meet
any of the criteria as aforestated in justifying the exemption issued by it under Sec.
41(3), the exemption would not only become violative of Sec. 41(3), but also would
fall from the generic principles and Parliamentary intent as exhibited under Secs.
41(1) and (2) of the Forest Act;
i. The powers of exemption under Sec. 41(3) are inherently transient in character and temporary in
nature. No exemption allowed under Sec. 41(3) be allowed to exist in perpetuity, as Sec. 41(3), being
an exception to Secs. 41(1) & (2), cannot possess the trait of permanency. By necessary implication,
therefore any exemption is bound to be short- lived for a period not more than 2-3 years;
j. It is obligatory for the State to undertake periodic review of all the exemptions granted by it on a
periodical basis, atleast once in three years on the same principles and same considerations, that
necessitated the issuance of the original notification of exemptions;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 k. The broader the scope of exemption, the scope and width
of the exemption is inversely proportional to its transient character, meaning thereby that if the
exempting notification covers a large number of species and is applicable for the whole State, then it
is necessary for the State to review it all the more in shorter intervals, instead of keeping the
exemption operative for years together as a license to plunder the forest wealth of the State;
l. Rules 3 and 4 of the 'Transit Rules', insofar as they make a distinction between 'forest produce'
generated from the Government on one hand and generating from private land, have to be read in
consonance with the definition of 'forest produce' under Sec. 2(4) of the Forest Act. All those
categories of 'forest produce', mentioned under Sec. 2(4)(a) have to be treated as originating from
the 'forest area', irrespective of they having been grown on the private lands and be subjected to
stricter regulatory control and cannot be subjected to exemption at all. Meaning thereby that the
distinction made in the Rules between the forest produce growing on government land and that
growing on private land is clearly artificial, not backed by the definition of 'forest produce' under
Sec. 2(4)(a);
m. Any species, which is found in the forest areas of the State of Madhya Pradesh substantially /
significantly (if not abundantly) cannot be subjected to a blanket exemption from the regulatory
regime or the Transit Pass Rules enacted under Sec. 41(2);
n. It is only those species, which are not significantly/ substantially present or available in the forest
areas of the State of M.P., (but are ordinarily alien and exotic to the forest areas) can only be
exempted), but that too after undertaking thorough research and surveys, empirical studies by the
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 HPC, as we have suggested above. Without such data,
research, or survey studies, the powers of exemption under Sec. 41(3) clearly cannot be resorted to,
for exempting those species which are found ordinarily and significantly in the forest areas of the
State;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 50
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
o. The impugned exemption notification dated 24th September 2015 and subsequently issued
amendments thereto, amending the same to exclude 62-63 species of plants and forest produce, are
therefore held to have been issued without any independent background research, and surveys,
empirical studies undertaken by the State on its own to demonstrate the compelling circumstances
in which such large number of species came to be exempted, that too indefinitely;
p. The impugned notification has been issued without deliberations and intelligent care and is
therefore 'manifestly arbitrary', being violative of not only Sec. 41(3) but also Secs. 41(1) and (2), r/w
Articles 14, 21 and 48-A of the Constitution of India. It shows the lackadaisical approach of the
State;
q. The annulment of the impugned notification of September 2015 might automatically lead to
revival of the previously issued notifications of 2005 and 2007, exempting around 13-14 species for
the whole State of M.P. However, for the reasons stated supra, the aforestated notifications also
deserve a re-scrutiny, relook, and reconsideration by the State authorities before being
implemented, made operational, or given effect to in the State of M.P. Therefore, the operation and
effect of all the statutory provisions, notifications issued under the provisions of Transit Rules, 2000
granting blanket exemption to the 13-14 species for the whole State of M.P., from the year 2000
onwards are also kept in abeyance and suspension for the next six months, whilst requiring the
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 State to undertake the exercise of data collection &
empirical study of all the exempted species as has been directed hereinabove qua the impugned
notification of September 2015;
r. The aforesaid direction for keeping earlier notifications of the years 2000, 2005, and 2007 is
being issued by this Court by moulding the relief so that whilst finding the cure to one malady, we
do not open the floodgates for another malady. In other words, the solution / cure to the problem
cannot be worse than the problem itself. The State shall in terms of whatever has been observed in
the present judgment is duty-bound to adopt diligence, intelligent care, and deliberations before
issuing any exemption for any species or forest produce for the whole of State.
U. THE WAY FORWARD & OPERATIVE DIRECTIONS
122. DIRECTIONS ISSUED IN FURTHERENCE OF THE CONCLUSIONS In view of the
conclusions recorded above, our task would be left half complete, if this Bench does not issue
necessary directions to preserve the 'forest produce' relating to exempted species lying spare in
various parts of the States and may be attempted to be disposed of/ transported out of the straight
to avoid the clutches of stringent provisions of Transit Rules, 2000. The issuance of directions is
necessary to ensure that the spirit of our judgment is kept intact, till the full fledged implementation
of Transit Rules, 2000 is restored and revised by the State machinery.
However before issuing any direction, we must underscore that ordinarily the task of the larger/ full
Bench is concluded with the recording of conclusion and remitting the matter back to the designated
Bench for further adjudication. Rules 8 & 9 occurring under Chapter IV of the M.P. High Court
Rules, 2008 also envisages answering of the reference by the Larger CITATION NO.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 51
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 Bench constituted for the said purpose Rules 8 & 9 of the High Court Rules
Read thus:
"8. (1) A single bench or a division bench may refer any proceeding, pending before it,
to the Chief Justice with a recommendation that it be placed before a larger bench
where it involves a substantial question of law of general importance.
(2) In such proceeding, the referring Judge(s) may formulate question(s) and may
either refer such question(s) for opinion or may request that entire proceeding be
heard and decided by the larger bench.
(3) Where a Judge sitting alone while hearing a case is of the opinion that for the
decision of that case, an earlier decision of coordinate or larger bench of this Court
needs reconsideration, he may formulate question (s) and refer the same to the Chief
Justice with a recommendation that it be placed before a larger bench.
9. After the reference is answered by the division bench or the larger bench, the case
shall be placed before the Chief Justice for listing before the appropriate bench for
hearing and decision in accordance with the opinion of the division bench or larger
bench, as the case may be."
Though the Rule obligates the Larger Bench to refer the matter back to the regular Bench hearing
the similar category of assigned matters, but however it nowhere inhibits or curtails the inherent
powers of the High Court under Article 226 available to the larger/ full Bench for acting 'ex debito
justitiae' (in the larger interests of justice), where it is felt compulsory.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 The practice of issuing directions whilst answering
reference in extraordinary cases for doing complete justice in extraordinary situations is not
completely unknown. A pari materia provision of reference to larger Bench exists under the
Supreme Court Rules, 2013 as well. Vide Order VI Rule 2, the power is conferred upon the Benches
of the Supreme Court to refer it to a larger Bench. Order VI Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules,
2013, reads thus:
"2. Where in the course of the hearing of any cause, appeal or other proceeding, the
Bench considers that the matter should be dealt with by a larger Bench, it shall refer
the matter to the Chief Justice, who shall thereupon constitute such a Bench for the
hearing of it."
Whenever it has been felt necessary to issue directions by the larger Bench, as an inextricable and
insegregable component of the conclusions written by it, there the larger Bench has issued
directions collaterally with the conclusions recorded by it. The issuance of directions is intertwined
with the delivery of the final judgment as a necessary ingredient of the justice dispensation process.
We may readily refer to certain judgments of the larger Benches of the Supreme Court, constituted
under Rule 2 Order VI, abovementioned, wherein apart from recording conclusions, directions were
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 52
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
also simultaneously issued by the Supreme Court's larger Bench to give full effect to the purpose for
which the reference was made to the by the larger Bench. The following judgments of the larger/
Constitution Benches of the Supreme Court may be referred to, wherein along with the eventual
conclusion, a host of directions were issued :
a. In Lalita Kumari v. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., (2014) 2 SCC 1, wherein
vide Para 120, whilst recording conclusions, the Constitution Bench had issued
certain directions in relation to the CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 powers of
the investigating officers of registration of FIR, whenever commission of offences is
communicated to him/ her;
b. In Re : Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955, 2024 SCC OnLine 2880, the
Supreme Court examined the constitutionality of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act,
1955. The majority opinion whilst returning conclusions had also felt necessary to
issue a slew of directions to ensure that illegal immigration post 1971 in the borders
of India is being appropriately regulated. The directions pertain to implementation of
immigration and citizenship legislations, which were held to be requiring constant
monitoring of the Court and accordingly it was falsed down;
c. In Association for Democratic Reforms & Anr. (Electoral Bond Scheme) v. Union of
India & Ors., (2024) 5 SCC 1, wherein the validity of the electoral bond scheme
floated by the Central Government was examined. Vide Para 222, the majority
opinion whilst recording conclusions also issued certain directions for revocation of
various categories of electoral bonds and placement of the said money were issued.
Though the proceedings were arising out of Writ Petition filed under Article 32,
however, the same were adjudicated finally by the 5 Judge Bench.
In view of the foregoing discussion, therefore whilst answering the reference, we have
no hesitation in holding that certain directions necessarily consequential to
answering the reference would be necessary to be made by the very same Bench. This
is to ensure that at the later stage, owing to mutual difference between the members
of the Bench, the directions are just and necessary for protecting the 'forest produce'
generated out of the exempted CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 species, till
the same is subjected to regulatory regime by the State and its instrumentalities.
123. In view of the discussion undertaken, since we shall be annulling the impugned notification,
therefore a consequential direction flowing out of it is also necessary to avoid any multiplicity of
litigation after the references are answered. The following directions are therefore issued:
a. In view of the detailed reasoning and analysis mentioned hereinabove, we hold &
declare that the impugned notification dated 24.09.2015 and the amendments
affected to it subsequently in April, 2017 are ultra vires the provisions of Secs. 41(1),
(2) & (3) of the Forests Act, 1927 and violative of Arts. 14, 21, 48-A of the Constitution
of India, being also manifestly arbitrary. Therefore, the impugned notification dated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 53
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
24.9.2015 and subsequent amending notification dated 11.04.2017 are hereby
quashed/set aside.
b. The annulment of the impugned notification shall revive the applicability of Transit Pass Rules,
2000 to all the previously exempted 62-63 species in their full effect, which must be implemented
with immediate effect by the State Government;
c. We keep in abeyance for reasons stated supra, the previously issued exemption notifications of
2005 and 2007 for a period of 6 months for State to undertake the exercise of collection and
collation of necessary data before implementing both the said exemptions notifications.
d. To avoid any immediate hardship, a maximum time frame of 10 days shall be given to all the
persons/ entities in possession of or in the occupation of transit/ transportation of exempted
categories of forest CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 produce and timber to take all necessary
steps for compliance of provisions of the Transit Rules, 2000;
e. Within a period of 10 days from the date of this judgment, therefore, if any application is filed for
issuance of a Transit Pass or for any other purpose under the Transit Rules, 2000 by any person/
entity, then the same shall be dealt with at the earliest dispatch and disposed of statutorily within a
further period of 30 days from the date of filing of the application;
f. Therefore, for a period of 10 days from the passing of this order, though it is mandatory for every
such person/ entity indulging in transit/ transportation of any forest produce and timber relating to
exempted species to necessarily apply for issuance of transit pass, however, on the proof of the filing
of said application (so made for issuance of transit pass) being produced, for a period of 30 days
after 10 initial days mentioned above, no adverse action or coercive action be initiated against such
person producing the proof of filing his application. The "coercive action" is referable to the civil and
criminal action envisaged under the provision of Transit Rules, 2000 only qua the exempted
species, exempted from the year 2000 till date by the State Government;
g. However, it shall be open for the State or its instrumentalities to apply for suitable extension (only
if necessary) if they hit upon any impediment or difficulty in disposing of the large number of
applications received by them for issuance of Transit Passes. Appropriate orders may then be passed
by the designated Division Bench extending the time frame for disposal of such applications filed for
issuance of Transit Passes or for any other purpose as specified under the Transit Rules, 2000;
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 h. For a period of 10 days from the date of judgment of this
Court, therefore there shall be no transportation/ transit undertaken by any person of any forest
produce or timber in the State of Madhya Pradesh, till (a.) he/ she files an application for issuance of
a transit pass or any other statutory permission/ requirement under the Transit Rules; and (b.)
produces the proof of filing of such transit pass with the notified competent authority under the
Transit Rules on being detected or found transporting or moving any exempted category of forest
produce or timber as stated supra;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 54
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
i. If after passing of this judgment, if it is found that a person is indulging in movement or
transportation of exempted species of forest produce without a validly issued transit pass issued by
the competent authority of the State, or the application for the same as aforestated in the preceding
paras, the authorities under the Forest Act as well as the Transit Rules shall be at liberty/ free to
institute appropriate civil and criminal action including seizure & confiscatory proceedings under
the provisions of the Forest Act;
j. The proof of application filed by the concerned person/ entity for issuance of necessary passes or
any other permission / requirement under the Transit Rules for movement/ transport of exempted
forest produce shall be valid only for a period of 30 days from the date of its filing qua such a
produce, within which it shall be obligatory for the competent authority to issue the necessary
permission, failing which (in the absence of any extension granted by this Court) such an officer or
competent authority shall be individually responsible for committing contempt and disobedience of
the directions of this Court to be CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363 proceeded appropriately
under the provisions of Contempt of Courts Act, 1971;
k. The State Government and its instrumentalities shall ensure State wide dissemination of
directions of this Court so issued in the present judgment within a period of 3 days from the date of
the judgment, through both print and electronic media so that the effective compliance of the
directions of this Court takes place timely by every person/ entity in the State;
l. The State authorities shall ensure the circulation of operative directions of this Court to all officials
of their respective departments and Gram Panchayats for ensuring proper implementation of
Transit Rules, 2000 qua all the exempted species (without any exception) with immediate effect;
m. We expect that the operative part of this judgment, viz. the directions mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs are published on the homepage of the official websites of all concerned departments of
the State, who are responsible in any manner (even remotely) for implementation of the Transit
Pass Rules at the grassroots level. The personal responsibility for this dissemination shall lie on the
shoulders of Principal Secretary of the concerned departments as aforementioned;
n. We hope and expect that the State, as a public trustee under Sec. 41(1) of the natural resources of
the State shall act with all promptitude to ensure that officers and responsible government
functionaries at the grassroots level are made aware of the directions of this Court as well as every
person who is likely to be affected directly - indirectly by them.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
124. In case the State or any aggrieved party intends to seek clarification of the above directions or
extension of time for compliance of any the directions issued above, there shall be liberty to move
appropriate application if necessary. The designated Division Bench shall consider the application
on its own merits, in view of the circumstances mentioned thereunder.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 55
Vivek Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 1 March, 2025
125. Since the present reference is being answered with certain consequential directions, whose
compliance and monitoring would be necessary, therefore all the matters relating to the subject
matter of the present petitions, viz. relating to issues arising out of the various exemption
notifications shall be heard by a designated Division Bench at the Principal Seat, Jabalpur. If any
writ petition on any proceeding relating to the exemption notifications or the directions issued
hereinabove are instituted before the Indore or the Gwalior Bench, then the same shall stand
transferred immediately to the Principal Seat, Jabalpur, in respect of which the Registrar (Judicial)
shall issue necessary steps of intimating all the Bar Associations in both the Benches of this Court
about the present matter. Since this Court has issued a series of directions in the matter, which shall
require compliance and monitoring by the Court atleast for next 6 months, therefore the compliance
proceedings or any connected proceedings shall also be heard by the designated Division Bench of
this Court.
126. The reference is answered accordingly. The designated Division Bench shall be constituted for
the above purposes as aforementioned on the directions of the Hon'ble The Chief Justice at the
Principal Seat, Jabalpur. It shall deal with all other issues arising in relation thereto including the
compliance proceedings as aforementioned.
CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
127. List before the designated Division Bench on 10.03.2025 for necessary directions & orders,
when the learned AAG file the status report of compliance of the directions issued above before this
Court.
(SURESH KUMAR KAIT) (S.A.DHARMADHIKARI) (VIVEK JAIN) CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE
JUDGE HS HEMANT SARAF 2025.03.01 17:11:05 +05'30' CITATION NO. 2025:MPHC-JBP:8363
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41448330/ 56
