Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17
December, 2021
Author: M.Sundar
Bench: M.Sundar
W.P.(MD)No.22459 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 17.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
W.P.(MD)No.22459 of 2021
Williams ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Additional Superintendent of Police,
(Prohibition Enforcement Wing),
Ramanathapuram District,
Ramanathapuram.
2.The Inspector of Police,
Keelakarai Police Station,
Ramanathapuram District.
Crime No.225 of 2021 ... Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India for issuance of Writ of Mandamus, to direct the
respondents to release the petitioner's Auto bearing Registration
No.TN 65 AC 4909 seized by the second respondent police, by
considering the petitioner's representation dated 08.12.2021,
within a time frame stipulated by this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 1
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/12
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.22459 of 2021
For Petitioner : Mr.R.Vinoth
For Respondents : Mr.C.Satheesh
Government Advocate
ORDER
*********** Mr.R.Vinoth, learned Counsel on record for writ petitioner is before this Court.
Mr.C.Satheesh, learned Government Advocate accepts notice on behalf of both the respondents.
2.With the consent of both sides, the captioned main writ petition is taken up and heard out.
3.There is no disputation or disagreement that in a similar matter another Hon'ble Single Judge has
ordered release of the seized vehicle on certain terms. To be noted, this is a case of alleged violation
of Sections 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(i) of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, 1937.
4.In the light of there being no disputation or disagreement that this matter is similar to the case in
which another Hon'ble Single Judge has directed release of the vehicle by imposing certain
conditions, it is not necessary to dilate further on facts. The order https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
made by the other Hon'ble Judge with the consent of both sides is as follows:
'Heard the learned counsel on either side. By consent of both parties, this writ
petition is taken up for final disposal at the admission stage itself.
2. The petition mentioned vehicle was seized in connection with Crime No.57 of 2020
registered on the file of the second respondent for the offence under Sections 4(1)(a)
and 4(1)(i) of Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act. It is not in dispute that till now no
confiscation order under Section 14 of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act has been
passed. It is also not in dispute that the vehicle has not been produced before the
jurisdictional Criminal Court.
3.In similar circumstances, this Court vide order dated 09.07.2020 in
W.P.(MD)No.2679 of 2020 (Sathiah v. The State of Tamil Nadu and Others) has
passed the following order:-
“Heard the learned counsel on either side.
2. The petition mentioned vehicle belongs to the petitioner herein. It appears that the
said vehicle was involved in Crime No.231 of 2019, registered on the file of the third
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 2
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
respondent under Tamil Nadu https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Prohibition Act,
1937. The petitioner's son Karthick was arrested and he was found in possession of
384 Brandy Bottles. The petitioner's son was said to have driven the said vehicle at
the relevant point of time. The grievance of the petitioner is that the vehicle in
question has not been produced before the Judicial Magistrate till date. His further
apprehension is that even without complying the necessary procedures, the second
respondent is likely to auction the vehicle, which necessitated the petitioner to file the
present Writ Petition.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the order dated
06.06.2019 made in Crl.O.P.No.11945 of 2019, wherein the learned judge has
observed as follows:-
11.The provisions of Section 49A of the Tamil Nadu Forest Act does not in any way
take away the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court to exercise its power under Section
451 or 457 of Cr.P.C. The confiscation of a vehicle involved in the commission of an
offence under the Tamil Nadu Forest Act is not only punitive in nature but also a
deterrent.
When a vehicle is involved in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis commission of offence under the
Tamil Nadu Forest Act and there are prima facie materials to show that the owner of the vehicle did
not have any knowledge or connivance in the commission of the offence, he can always file an
application for return of vehicle under Section 451 or 457 of Cr.P.C. But, however the Court while
exercising its powers will have to do it with care and caution and should provide an opportunity to
the Public Prosecutor and also must keep in mind the spirit behind Section 49A of the Tamil Nadu
Forest Act, 1882 and its benevolent object.
12.Even though, the Judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner deals with the case
under the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, the ratio in the said Judgment can be applied even in a case
where confiscation proceedings have been initiated under the Tamil Nadu Forest Act.
13.In view of the above, the reason given by the Court below for returning the petition filed by the
petitioner is unsustainable and the same is hereby setaside. The Court below is directed to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis consider the petitioner afresh by keeping in mind the judgment of
the Hon'ble Division bench referred supra and after affording an opportunity to the prosecution.
This exercise shall be completed by the Court below within a period of one month from the date of a
receipt of copy of this order.
4. The learned Government counsel wanted to rely upon G.O.Ms.No.39 dated 22.10.2019, Home,
Prohibition and Excise (VIII) Department to sustain his contention that the second respondent can
very well auction the vehicle in question. But the said Government order will come into play after
the confiscation is done under Section 14 of Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act 1937. In this case, there is
nothing on record to show the fulfillment of formalities set out in Section 14(4) of the Tamil Nadu
Prohibition Act. Therefore, the question of auctioning the vehicle even without formal confiscation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 3
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
does not arise at all. Also, it does not mean that the vehicle involved in criminal case should not be
produced before the Jurisdictional Court. In fact, the provisions of Criminal Procedure Code
envisage that the seized vehicle should be produced before the Jurisdictional Court and the party
concerned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis can avail the right to claim the vehicle by way of
interim or final custody.
5.Therefore, I direct the respondents to produce the vehicle in question before the jurisdictional
criminal Court without any further delay. Upon such production, it is open to the petitioner to apply
for return under Section 451 of Cr.P.C. Of course, the authorities are at liberty to take action to
confiscate the vehicle as per law.
6. In the above terms, the Writ Petition is allowed. No costs.'
4.The petitioner's counsel on instructions gives an undertaking that the petitioner will not alienate
the petition mentioned vehicle till the confiscation proceedings are over. She also gives a further
undertaking that the petitioner will also produce the vehicle as and when the respondents call for
the vehicle for enquiry and cooperate with the enquiry to be conducted by the respondents.
5. I make it clear that it is very much open to the respondents herein to initiate and conclude the
confiscation proceedings. The only relief that I am granting is interim custody of the vehicle. I have
not gone into the merits of the matter.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
6. Therefore, the respondents are directed to release the said vehicle subject to the following
conditions:-
a) The petitioner is directed to pay a sum of Rs.2,000/- (Rupees Two Thousand only)
in favour of the Officer-in-Charge, High Court Legal Services Committee, Madurai
Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai, S.B.A/c.No. 496037387, IFSC :
IDIB000H040, Indian Bank, High Court Branch, Madurai. It will be a non
refundable payment. The Registrar (Judicial) is directed to spend the amount for
appropriate welfare activities such as feeding the disadvantaged communities in
Madurai District.
b) The petitioner shall not alienate or encumber the vehicle in question till the
proceedings are completed.
c) petitioner shall produce all the documents pertaining to the ownership of the
seized vehicle.
d) and when the respondents call for the vehicle for enquiry, the petitioner has to
produce the vehicle in question and he shall cooperate with the enquiry to be
conducted by the respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 4
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
7. Upon completion of these formalities, the respondents shall release the vehicle forthwith without
any delay. If this undertaking given by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the petitioner is breached,
the petitioner will not be entitled to interim release of the vehicle in future. The Writ Petition is
allowed accordingly. There shall be no order as to costs.'+-
5.The conditions imposed and the release of the vehicle post compliance of the conditions have been
set out by the Hon'ble Single Judge in paragraph Nos.5, 6 & 7.
6.Therefore, there shall be a similar order in the captioned matter. The order is a follows:
6.1. I make it clear that it is very much open to the respondents herein to initiate and
conclude the confiscation proceedings. The only relief that I am granting is interim
custody of the vehicle. I have not gone into the merits of the matter.
6.2. Therefore, the respondents are directed to release the said vehicle subject to the
following conditions:
a) The petitioner is directed to pay a sum of Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand only)
to the credit of the Officer-in-Charge, High Court Legal Services Committee, Madurai
Bench of Madras https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis High Court, Madurai,
S.B.A/c.No.496037387, IFSC : IDIB000H040, Indian Bank, High Court Branch,
Madurai. It will be a non refundable payment. The Registrar (Judicial) is directed to
spend the amount for appropriate welfare activities such as feeding the
disadvantaged communities in Madurai District;
b) The petitioner shall not alienate or encumber the vehicle in question till the
proceedings are completed;
c) The petitioner shall produce all documents pertaining to ownership of the seized
vehicle;
and
d) when the respondents call for the vehicle for enquiry, the petitioner has to produce
the vehicle in question and he shall cooperate with the enquiry to be conducted by the
respondents.
6.3.Upon completion of these formalities, the respondents shall release the vehicle forthwith
without any delay. If aforementioned undertaking given by the petitioner is breached, the petitioner
will not be entitled to interim release of the vehicle in future.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 5
Williams vs The Additional Superintendent Of ... on 17 December, 2021
7.Captioned Writ Petition is disposed of in aforesaid manner i.e., with aforementioned directive
without any order as to costs.
17.12.2021
Index : Yes / No
Internet: Yes / No
MR
NOTE: In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may
be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the
correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned.
To
1.The Additional Superintendent of Police, (Prohibition Enforcement Wing), Ramanathapuram
District, Ramanathapuram.
2.The Inspector of Police, Keelakarai Police Station, Ramanathapuram District.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis M.SUNDAR., J.
MR ORDER MADE IN 17.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78105557/ 6
