Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20 November, 2020
Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20
November, 2020
Author: Ravi.V.Hosmani
Bench: Ravi V.Hosmani
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 20TH DAY OF NOVEMBER 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE RAVI V.HOSMANI
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.100059/2014
BETWEEN:
Shri Yallappa Basappa Hadapad,
Age: 49 years, Occ: Barbar,
R/o Ningapurpeth, Ramdurg,
Tal: Ramdurg, Dist: Belgaum.
... Appellant
(By Smt.P.G.Naik, Advocate)
AND
Shri Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf,
Age: 40 years, Occ: Business,
R/o Ningapeth, Near Talikoti's House,
Ramdurg, Tal: Ramdurg, Dist: Belgaum.
... Respondent
(By Shri B.V.Somapur, Advocate)
This Criminal Appeal is filed under Section 378(4) of
Cr.P.C. seeking that the judgment and order of acquittal passed
in C.C.No.80/2009 dated 07.01.2014 by the Civil Judge and
JMFC Court, Ramdurg, be set aside and the respondent be
convicted.
This appeal being reserved for judgment on 09.11.2020,
this day, the court, delivered the following:
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137057815/ 1
Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20 November, 2020
JUDGMENT
This appeal is preferred by the appellant challenging the judgment and order of acquittal dated
07.01.2014 passed in C.C.No.80/2009 by the Civil Judge & JMFC., Ramdurg, for the offences
punishable under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act (hereafter referred to as 'N.I.Act' ).
2. The brief facts of the case are that a private complaint came to be filed u/s 200 Cr.P.C.
(hereinafter referred to as "Cr.P.C." for short) by complainant against accused stating that
complainant and accused are residents of Ramdurg and well known to each other. That on
29.05.2008, accused borrowed hand loan of Rs.1,80,000/- from the complainant in order to meet
his financial difficulties. On demand for returning the hand loan, accused had issued a cheque
bearing No.370296 dated 18.11.2008 for Rs.1,80,000/- drawn on Syndicate Bank, Ramdurg. On
19.11.2008, when cheque was presented for payment through Reddy Co- operative Bank, Ramdurg
Branch, it returned with an endorsement 'insufficient funds'. A legal notice dated 08.12.2008 was
issued by RPAD to the accused calling upon him to pay the cheque amount within 15 days. The
notice returned with postal shara 'not claimed return to sender'. Hence, complaint came to be filed
against the accused for offence under Section 138 of the NI Act.
3. In support of his case, complainant got examined himself as PW1 and two other witnesses as PW2
and PW3. Ex.P.1 to P6 were marked. On the defence side, accused examined himself as D.W.1 and
manager of Syndicate Bank, was examined as DW2. Two documents were marked as Ex.D.1 and
D.2.
4. On a consideration of the material on record, the trial court framed the following points for
consideration:
1) Whether the complainant has proved beyond all reasonable doubt that legally
enforceable debt payable to him by the accused was existing as on the date of cheque
in question?
2) Whether the complainant further proves that the accused has committed an
offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act?
3) What order?
5. After answering points No.1 and 2 in the negative, the trial court acquitted the accused. Aggrieved
thereby complainant has filed this appeal.
6. Learned counsel Smt. P.G.Naik, for the appellant submitted that due to acquaintance between
complainant and accused, when accused sought hand loan of Rs.1,80,000/-, complainant lent him
the money. When complainant demanded repayment, accused issued a cheque for Rs.1,80,000/-
dated 18.11.2008. On 19.11.2008, said cheque was presented for payment, but returned with
endorsement 'funds insufficient'. Thus, complainant got issued legal notice dated 08.12.2008 by
RPAD calling upon accused to repay the cheque amount. But, the notice returned with postal shara
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137057815/ 2
Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20 November, 2020
'not claimed', thereby constraining the complainant to file a private complaint. Though complainant
led cogent evidence in support of his case, the Trial court acquitted the accused, on three grounds:
i) the accused had substantiated his defence that his cheque book was lost and he had
not only intimated the police and obtained acknowledgement but also issued 'stop
payment' instructions to his banker. This defence was held by trial court to be highly
probable.
ii) It was also held by the trial court that in order to give rise to a cause of action for
filing a private complaint, date of service of legal notice on the accused is very much
necessary, as stipulated in Section 142 of the N.I. Act, a complaint can be filed within
30 days from date of receipt of notice by accused. There was failure to prove the date
of service of statutory notice.
iii) Lastly as the complainant admitted in his cross examination that he himself had
availed loan from Bank for construction of house, his financial capacity to lend loan
to accused was doubtful, especially when there was no mention of drawing loan, its
purpose and availability of other resources to lend loan amount. Lack of any
explanation for accepting return of same amount of Rs.1,80,000/- while accepting
liability to pay interest to Bank, (even if loan were obtained to lend money to
accused) was also considered as a circumstance against the complainant.
7. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent-accused Sri B.V.Somapur, made the
following submissions:
(a) In view of the admission by the complainant in his cross examination that he took
loan by mortgaging his house on the same date as the hand loan transaction, the very
financial capacity of the complainant, who is a barber by profession, to lend such
huge sum, would be doubtful. In the absence of credible proof regarding sufficient
income from any other source to lend the money, acquittal of the accused is fully
justified.
(b) While denying the loan transaction in toto, the accused contended that the cheque
book containing the cheque in consideration was lost on 02.07.2008 and that
accused had not only given complaint to police on 09.07.2008 but also issued
intimation to his banker on 09.07.2008 to stop payment of any of the cheques. The
trial Court appreciating this probable defence which stood substantiated by the
production of the acknowledgement for police complaint as Ex.D1 and the intimation
to bank as Ex.D2 and also examination of bank manager as DW.2, rightly acquitted
the accused.
(c) Learned counsel further submitted that mere production of the returned cover
containing statutory notice with postal shara "not claimed" would not be sufficient to
prove the mandatory requirement without examination of the postal authorities and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137057815/ 3
Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20 November, 2020
therefore acquittal of the accused was justified on this ground also.
(d) It was also submitted that the complainant had used a blank cheque to extract
money from the accused, though the cheque was not issued to the complainant.
8. I have heard the learned counsel, perused the impugned judgment and the record.
9. Learned counsel for appellant argued vehemently that complainant had stated in his oral
evidence that he was earning Rs.500/- to 600/- per day from his barber shop, where he had
employed four persons, to contend that complainant had explained his financial capacity. This was
in addition to admitted fact that complainant had purchased the house belonging to accused, few
years earlier to loan transaction. And therefore, the doubt expressed by the trial Court over financial
capacity of the complainant was perverse. I am of the view that failure on the part of the
complainant to have clearly mentioned in the complaint about borrowing of loan from bank on same
day as date of giving hand loan to accused by giving full particulars about its purpose and existence
of other resources with him to lend money to the accused, is a material omission without proper
explanation.
10. Though it is further contended by learned counsel for appellant that there is failure on the part of
accused to give police complaint against the complainant if it were indeed being misused by the
complainant to extract money from the accused and which would cast serious doubt about the police
intimation at Ex.D1 and the intimation to the Bank at Ex.D2. But it is now well settled that the
standard of proof available to the accused to upset the presumptions available to the holder of a
cheque under Section 139 of N.I.Act, and therefore the accused need not substantiate his defence by
proof beyond reasonable doubt but can validly do so by substantiating a probable defence. In this
case, the consistent action on the part of the accused to follow up his intimation to the police about
the lost cheques with instruction to his banker not to honour such cheques clearly substantiates a
highly probable defence.
11. Insofar as the contention urged by the respondent counsel that mere production of postal cover
containing statutory notice with postal shara as "unclaimed" would not establish proof of service of
notice on the accused, without examining the postman, I am of the view that the said contention
does not hold much water in view of decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of K.Bhaskaran
Vs. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan reported in (1999) 7 SCC 510.
12. There is one more factor which goes against the complainant-appellant. The complainant
examined two witnesses as PW.2 and PW.3 claiming that they were witness to the hand loan
transaction between complainant and accused. But even they did not state about date of the hand
loan transaction. In their cross examination they have categorically admitted that they were not
witnesses to accused issuing the cheque in consideration to complainant. Their examination is an
attempt by the complainant to fill the gaps in his evidence. As there is no mention about them
witnessing hand loan transaction in the complaint.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137057815/ 4
Yallappa Basappa Hadapad vs Nabisab Rajesab Nadaf on 20 November, 2020
13. On an overall consideration of the above material on record, the hand loan transaction and the
financial capacity of complainant being riddled with serious doubts, coupled with the defence set up
by the accused regarding lost cheque substantiated by the intimation to the police followed by
intimation to the bank, I am of the considered view that there was sufficient justification for the trial
Court in acquitting the accused and there is no substantial error or perversity in the impugned
judgment.
In the result, appeal deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
SD/-
JUDGE Psg* /msr
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/137057815/ 5
