Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10
September, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRM(M) No.115/2023
Reserved on: 15.07.2025
Pronounced on: 10.09.2025
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo
.....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Zamir Abdullah & Mr. Zahir Abdullah, Advocates
V/s
UT of J&K through P/S ACB
..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Mohsin S. Qadri, Sr. AAG for respondent no.1
Mr T. H. Khawja, Advocate for respondents 2&3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
1. Petitioner prays quashing of FIR no.29/2022 dated 18.07.2022 for commission of offences
punishable under Section 120-B of Indian Penal Code (IPC), Section 7 of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, in police station Anticorruption Bureau, Kashmir, Srinagar and also the proceedings
initiated consequent thereto for commission of aforesaid offences to the extent of petitioner.
2. The case set up by the petitioner is that the complainants, namely Mohmmad Farooq Bhat and
Sajid Hussain in FIR no. 29/2022, appeared before SP, ACB (SBG) by filing written complaints,
wherein they alleged that the Naib Tehsildar, namely, Gh. Rasool Hajam and Tehsildar Younas
Ahmad Bangroo/ Petitioner herein were demanding bribe from them to the tune of INR. 5,00,000
in order to facilitate the smooth running of their business units which is located on Nazool land
located at Rampura Chattabal, Srinagar measuring 02 kanals and 19 marlas covered under khasra
no. 437(min). It was also alleged that, in order to ascertain the alleged allegation, a discreet pre-trap
verification to check the veracity of the allegations levelled against the Petitioner and the Naib
Tehsildar was set up and a trap was laid and some independent witnesses were also sought.
Consequently, impugned was registered. After completing the pre-trap formalities, the team along
with the complainant and independent witness proceeded towards the spot, i.e., Bemina Crossing.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 1
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
On reaching the spot, one of the accused, namely, Gh. Rasool Hajam (NT) boarded the vehicle
towards Tehsil Office Shalteng located at Bemina Bye-pass and demanded the bribe money from the
complainant and he handed over the bribe money to him in front of the independent witnesses, who
flashed pre-existing signals towards the trap team, whereafter the NT tried to flee from the spot. The
ACB team members, who were following the complainant, swung into action and after chasing the
NT caught hold of him by wrists near Firdous Colony Bemina near Bismillah Masjid opposite
Directorate of Aysuh J&K Srinagar. Upon personal and search of the accused, INR. 2,00,000 were
recovered from him and necessary search memos were prepared and upon his arrest an arrest
memo was drafted. It is also alleged that the ACB team proceeded towards the office of Tehsildar,
Shalteng, namely, Younis Ahmad Bangroo/ Petitioner herein and from his office the occasion file
was recovered and seized on spot and the arrest of the Tehsildar was made as well. Both the NT and
the Petitioner, were arrested. It is contended that during the course of investigation, it has been
established that the accused-Gh. Rasool Hajam demanded accepted tie bribe money from the
complainant as was toid by Tehsildar concerned, namely, Younus Ahmad Bangroo/ Petitioner
herein and got the bribe money collected from the complainants as 1" instalment.
3. The grounds of challenge taken in the instant petition are that perusal of the complaint and FIR
does not disclose any act of the petitioner or his participation is commission of the alleged crime and
in this regard, he has sought to rely on the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in the case of
State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and Other, 1992 Suppl. (1) 335; that allegations levelled
against petitioner are baseless, arbitrary and without an iota of truth in them; that all the charges
alleged against petitioner are whimsical and capricious and that name of petitioner has wrongly
been mentioned as Mohammad Yunus Bangroo instead of Younus Ahmad Bangroo; that FIR has
been registered on account of evil intention of complainants as they did not want the Petitioner to
proceed under the orders of the Division bench judgment of this Court; that petitioner has strong
reasons to believe that the complainants were apprehensive of the steps being taken by the
Department for retrieval of their land illegally transferred under the Roshni Act and accordingly, the
complainants appear to have hatched a conspiracy against him when he did not listen to their illegal
demands; that conduct of the complainant would indicate that the criminal proceedings against the
petitioner was instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on him and with a view to
spite him due to private grudge and in this regard, the Petitioner has sought to rely on the
judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy (1977) 2 SCC
699; that the act and conduct of the officials are indicative of the fact that the criminal proceedings
have been instituted maliciously; that on 18.07.2022, while the petitioner was performing his duties
as usual in his office, some officials from the ACB entered his office and informed him that one Naib
Tehsildar, namely, Ghulam Rasool Hajam, has been arrested and, for identification, he was asked to
accompany the said men which he did being a law abiding officer; that thereafter, in the evening of
the same day, the petitioner too was informed that he was to be arrested for reasons not known to
him; that accordingly, he was also arrested without there being any rhyme or reason; that the
petitioner was, thereafter, granted bail by the court Special Judge, Anticorruption, Srinagar on
28.07.2022 and, upon his release on bail, he came to know that he has been placed under
suspension by the Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir, Srinagar, which was subsequently confirmed
by order dated 03.11.2022; that it is trite law that the inherent power of the High Court under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. sought to be exercised where judicial process is converted into an instrument of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 2
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
operation or harassment and reliance has been placed to Vineet Kumar and Others vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and another, (2017) 13 SCC 369; that none of the ingredients of Section 7 P.C. Act read with
120-B IPC is present as against the petitioner in the impugned FIR; that in absence of any of the
ingredients of these section being present or coming forth from the allegations against the petitioner
in the impugned FIR, the registration of the FIR impugned against the petitioner is highly uncalled
for and is wholly vitiated; that the impugned FIR is being used as a tool of harassing and victimizing
the petitioner notwithstanding the fact that the Petitioner has not been involved in any offence
muchless the offences punishable under aforesaid sections; that the respondent has registered the
FIR by abusing his official position which is quite apparent and evident from the perusal of the FIR
impugned.
4. Respondents have filed the status report, wherein it is stated that on 13.07.2022, complainants,
namely, Mr. Farooq Ahmad and Mr. Sajid Hussain approached police station ACB Srinagar and
reported that they were running their business units at Rampora Chattabal Srinagar on Nazool land
since 2014. The respective piece of land under their possession was registered in the names of their
parents duly mutated as per the provisions of Roshni Act, and a case in this regard was also sub
judice before the Court. They alleged that Tehsildar Mohammad Younis and Naib-Tehsildar Ghulam
Rasool repeatedly visited their business units and harassed/ threatened them that their business
units would be sealed as both the units were on Nazool Land. Further they were being told to pay
Rs.5.00 Lacs to them (Tehsildar and Naib- Tehsildar) as bribe etc. Before registering a formal case,
Inspector Firdous Ahmad of ACB Srinagar was asked to conduct pre-verification to test the veracity
of the complaint. To ascertain the facts, the complainant, Mr. Farooq, was asked to call on the cell
number of Naib- Tehsildar and keep the phone on loudspeaker mode which he did and
Naib-Tehsildar during the conversation asked the complainant Mr.Farooq Ahmad to attend the
office of Tehsildar Shalteng (Central Srinagar) located at Bye pass Bemina at around 14:00 hours. In
the meantime, verifying officer (VO) took a recorder from I/C Technical Lab of ACB and left the
office along with the complainants and reached at the office of Tehsildar Shalteng. The recorder was
switched on and kept in the pocket of complainant Farooq Ahmad who along with the other
complainant went inside the office of Tehsildar Shalteng while as verifying officer waited outside the
office for about 45 Minutes. As soon as the complainants came out of the office of Tehsildar
Shalteng, the recorder was collected back and switched off. The complainants informed that
Tehsildar Shalteng Mr. Younis Bangroo and Naib Tehsildar Gh. Rasool Hajam heard them in the
office and applicants requested them to issue notice under relevant rules to them so that they can
approach the relevant forum for appeal/stay as the matter of Roshni Act is Sub-Judice. However,
Tehsildar directed them to accompany Naib-Tehsildar Ghulam Rasool who will make them
understand the issue, accordingly they went with the Naib Tehsildar who demanded Rs.5.00 Lacs as
bribe from them to avoid closure of their Business Units. The conversation recorded in the recorder
is corroborative. The verifying officer, as asked, remained in touch with the complainants and on
14.07.2022, the complainants informed verifying officer on phone that Naib-Tehsildar has asked
him to arrange the bribe money quickly otherwise their shops would be shut. On 16.07.2022 at
about 10.00 hours, the complainant Mr. Farooq Ahmad informed verifying officer that both the
applicants have arranged Rs.1.00 Lac (Fifty thousand each). In order to be satisfied that the demand
is made by the accused public servants, Mr. Farooq Ahmad was again asked to call the suspect;
Naib-Tehsildar Batamallo on his Cell phone who informed him that he will come to his office
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 3
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
chamber (shop of Mr. Farooq Ahmad) between 3 PM to 6 PM. Accordingly, verifying officer waited
outside the shop of Mr. Farooq Ahmad; M/S Modish constructions while as HC Showkat Hussain
168/KGM who was accompanying verifying officer and associated with the verification was asked to
remain inside the office of the complainant as a customer and make every effort to hear/listen to the
conversation between the suspects and the applicant. In the meantime, at about 6 PM, the suspect;
Naib- Tehsildar Batamallo Gh Rasool Hajam arrived in an official Vehicle Bolero bearing
Registration No: JK01AL-8206 actually attached with Tehsildar Mr. Younis Bangroo, at the spot
and entered into the shop of complainant, wherein the Naib-Tehsildar refused to settle down with
Rs.1.00 Lac and insisted to arrange, at least, Rs.2.00 Lacs as first instalment by Monday 18th July.
The suspect, Naib-Tehsildar, Gh Rasool also asked Mr. Farooq Ahmad to call him early in the
morning on Monday 18th July, so that after conversing with Tehsildar Shalteng, they can fix the
spot for accepting the bribe money. The conversation was witnessed/heard by HC Showkat Hussain
168/KGM also. Accordingly, after being fully satisfied that prima-facie demand of bribe by the
suspect Public Servants is made out and the contention of the complainants is corroborated, a
formal case FIR No.29/2022 in PS ACB Srinagar was registered in the matter on 18.07.2022 on the
basis of a written complaint moved by the complainants Mohammad Farooq Bhat S/O Ghulam
Mohammad Bhat RO Bemina and Sajid Hussain Mir S/O Ghulam Qadir Mir R/O Nabdipora Hawal
Srinagar. Investigation of the case was entrusted to Dy. S.P. Rameez Raja.
5. It is also stated by respondent in his status report that during the course of investigation, a
trap-team headed by the Trap Laying Officer (TLO/ IO) was constituted and services of an
independent witness were utilized. During pre-trap proceedings, complainants after introducing
themselves to the trap team members and the independent witness, produced an amount of Rs.2.00
Lacs consisting of four hundred (400) Indian Currency Notes of Rs.500/- denomination (one Lakh
each complainant), which were supposed to be given by them to the accused persons on demand.
The serial numbers of currency notes so produced by them were noted down and checked by the
team members and independent witness. The notes were counted by independent witness when
asked by Dy.SP Rameez Raja (TLO/I/O). In order to demonstrate the effect of phenolphthalein
powder on the tainted currency notes to establish acceptance of bribe money by the public servants,
TLO has instructed SGCT Hilal Ahmad to prepare a solution of Sodium Carbonate and water in a
transparent glass tumbler. Accordingly, the said official prepared the solution. Independent witness
was asked by TLO to dip his fingers in the said solution and on his doing so, colour of the solution
didn't change. Then SGCT Hilal Ahmad was asked by the TLO to smear phenolphthalein powder on
the currency notes. The said official acted accordingly and dusted all the notes with phenolphthalein
powder. Later, the independent witness was asked by TLO to arrange the notes as per the serial
numbers already mentioned in Pre-Trap Memo and then asked to place the amount in two front side
pockets of Jeans Pant worn by one of the complainants; Sajid Hussain Mir (one lakh in each
pocket). The complainant was directed not to touch these notes till handing them over to the
accused only on specific demand. The independent witness was again asked by TLO to dip his
fingers in the said solution as he had touched the phenolphthalein dusted currency notes. On his
doing so, colour of the solution changed to Pink, which was preserved in a transparent glass bottle
and labeled with adhesive and marked as exhibit "A" & same was sealed and seized, and was kept in
P/S Malkhana for safe custody for further submission to FSL for examination. All trap team
members and independent witness were asked by TLO to wash their hands properly with soap and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 4
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
water in order to remove traces of phenolphthalein, if any, on their person.
6. The respondent also states in his status report that the trap team then proceeded towards the
shop of the complainant Mohammad Farooq Bhat in different vehicles where the duo (Tehsildar and
Naib-Tehsildar) was supposed to receive the bribe money. Before leaving for the destination,
complainant Mohammad Farooq made a phone call to Naib-Tehsildar on his Phone No:
9419052941 who informed him that Tehsildar is busy somewhere and will visit Mohammad
Farooq's office after few minutes. Upon reaching shop of Mr. Farooq; M/S Modish Constructions
located near Tatoo Ground, Naib-Tehsildar called Mr. Farooq and commanded him to send Sajid
Hussain Mir (another complainant) along with bribe money to Bemina Crossing. Mr. Sajid
proceeded to the spot in Scorpio vehicle. The trap team members followed him and scattered at
different positions to watch the happenings from a distance. Few minutes later, the accused Naib-
Tehsildar came from Sabzi-Mandi side and boarded Scorpio near Bemina crossing. Then Scorpio
started moving towards Tehsil Office Shalteng, trap team members including independent witness
boarded the vehicles/bikes and were following the Scorpio. The Scorpio Vehicle stopped opposite
Tehsil office located on other side of NHW in Firdous Colony Bemina Srinagar near Bismillah
Masjid and after a while Gh. Rasool (Naib-Tehsildar) deboarded the Scorpio and started walking
towards Firdous Abad via a lane. Complainant, Sajid Hussain Mir, flashed signal (Thumbs-up) to
trap team member. ACB Team swung into action and team members Inspector Parvaiz Ahmad, HC
Showkat Ahmad & SGCT. Hilal Ahmad post-trap proceedings were held on spot at Firdous Colony
near Masjid Bismillah. During post-trap proceedings, a solution of Sodium Carbonate was prepared
by SGT Aijaz Ahmad and firstly TLO dipped fingers of both his hands in the said solution but its
colour remained unchanged. Then accused who disclosed his name as Gulam Rasool Hajjam
(Naib-Tehsildar Batmaloo) S/O Abdul Rehman Hajjam R/o Azad Colony Batapora Srinagar dipped
fingers of both his hands in the same solution. On his doing so, colour of the solution turned pink.
This pink colour solution thus obtained was preserved in a transparent glass bottle, seized and
sealed on spot and marked as "B". The search of accused, Ghulam Rasool Hajam (Naib Tehsildar),
was conducted and the bribe/tainted money of Rs. Two Lacs was recovered from the right and left
side pockets of pant worn by him. The serial numbers of the said recovered tainted money were
tallied by independent witness and were found same as recorded earlier during Pre-Trap. To this
effect, Post Trap Memo-1 was prepared and signed by witnesses and paper which was provided to
independent witness in which serial numbers were noted was also seized. Further, the site plan of
the place of occurrence (Naqsha Mouqa) was prepared on spot. Thereafter, the personal search of
the accused was conducted thoroughly, during which some items/articles were also recovered and
personal search memo to this effect was prepared on spot. The accused Gh. Rasool Hajam "Naib-
Tehsildar" was arrested and arrest memo was prepared on spot. While the proceedings were going
on, lot of people gathered at the spot, as such, the accused Naib-Tehsildar was taken inside the
building of Directorate Ayush J&K Srinagar and seated in meeting hall. On the directions of TLO,
the solution of sodium carbonate was prepared in a transparent glass by HC Showkat Ahmad
No.168/KGM. The side pockets of pant (colour brown) which was worn by accused Gh.Rasool
Hajam and from which bribe money was recovered were dipped in the said solution by HC Showkat
Ahmad. On immersing the pant pockets in the said solution, colour of the solution turned pink. This
pink colour solution was preserved sealed & seized in a separate glass bottle marked as exhibit "C".
The memos were prepared accordingly. Thereafter, the ACB team & independent witness proceeded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 5
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
towards the office of 2nd accused Tehsildar Shalteng and "Occasion file" titled "File No. 152 Roshni
File Central Srinagar" consisting 19 leaves, was produced by one Ab. Majid Lone (Office Qanoongo,
Tehsil Office Shalteng) S/O Gh. Mohd R/O Mujgund and same was seized in the instant case. On the
basis of evidence collected which include initial demand, demand on spot and subsequent recovery
of tainted money, other allied circumstances & custody of occasion file pointing towards
involvement of Tehsildar Shalteng, namely, Younis Ahmad Bangroo in commission of offence, as
such, he was arrested from his office where he was present. His personal search was conducted and
memos were prepared, accordingly, and both the accused persons i.e., Gh. Rasool Hajam (Naib
Tehsildar) and Younis Ahmad Bangroo (Tehsildar) were taken to police station ACB Srinagar, Old
Secretariat, for further course of action. The Medical examination of the accused was ensured. The
bribe money and other seized items were handed over to I/C Malkhana for safe custody. The
items/articles which were recovered/seized during personal search of the accused were released by
the Hon'ble Court of law vide order dated 17.08.2022 in their favour. During the course of
investigation the accused Public Servants, namely, Younis Ahmad Bangroo (Tehsildar) and Ghulam
Rasool Hajam (Naib Tehsildar) have been placed under suspension from the date of their arrest by
the order of Division Commissioner, Kashmir vide order No. DivCom-K-848 of 2022 dated
20-07-2022 under endorsement No: Div.Com/ PS/ Misc/ 2022- 23/1082-88 Dated 20-07-2022 and
both have been attached with the office of Deputy Commissioner's Office Srinagar. During course of
investigation CDR of Cell numbers 9419022386, 9419007695, 9419052941 for the period of
01-06-2022 up to 18-07-2022 were obtained from the office of the BSNL J&K and the same have
been placed on file which corroborate the sequence of events. During course of investigation, the
Pre-Trap and Post-Trap washes were forwarded to FSL Srinagar for examination and opinion which
has been obtained and placed on file. Witnesses acquainted with facts and circumstances of the case
have been examined and their statements recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C. The accused Public
Servants were arrested on 18.07.2022, and admitted to bail by the Hon'ble Court of Special Judge
Anti-Corruption Kashmir at Srinagar on 28h July 2022. Further, one "Memory Card" used to record
conversations between the accused and the complainant, during verification of complaint which
corroborates the demand of bribe by the public servants, has been seized, sealed and marked as 'Q'.
Further voice samples of accused persons as well as of the complainant Mr. Farooq were recorded in
three (3) separate memory cards in presence of Executive Magistrate 1 Class, and the same cards
were seized and sealed with adhesive tape and marked as "A1", "A2" & "C1" in presence of the
Executive Magistrate and other witnesses on spot. questioned recording marked as 'Q', recorded
during cation of complaint along with voice samples of accused ns and complainant Farooq Bhat
have been forwarded to Director, Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Chandigarh, for comparison
on 08.09.2022.
7. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
8. The learned counsels for the petitioner have stated that once there is no allegation as to direct
acceptance of money as bribe, no offence as contemplated under Section 7 of the Act can be made
out against him. The learned counsels for the petitioner would contend that the impugned FIR is
based on false and frivolous grounds. The learned counsels for the petitioner also state that even if
the allegations levelled in the impugned FIR are taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety, still they do not make out a prima facie case which constitute any offence against
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 6
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
petitioner. It is also submitted that the genesis of the impugned FIR emanates from the complaint,
cognized by the investigating agency is barred under law to be proceeded from and the protection
granted to public servants in immune from the projections of bogus complaints and cannot be
permitted to hinder or place an embargo on the functioning of the petitioner. It is further submitted
that the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 postulates impermeable protections of public servants
with the object of curtailing frivolous complaints and the legislative presumption are always in
favour of the public servant and the impugned FIR cannot be permitted to circumvent the statutory
protections and any violation thereto renders the impugned FIR without any justification in law and
liable to be set at naught.
9. The petitioner seeks exercise of the inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
impugned FIR. The scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C. is well defined and inherent powers could be
exercised by the High Court to give effect to an order under the Code, to prevent abuse of the
process of the court; and to otherwise secure the ends of justice. This extraordinary power is to be
exercised ex debito justitiae. However, in exercise of such powers, it is not permissible for the High
Court to appreciate the evidence as it can only evaluate the material documents on record to the
extent of its prima facie satisfaction about the existence of sufficient ground for proceeding against
the accused and the court cannot look into materials, acceptability of which is essentially a matter
for the trial.
10. The judicial conscience of the High Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings
in exercise of the powers vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C., if answer to all the steps, as
enumerated herein after, is in affirmative, has been so said by the Supreme Court in Rajiv Thapar v
Madan Lal Kapoor, 2013 (3) SCC 330:-
"Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate the
following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing, raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure:
i. Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable, and
indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
ii. Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused, would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused, i.e., the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e.,
the material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false.
iii. Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not been refuted
by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is such, that it cannot be
justifiably refuted by the prosecution/complainant?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 7
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
iv. Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process of
the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?"
11. The case in hand, when examined on the touchstone of the law laid down by the Supreme Court,
does not at all persuade this Court to grant the relief prayed for by the petitioner in the instant
petition. It is well settled law that Section 482 Cr.P.C. empowers the High Court to exercise its
inherent powers to prevent abuse of the process of the Court. The Supreme Court in State of
Telangana v. Habib Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC 779, has held that the powers under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to quash the FIR, is to be
exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or smother the prosecution that is
legitimate. The inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the High Court to act
according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised sparingly, with circumspection and in
the rarest of rare cases. The inherent powers in a matter of quashing FIR have to be exercised
sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is justifying by the test specifically laid
down in the provision itself. The power under Section 482 Cr.PC, is a very wide, but conferment of
the wide power requires the Court to be more conscious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty
on the Court.
12. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Telangana v. Habib Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017
(2) SCC 779, has held that the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. or under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, to quash the FIR, is to be exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be
used to choke or smother the prosecution that is legitimate. Inherent powers do not confer an
arbitrary jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be
exercised sparingly, with circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. Inherent powers in a matter
of quashing FIR have to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is
justifying by the test specifically laid down in provision itself. Power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., is a
very wide, but conferment of wide power requires the Court to be more conscious. It casts an
onerous and more diligent duty on the Court.
13. In State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, the Supreme
Court has elaborately considered the scope and ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. and Article 226 of the
Constitution of India in the background of quashing the proceedings in the criminal investigation.
After noticing the various earlier pronouncements, the Supreme Court made certain categories of
cases by way of the illustration, where the power under Section 482 Cr. P.C. can be exercised to
prevent the abuse of the process of the Court or secure the ends of justice. The paragraph 102, which
gives seven categories of cases where power can be exercised under Section 482 Cr. P.C. are
reproduced as follows:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 8
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the
allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police
officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the
purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations
made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do
not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the
Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7)
Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."
14. In another case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy, reported in (2004) 6 SCC
522, the Supreme Court, while dealing with inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482
Cr. P.C., has observed and held as under:
"5. Exercise of power under Section 482of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 9
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquid alique concedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto. xxxxxx
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal
evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When
exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not
ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That
is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an
instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances
into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the
same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit
a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under
Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may
exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by
this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC 335)...... xxxxxxx 8
As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 10
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its
exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is
based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a
legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court of a State should normally
refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts are
incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and
produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of
magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material.
Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High
Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any
stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S. Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC
892), Dr. Raghubir Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would not
be proper for the High Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all
probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on
such premises, arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would
be erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot
be proceeded with. In proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent
powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint does
not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken
by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that
there should be meticulous analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether the
case would end in conviction or acquittal. The complaint/F.I.R. has to be read as a
whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in the light of the
statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show
that the complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there
would be no justification for interference by the High Court. When an information is
lodged at the police station and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the
informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected during the
investigation and evidence led in Court which decides the fate of the accused person.
The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot
by itself be the basis for quashing the proceeding."
15. The above settled position of law has also been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Priti Saraf &
anr v. State of NCT of Delhi & anr, 2021 SCC Online SC 206, and it has been said that inherent
power of the High Court is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised with great care and
circumspection before embarking to scrutinize a complaint/FIR/ charge-sheet in deciding whether
the case is the rarest of rare cases, to scuttle the prosecution at its inception. It is settled that
whether the allegations in the complaint were true, is to be decided on the basis of evidence during
the trial. In the matter of exercise of inherent power by the High Court, the only requirement is to
see whether continuance of the proceedings would be a total abuse of the process of the Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 11
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
16. Even the Supreme Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Arun Gulab Gawali (2010) 9 SCC
701, set-aside the order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, whereby the criminal
complaint/FIR was quashed on the prayer made by the complainant himself. While quashing and
setting-aside the order passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court in paras 13 and 27 to 29 has
observed and held as under:
"13. The power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases and the Court cannot
be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or
otherwise of allegations made in the F.I.R./Complaint, unless the allegations are so
patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach
such a conclusion. The extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer
an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice.
However, the Court, under its inherent powers, can neither intervene at an uncalled
for stage nor it can `soft-pedal the course of justice' at a crucial stage of
investigation/ proceedings. The provisions of Articles 226, 227 of the Constitution of
India and Section 482of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter called as
'Cr.P.C.') are a device to advance justice and not to frustrate it. The power of judicial
review is discretionary, however, it must be exercised to prevent the miscarriage of
justice and for correcting some grave errors and to ensure that esteem of
administration of justice remains clean and pure. However, there are no limits of
power of the Court, but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be
exercised in invoking these powers. (Vide State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha
[(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 283 : AIR 1982 SC 949] , Pepsi Foods Ltd. v.
Special Judicial Magistrate [(1998) 5 SCC 749 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1400] , G. Sagar Suri
v. State of U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 :
2000 SCC (Cri) 513 : AIR 2000 SC 754] and Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. [(2003) 3
SCC 11 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 703] ) xxx xxxx xxxx
27. The High Court proceeded on the perception that as the complainant himself was
not supporting the complaint, he would not support the case of the prosecution and
there would be no chance of conviction, thus the trial itself would be a futile exercise.
Quashing of FIR/Complaint on such a ground cannot be held to be justified in law. Ordinarily, the
Court of Sessions is empowered to discharge an accused under Section 227 Cr.P.C. even before
initiating the trial. The accused can, therefore, move the Trial Court itself for such a relief and the
Trial Court would be in a better position to analyse and pass an order as it is possessed of all the
powers and the material to do so. It is, therefore, not necessary to invoke the jurisdiction under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. for the quashing of a prosecution in such a case. The reliance on affidavits by the
High Court would be a weak, hazy and unreliable source for adjudication on the fate of a trial. The
presumption that an accused would never be convicted on the material available is too risky a
proposition to be accepted readily, particularly in heinous offences like extortion.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 12
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
28. A claim founded on a denial by the complainant even before the trial commences coupled with
an allegation that the police had compelled the lodging of a false FIR, is a matter which requires
further investigation as the charge is levelled against the police. If the prosecution is quashed, then
neither the Trial Court nor the Investigating Agency has any opportunity to go into this question,
which may require consideration. The State is the prosecutor and all prosecution is the social and
legal responsibility of the State. An offence committed is a crime against a society and not against a
victim alone. The victim under undue pressure or influence of the accused or under any threat or
compulsion may resile back but that would not absolve the State from bringing the accused to book,
who has committed an offence and has violated the law of the land.
29. Thus, while exercising such power the court has to act cautiously before proceeding to quash a
prosecution in respect of an offence which hits and affects the society at large. It should be a case
where no other view is possible nor any investigation or inquiry is further required. There cannot be
a general proposition of law, so as to fit in as a straitjacket formula for the exercise of such power.
Each case will have to be judged on its own merit and the facts warranting exercise of such power.
More so, it was not a case of civil nature where there could be a possibility of compromise or
involving an offence which may be compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C., where the Court could
apply the ratio of the case in Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia [(1988) 1 SCC 692 :
1988 SCC (Cri) 234 : AIR 1988 SC 709]."
17. In the above backdrop it may be appropriate to mention here that Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to
prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The
provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which
inhere in the High Court. The High Court, while forming an opinion whether a
criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR should be quashed in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr. P.C., must evaluate whether the ends of justice
would justify the exercise of the inherent power. While the inherent power of the
High Court has a wide ambit and plenitude, it has to be exercised to secure the ends
of justice or to prevent an abuse of the process of any court.
18. Perusal of the instant petition and the contents contained therein require and
demand full dress trial and examination of facts by this Court as if this Court is in
appeal and acting as an appellate court and to draw its own conclusion vis-à-vis
impugned FIR, complaint and proceedings emanating therefrom. This is not the aim
and object of the provisions of Section 482 Cr. P.C., particularly when the petition on
hand does not unveil any ground muchless cogent or material one, to indicate that
the inherent powers are to be exercised to prevent abuse of process of law and to
secure the ends of justice. The reference made by the learned counsels for the
petitioner to the judgements are distinct in the facts and circumstances of the present
case. In that view of the matter, the impugned FIR does not call for any interference
and consequently, the instant petition is liable to be dismissed. Interim direction, if
any, shall stand vacated.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 13
Yunus Ahmad Bangroo vs Ut Of J&K Through P/S Acb on 10 September, 2025
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 10.09.2025 Qazi Amjad, Secy Whether the order
is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171132287/ 14
