Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar
And Ors on 25 July, 2019
Author: Anil Kumar Upadhyay
Bench: Anil Kumar Upadhyay
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.331 of 2018
======================================================
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan through its Secretary, Shri Zafar Ahmad Ghani,
son of Late M.N. Ahmad Ghani, resident of Purana Quila, P.S.- Siwan Town,
District- Siwan.
... ... Petitioner/s
Versus
1. The State of Bihar
2. Director, Higher Education, Bihar, Patna.
3. Jai Prakash University, Chapra through its Registrar.
4. Vice Chancellor, Jai Prakash University, Chapra.
5. Registrar, Jai Prakash University, Chapra.
6. Dr. Md. Rashid Shibli, Son of Md. Asif Billah, presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Mathematics, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
7. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mishra, Son of Sri Nagendra Mishra, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Economics, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
8. Dr. R.P. Shahi, Son of Late B.P. Shahi, Presently posted as Reader,
Department of Botany, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
9. Dr. Md. Junaid Alam, Son of Late Md. Shoaib, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Psychology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
10. Dr. Zafrullah, Son of Sri Kamaluddin Ahmad, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Persian, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
11. Dr. Anjum Ara, Son of Late Syed Ejaj Hussain, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Botany, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
12. Md. Alimullah, Son of Late Mohid Kashim, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Botany, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
13. Md. Imteyaz Hashim, Son of Late Moho Hashim, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Botany, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
14. Dr. Navin Kumar Sharma, Son of Late Sri Ram Sagar Sharma, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Chemistry, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
15. Dr. Sangita Kumari, Son of Late Dr. Shyambalak Sinha, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Chemistry, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
16. Md. Shamsuddin Ahmad, Son of Late Md. Sahazada, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Physics, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
17. Sri Arvind Prakash Verms, Son of Late Alakh Deo Narayan, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Mathematics, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
18. Md. Asdullah, Son of Late Md. Sallemullah, Presently posted as Lecturer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 1
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
Senior Scale, Department of Mathematics, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
2/25
19. Sri Sunil Kumar Giri, Son of Late Sukh Deo Giri, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Mathematics, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
20. Dr. Vijay Kumar, Son of Dr. Vishwanath Pd. Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Zoology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
21. Dr. Abul Kalam, Son of Late Md. Hafizullah, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Zoology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
22. Dr. Parwej Ahmad, Son of Late Ainul Haque, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Zoology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
23. Dr. Nalini Bhardwaj, Son of Prof. Rabindra Nath Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Zoology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
24. Md. Farooque Azam Khan, Son of Haider Ali Khan, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of English, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
25. Md. Sami Akhtar Ansari, Son of Abdul Jabbar, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Urdu, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
26. S. Ziyauddin Ahmad, Son of Moulvi S. Gul Mohd. Auadry, Presently posted
as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Urdu, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
27. Md. Abul Hayat, Son of Late Md. Auasim, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Urdu, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
28. Dr. Anuradha Agrawal, Sri Hari Prasad Agrawal, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Philosophy, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
29. Dr. Azhar Hussian Parvej, Son of M.F. Zaman, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Philosophy, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
30. Dr. Shailesh Kr. Singh, Son of Sri Nawlakh Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Philosophy, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
31. Dr. Sanjay Kumar, Son of Sri Chandramouli Pd. Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Philosophy, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
32. Sri Surendra Kumar, Son of Late Raghwaw Kunwar, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Sanskrit, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
33. Dr. Brij Kishore Sinha, Son of Late Ram Naresh Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Economics, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
34. Dr. Tanveer Ahmad, Son of Late Auarimoti Haque, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Economics, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
35. Sri Umesh Pd. Singh, Son of Late Shubh Narayan Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Economics, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
36. Md. Abdul Washim Khan, Son of Late Abdul Rajad Khan, Presently posted
as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of History, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
3/25
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 2
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
37. Md. Abul Kalam, Son of Late Raza Hussain, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Geography, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
38. Dr. Neyazul Haque Farroqui, Son of Late Ainul Haque Farooqui, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Geography, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
39. Dr. Murari Singh, Son of Late Jang Bahadur Singh, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Geography, Z.A. Islamia College,
Siwan.
40. Dr. Kalim Gaffar Mian, Son of Late Peer Mohammad Mian, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Geography, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
41. Md. Tarique Mohmood Khan, Son of Late Mahmood Ali Khan, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Political Science, Z.A.
Islamia College, Siwan.
42. Md. Quaji Junaid, Son of Late Quasi Mohd. Ataullah, Presently posted as
Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Political Science, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
43. Dr. Akhlaque Ahmad, Son of Late Wasi Ahmad, Presently posted as Lecturer
Senior Scale, Department of Psychology, Z.A. Islamia College, Siwan.
44. Mahmoodul Hasan Ansari, Son of Late Abdul Jabbar Ansari, Presently
posted as Lecturer Senior Scale, Department of Persian, Z.A. Islamia
College, Siwan.
45. The Chancellor of Universities of Bihar, Raj Bhawan, Patna
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Petitioner/s : Mr.Abhinav Srivastava, Advocate
For the State : Mr.Madhaw Prasad Yadav -GP-23
Mr. Rajesh Kumar Sinha, AC to GP 23
For the J.P. University : Mr. Anjani Kumar, Sr. Advocate
For Pvt. Resp. : Mr. Shivendra Kishore, Sr. Advocate
Mr. Manoj Priyadarshi, Advocate
For the Chancellor : Mr. Rajendra Giri, Sr. Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR UPADHYAY
ORAL JUDGMENT
Date : 25-07-2019
The present writ petition involves many competing
interest. The Governing Body of Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan
through its Secretary has filed this writ petition. They are
concerned with their autonomy and right to administer education
in terms of the constitutional protection available to religious
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 3
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
4/25
institutions. The petitioner-institution is minority institution and as
such it enjoys certain privilege in the matter of administration of
the college established by the religious minority. The interest of
the University on the other hand, is to regulate the affairs of the
minority affiliated college irrespective of the fact that the college
is minority institution. The interest of the teachers, who have been
granted promotion under the Career Advancement Scheme or the
Time Bound Promotion Scheme are also involved as the outcome
of this case has bearing on their status and future prospect. There
is yet another interest of the State involved as the entire
expenditure for payment of salary to the teaching and non-teaching
staff in the college in question is borne from the State Exchequer.
Considering the involvement of public exchequer, the Court
requested the Advocate General to assist the Court vide order
dated 08.05.2018. On 14.05.2018 on the request of the Director,
Higher Education the Court granted time to file counter affidavit
duly vetted by the Principal Secretary of the Department. After
change in the roster the matter was listed before the brother Judge,
Hon'ble Mohit Kumar Shah. On 05.09.2018, his Lordship has
noted the difficulty of learned Advocate General in appearing in
the matter as he was not free on that day. The Court in order to
accommodate the Advocate General adjourned the case for
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
5/25
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 4
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
12.09.2018
. Finally the case was taken up and hearing was concluded on 23.07.2019 by this Court without the
advantage of assistance from the Advocate General.
2. Mr. Abhinav Srivastava, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has made
submissions on behalf of the petitioner-Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan. Mr. Shivendra Kishore, learned
senior counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenor, who have been granted promotion, under the
Advance Career Progression /Time Bound Promotion Scheme under the 1986 Time Bound
Promotion Scheme Statute made exhaustive argument, Mr. Anjani Kumar, learned senior counsel
along with Mr. Nagendra Prasad Singh appeared and assisted the Court on behalf of the University,
Mr. Rajendra Giri, learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the Chancellor, Mr. Madhaw Prasad
Yadav, GP-23 has appeared for the State to assist the Court and Mr. Manoj Priyadarshi has made
submissions on behalf of the intervenors, who has supported the stand of the petitioner.
3. At the very outset the Court would like to decide the issue of intervenors whose case was
represented by Mr. Manoj Priyadarshi. After the amendment of the Patna High Court Rules, the
interventions are only allowed in opposition to the writ petition but from the intervention petition it
appears that the intervenors Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 represented by
Mr. Manoj Priyadarshi have, in fact, supported the case of the petitioner and as such the Court does
not find any merit in the intervention on behalf of such teachers who are in support of the case of
the writ petitioner. The intervention at the instance of the teachers, who are not in opposition to the
writ petition does not merit any consideration and is accordingly, rejected.
4. Adverting to the issue raised in the present writ petition, Mr. Abhinav Srivastava, appearing on
behalf of the petitioner would submit that the petitioner is not oppose to consider and grant
promotion to any of the teachers who are otherwise eligible for grant of promotion but in the garb of
granting promotion the Institute run by religious minority will not tolerate and accept interference
of University with the day to day affairs of the minority institution. His contention in the present
writ petition is that the power exercised by the University is unauthorized and encroachment upon
the right to administer education guaranteed to the minorities to establish and administer
educational institution of their choice. Mr. Srivastava has drawn the attention of the Court to the
letter dated 24.8.2016, Annexure-1 addressed by the Registrar, J.P. University to the
Principal/Secretary of the petitioner-institution-Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan. The letter indicates
that in the meeting of the Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 Academic Council
dated 9.8.2016, the names of experts were selected by the Vice-Chancellor and out of the 5 names
selected by the Vice-Chancellor, the Governing Body was asked to select three. The letter further
indicates that apart from three experts, the Governing Body of the College is required to nominate
two subject experts from the list which was made available. In other words, the letter indicates that
out of the experts and subject experts the Governing Body was at liberty to select three experts and
two subject experts and send the names to the University for approval of the Selection Committee.
The College was asked to furnish information if any applicant belonging to SC, ST, EBC, minority,
female and physically challenged person are under consideration to the University. Mr. Srivastava
referring to Annexure-1 submits that when the process of approval of the Selection Committee was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 5
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
on and after approved list submitted by the University, the Principal of the College sent list of the
teachers for consideration of their case for promotion under the Career Advancement Scheme as
would be evident from Annexure-2 dated 15.04.2017, no action was taken. On 16.7.2017 the college
sent list of experts in terms of Annexure-1 to the University for approval. Annexure-3 is the list of
three experts out of 5 names approved by the Academic Council of the University. The idea was that
the Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 University may approve the Selection
Committee so that the Governing Body of the College may proceed for grant of promotion to eligible
candidates in terms of the Career Advancement Scheme or the Time Bound Promotion Scheme.
Instead of approving the list submitted by the Governing Body for constitution of the Selection
Committee, the University issued notification dated 7.10.2017. The aforesaid notification was in
relation to grant of promotion of Lecturer to Lecturer senior scale purportedly in exercise of powers
under the Statutes for Career Advancement Scheme dated 29.6.2005 amended from time to time.
The Governing Body objected to the action of the University as the action of the University granting
promotion was direct attempt to encroach upon the power of the Governing Body in the matter of
establishing and administering minority institution. The objection dated 18.10.2017 addressed to
the University was in relation to the grant of promotion from Lecturer to Lecturer Senior Scale
under the Career Advancement Scheme. On the same date i.e. 18.10.2017, the University issued
another notification granting promotion under Time Bound Promotion Scheme of 1986. The power
was exercised under the Statute dated 24.12.1986. The other notifications are also placed on record
to contend that the Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 University made
encroachment in the affairs of the minority institution.
5. Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that minority institution has
right under the Constitution of India to administer education of their choice and their right to
establish minority institution is absolute right as has been held out by the Apex Court in Re : Kerala
Education Bill, 1957, A. I. R. 1958 S. C. 956. The Supreme Court has occasion to discuss the right to
administer education again by larger Bench in the case of Ahmadabad St. Xavier's College Society
Vs. State of Gujarat (1974) 1 SCC 717 which is still holding the field. The other judgments of the
Constitution Bench and larger Bench are on the same line of the right of minority institution to
establish educational institution and administer affairs of the educational institution. Apart from the
constitutional mandates as to administration of affairs of the minority institution, Mr. Shrivastava
highlighted the statutory scheme contained in the Bihar State Universities Act and Statutes framed
thereunder to contend that the entire exercise by the University is totally without jurisdiction. The
Career Advancement Scheme was introduced with effect from 23.9.1995. Vide Statute dated
20.7.200 another Statute superseding the previous was introduced with effect from Patna High
Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 27.7.1998. Mr. Srivastava submitted that the University
has issued notification granting promotion under Career Advancement Scheme of 29.6.2005 with
effect from 27.7.1998. Clause 2.1.0 of the Statute dated 29.6.2005 is candid on the point of
application of the Career Advancement Scheme. It is only confined to the University, Department or
College managed and maintained by the University. It has absolutely no application to the affiliated
College muchless the minority institution.
6. So far as the Time Bound Promotion scheme is concerned, Mr. Srivastava submitted that the
University has exercised power purportedly under the Statute dated 24.12.1986. Again this Statute is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 6
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
only applicable to the University, Department or Degree College managed and maintained by the
State Government and it has no application to affiliated college or minority institution. Mr.
Shrivastava has submitted that so far as the affiliated college or minority institutions are concerned,
Time Bound Promotion Scheme of 1992 is applicable i.e. the Statute dated 14.9.1992. Clause I of the
Statute dated 14.9.1992 in clear terms indicates that Lecturer serving in affiliated college, which
include the college established and managed by the Governing Body shall, on the recommendation
of the Bihar College Service Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 Commission,
promote on the basis of time bound scheme subject to the following considerations.
7. It is admitted at the bar that College Service Commission ceased to exist after 2007. The Repeal
Act is relevant for the purpose of this case. The Bihar College Service Commission Repeal Act, 2007
was published in the Official Gazette on 19.4.2007. Clause 5 thereof is about assets and liability. For
ready reference Clause 5 of the 2007 Repeal Act is quoted below.
5. Assets and liabilities. - All the assets and properties of Bihar College Service Commission whether
movable or immovable including lands, building, stores, vehicle, books, cash balance, reserve fund,
investments, furniture and others shall stand transferred and vested on and be deemed to have
come into the possession of the State Government and all the liabilities and obligations of the
Commission under any agreement or contract entered into bona fide before the commencement of
this Act, shall devolve and shall be deemed to have been devolved on the State Government.
8. Referring to the substantive provisions of the Act, Mr. Srivastava would submit that for
appointment in the affiliated colleges statutory provisions are made in Section 57(A) and 57(B)
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 of the Bihar State Universities Act, 1976.
Section 57(A) deals with the appointment of teacher in affiliated college which is not governed by
the State Government or not funded by the University. The constitution of Selection Committee for
appointment is prescribed under Section 57(B). Section 57 (A) and (B) are quoted below:-
"57 A-Procedure of selection to be prescribed by the statute-
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes made thereunder, for
appointment of teachers in such affiliated Colleges, which are not governed by the
State Government or not funded by the Universities, the applications from the
candidate fulfilling the qualifications prescribed under clause (iii) of sub-section (1)
of section 57 of this Act shall be invited by the Governing Body of the College
concerned. The selection shall be processed by the Selection Committee constituted
by the University under the provisions contained in section 57B of this Act. (2) In
making recommendations on the basis of interview of the candidates holding the
above mentioned qualifications the rules or reservation shall be adhered by the
Selection Committee.
(3) The recommendation made by the Selection Committee shall remain valid for one
year from the date of the recommendation. Within six months from the date of
recommendation of the Selection Committee; the College Patna High Court CWJC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 7
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 administration shall process the
appointment/promotion in order of preference laid down by the Selection
Committee. (4) With regard to the appointment, promotion, dismissal, discharge,
removal from service and termination of service or demotion of teachers in affiliated
Colleges, the action shall be taken in the manner prescribed after making
consultation with the above mentioned Selection Committee.
(5) The appointments, promotions, dismissal, removal and termination of service of
teachers in the minority colleges affiliated on the basis of religion and language may
be made and disciplinary action against them shall be taken by the governing body of
those colleges with with the approval of the Selection Committee constituted by the
University;
Provided that, where the order concerned is limited to only ensure, withholding increment, against a
teacher or his/her suspension till the investigation of charges, in such cases the consultation with
the Selection Committee shall not be necessary.
(6) The Selection Committee, subject to this Act, will complete the scrutiny of the cases of the
teachers of affiliated degree colleges appointed prior to 19.4.2007, without the recommendation of
the Bihar College Service Commission on the basis of qualifications in force at the time of
appointment of such teachers upto 31.3.2017, otherwise such appointments will not be treated valid.
Thereafter the Governing Body of the college will accept the names recommended by the Selection
Committee, which shall be finally approved by the concerned University.
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 Distribution of the amount of grant
sanctioned by the State Government will be made amongst the teachers in the concerned affiliated
degree colleges by its Governing Body upto 31.3.2017."
"57 B. Constitution of Selection Committee.
(1) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts of Assistant Professor,
Principal in affiliated colleges shall be constituted by the University as follows:-
(i) The Chairman of the governing body of the college or the person nominated by the
governing body, who being one of its members, shall be the Chairman of the
Selection Committee.
(ii) Principal of the College.
(iii) Head of the department of the faculty concerned in the College.
(iv) Three experts, not below the rank of professor and two out of them should be
experts of the subject, shall be nominated by the Vice-chancellor of the concerned
University. In case of such colleges, which have been notified/declared as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 8
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
minorityeducational institution, three persons nominated on behalf of the Chairman
of the College who shall be from the list of five persons preferably from the minority
community and who have been recommended by the Vice -Chancellor of the
University concerned from the panel of experts proposed by the Academic Council of
the University concerned and three persons out of them should be subject experts.
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
(v) The Governing body of the College may nominate two such subject experts who are not
connected with that college and those persons have been recommended by the Vice-Chancellor out
of the panel of Subject Experts approved by the Academic Council of the University Concerned.
(vi) An academician representing SC/ST/OBC/Minority /Women/Differently-abled categories, if
any of candidates representing these categories it the applicant, to be nominated by the
Vice-Chancellor, if any of the above members of the selection committee do not belong to that
category.
(vii) presence of five members of the Selection Committee, which shall include three subject experts,
shall form the quorum for the meet ing or the Selection Committee."
9. Sections 59 and 60 of the Act is also relevant because it deals with the scheme in relation to the
administration of the colleges by the University and the Governing Body. For ready reference,
Sections 59 and 60 is quoted below :-
59. Relation of affiliated College with the University.-
The relations of the affiliated Colleges with the University shall be governed by the Statutes to be
made in that behalf, and such Statutes shall provide in particular for the exercise by the University
of the following powers in respect of the Colleges affiliated to the University:-
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 (1) to lay down minimum
educational qualifications for the different classes of teachers and tutorial staff
employed by such Colleges;
(2) to approve the action taken by the governing bodies of such colleges in regard to
creation of posts of teachers, their appointments, dismissal, discharge, removal from
service, termination of service and determination of term of post and to approve the
deputation of teachers to the Intermediate College delinked from the affiliated
College; (3) to co-ordinate and regulate the facilities provided and expenditure
incurred by such Colleges, in regard to libraries, laboratories and other equipments
for teaching and research;
(4) to require such Colleges, when necessary, to confine the enrollment of students to
certain specific subjects; (5) to regulate conditions of service of teachers of such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 9
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
colleges including the grant of leave with or without allowances and the constitution
of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of such teachers; and (6) to
require satisfactory arrangements for tutorial and similar other work in such Colleges
and to inspect such arrangements from time to time:
Provided that such colleges shall supplement such teaching by tutorial or other
instruction of training in a manner to be prescribed by the Regulation to be made by
the Academic Council.
60. The Governing body.- (1) There shall be a governing body for the management
and administration of each affiliated College other than a College owned and
maintained by the State Government or a College Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of
2018 dt.25-07-2019 established and administered by a minority community on the
grounds of religion or language or an affiliated technical or medical college.
It shall consist of following members-
(i) Principal of the College - Ex-Officio,
(ii) a member elected by and from amongst the teachers of the College,
(iii) a representative of the University nominated by the Vice Chancellor
(iv) an officer of the State Government posted in the district, being not below the rank of a
sub-divisional magistrate, nominated by the Vice Chancellor.
(v) a member elected by such donors from amongst themselves as have donated at least twenty five
thousand rupees to the College,
(vi) One member to be nominated by the Vice Chancellor, who is a member of the Parliament or the
State Legislature and mainly resides in the district of the area in which the College is situated; and
(vii) One member co-opted by the Governing body from amongst such educationists or persons
residing in the district where the College is situated as are reputed for their academic interest.
(2) The term of office of the members of the Governing body, their powers and functions shall be
such as are prescribed by the Statutes.
(3) Any act or proceedings of the Governing body of affiliated Colleges shall not be invalid merely
because of any vacancy or vacancies in its membership.
Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 (4) The Vice Chancellor shall constitute an
adhoc committee for the management of the College so long as Governing body is not constituted in
accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section (1).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 10
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
(5) The Governing body/Managing Committee for the management and administration of a College
owned and maintained by the Government, or established and administered by a minority
community, on the ground of religion or language and declared, from time to time, as such by the
State Government according to yardstick laid down by it, or of any affiliated technical or medical
college, shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions prescribed in the Statutes."
10. The relevant Statute in relation to the Governing Body and its powers, functions etc. is Statute
No. 32. The very first paragraph of the Statute No. 32 reads that the Governing Body constituted for
management and administration affiliated colleges other than the Colleges owned and maintained
by the State Government or College administered by the minority or affiliated as technical or
medical college. The modalities are indicated in the Statute for constitution of the Governing Body
and the power of the Governing Body.
11. Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava has referred to the statutory scheme under the Bihar State Universities
Act and Committee constituted for the purpose of constitution of Governing Body, Patna High Court
CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 power of the Governing Body, claim for grant of promotion
under the Career Advancement Scheme/Time Bound Promotion and submitted that apart from the
constitutional guarantee to the minority institution in the matter of management, control and
administration, the Bihar State Universities Act also does not authorizes the University to take
decision granting promotion either under the Career Advancement Scheme or under the Time
Bound Promotion Scheme. Their power is confined to approval of Selection Committee and
thereafter approval of appointment/promotion. The Governing Body has power in relation to
service condition. Mr. Shrivastava would submit that service condition includes grant of promotion
and for grant of promotion the University can only be required to examine the minimum
qualification prescribed by the Statute at the time of approval of appointment and promotion. The
University has the role to approve the name of experts for constitution of Selection Committee and
after the decision of the Governing Body, the University is required to take appropriate decision for
approval of such grant of promotion or appointment.
12. Mr. Anjani Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the University would submit
that the University has committed no mistake in granting promotion to the teachers as Patna High
Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 those teachers who have been granted promotion either
under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme or under Career Advancement Scheme, were eligible for
grant of promotion and as such the University has granted them such promotion. However, he has
no answer to the issue whether the Career Advancement Scheme permit the University to grant
promotion in relation to the affiliated Colleges. He has further no answer to the scheme of grant of
promotion under 1986 Time Bound Promotion Scheme. Where there is specific Statute for grant of
promotion under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme in affiliated colleges including the minority
institution dated 14.9.1992 then how the University can exercise power under 1986 Statute.
13. Mr. Shivendra Kishore, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenors, who have
been granted promotion and their promotion has been questioned by the Governing Body in the
present case, would submit that vacancies relates to 2006-2007 and right from 2006 onwards the
petitioner- Governing Body and the Secretary recommended the case for grant of promotion. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 11
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
issue of promotion was considered by the University Senate and Syndicate and was duly approved in
2017. Mr. Kishore submits that the Secretary of the Governing Body was party being member of
Senate and as such the Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 principle of
promissory estoppel operates against the petitioner and the writ petition at the instance of the
Governing Body and its Secretary is not maintainable. He submits that 2013 amendment is
prospective in nature and is not applicable in relation to vacancy of 2006 or 2007.
14. Adverting to the issue of estoppel the Court find it difficult to accept this contention as the law is
well settled that there would be no estoppel against Statute. Reference in this connection may be
made to the judgment of the Apex Court in the cases of Bengal Iron Company V. Commercial Tax
Officer: AIR 1993 SC 2414, Sethi Auto Service Station Vs. DDA (2009) 1 SCC 180.
15. So far as the issue as to prospective application of amended provision is concerned, the Bihar
College Service Commission Repeal Act came in 2007 and after the RepealAct the assets and
liabilities were taken over by the State Government as stated hereinabove. In the instant case the
University has taken step in furtherance of the Scheme in 2013 amended provisions, Annexure-1
onwards are indicative of the fact that the University was conscious of the statutory scheme under
Section 57(A) and 57(B) of the Act and that is why the University took steps for approval of the list of
experts and subject experts. Once the Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019
University took decision to approve the list of subject experts, the University was expected to honour
its own decision and allow the Governing Body to proceed with the selection for the purpose of grant
of promotion under Career Advancement Scheme or under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme.
16. So far as the issue of grant of promotion under the 1986 Statute is concerned that was alien to
the affiliated college and minority institution. Specific Statute was framed on 14.9.1992 in relation to
grant of promotion under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme. It is settled proposition of law of
construction that generalia specialibus non derogant i.e. the general provision cannot affect the
special provision. When special scheme was framed for the purpose of grant of Time Bound
Promotion in minorities institution then the general scheme of Time Bound Promotion would not
apply.
17. Notwithstanding the discussions made in the present case that the entire exercise was without
jurisdiction by the University in granting promotion, the Court cannot shut its eyes to the ground
realities that teachers are entitled to consideration for grant of promotion either under Career
Advancement Scheme or under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme, 1992, whether the University
may consider or the Governing Body may consider, if Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018
dt.25-07-2019 they have right to consideration, their right cannot be defeated on account of clash of
interest of the Governing Body and the University.
18. During the course of hearing Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava admitted that the Governing Body is not
averse to the interest of the teachers. They are concerned with the interference in the administration
of the college which is established and maintained by religious minority. His emphasis is on the
procedure prescribed to be followed for the purpose of appointment and other service condition
including the promotion. He fairly submitted that Governing Body will consider the case of all
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 12
Z. A. Islamia College, Siwan Through Its ... vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 25 July, 2019
eligible teachers for grant of promotion in terms of the existing Time Bound Promotion Scheme and
Career Advancement Scheme from due dates if the teachers answer the eligibility and other
conditions for grant of such promotion.
19. While holding the action of the respondents granting promotion as without jurisdiction, the
Court would like to direct the Governing Body to take appropriate decision with regard to all eligible
for grant of promotion after approval of the Selection Committee by the University. The Court
grants one month's time to the Governing Body to send the list of experts including subject experts
to the University and the University is required to Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018
dt.25-07-2019 approve the Selection Committee within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of the list by the Governing Body of the College and within a period of 30 days thereafter the
Governing Body may complete the process of scrutiny and other formalities for grant of promotion
and within one month take appropriate decision with regard to grant of promotion from due date
under Career Advancement Scheme or Time Bound Promotion Scheme.
20. As indicated hereinabove, the institution is minority institution and entire expenditure towards
payment of salary of the teachers in the college is borne by the State exchequer. The Court hereby
directs that after the grant of promotion by the Governing Body on the basis of the scrutiny and
interview etc. by the Selection Committee, the University in its turn may take appropriate decision
with regard to approval of grant of promotion within a further period of 15 days from the date of
receipt of such recommendation by the Selection Committee and thereafter the State Government is
required to ensure payment of salary to the beneficiary of the promotion either under the Career
Advancement Scheme or under the Time Bound Promotion Scheme, as the case may be within a
further period of 60 days.
21. Before I part with this judgment, I would like to remind all concerned to the settled proposition
of law. The Patna High Court CWJC No.331 of 2018 dt.25-07-2019 Chancery Court in the case of
Taylor Vs. Taylor: (1875) 1 Ch D 426 has held out that when the law requires a thing to be done in
the manner prescribed then it has to be done in the manner prescribed. Any other mode of
performance is forbidden by necessary implication. It is also settled that if statutory authority
professes its action to be judged as per the professed norm, then any departure from the professed
norms is only at the pain of invalidation as held out by Justice Frankfurter in Viteralli v. Seton which
has been followed by series of judgment of the Supreme Court of India and other Courts.
22. With the aforesaid, the writ petition stands disposed of.
(Anil Kumar Upadhyay, J) spandey/-
AFR/NAFR A.F.R.
CAV DATE NA
Uploading Date 29.07.2019
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48296226/ 13
