Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K
Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No.491/2021
CrlM No.1604/2021
1. Zaffer Iqbal S/o Late Nazir Ahmed
R/o Nikki Mohallah Eid Gah Road Sidhra
Village Khablan Tehsil and District Jammu.
2. Javed Iqbal S/o Late Nazir Ahmed
R/o Nikki Mohallah Eid Gah Road Sidhra
Village Khablan Tehsil and District Jammu.
3. Pawan Kumar S/o Shallo Ram R/o Rathian
Tehsil Udhampur.
..... Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Rupak Ratta, Advocate.
V/s
1. Union Territory of J&K through SHO
Police Station Ramnagar.
2. Incharge Police Post Sidhra Jammu.
3. Ashok Kumar S/o Om Parkash
R/o Dhandhal Tehsil Ram Nagar District Udhampur.
.....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Shazia Asaf, Assisting counsel to
Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy.AG.
Mr. Kamal Magotra, Advocate vice
Mr. Israr Ahmed Farooq, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
(ORAL)
1. Petitioners have invoked inherent jurisdiction of this Court under section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1989 ("Code", for short) for quashment of FIR No.118/2021.
2. Factual matrix of the case lies in a narrow compass. Petitioners claimed to be contractors by
profession. It is the allegation of the petitioners that FIR in question has been lodged by brother of
one of the victims at the behest of Sarpanch Halqa, having business rivalry with them. According to
the petitioners, respondent No.3 lodged a complaint alleging inter alia that his brother had been
abducted by them, however the abductees on the day of occurrence, were in the custody of
respondent No.2-Incharge Police Post Sidhra.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154745559/ 1
Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
3. The prosecution case, as unfolded from the status report filed by the official respondents is that
on 30.07.2021 one Ashok Kumar (respondent No.3) lodged a written report alleging inter alia that
on 29.07.2021 at about 21:00 hours his brother namely, Krishan Kumar along with his associate
were kidnapped by accused/petitioner-Pawan Kumar on the provocation of accused/petitioner
Zaffer Iqbal.
4. During investigation, it surfaced that while brother of the complainant namely Krishan Kumar
and one Jeevan Kumar were on their way home and reached near a coal tar plant of accused Javed
Iqbal and Zaffer Iqbal, they were restrained by the labourers of the plant. Their hands were tied at
the back with a rope and they were abducted by the labourers on the abetment of petitioners-Javed
Iqbal and Zaffer Iqbal in a Mahindra Scorpio driven by accused/petitioner Pawan Kumar. On
reaching Sidhra, Jammu, they were taken to Hotel Sunshine of accused persons, where they were
beaten with a "Fan Belt" and were wrongfully confined. Later, they were asked to run away.
According to the investigating agency, offences under sections 341/342/323/365 IPC were
established against accused/petitioner No.3 Pawan Kumar and offences under sections
341/342/323/365/109 IPC were established against accused/petitioners No.1 and 2. According to
the respondents, the investigation of the case is still on as the accused labourers involved in the
occurrence, are yet to be arrested and weapon of offence is to be recovered.
5. Significantly, respondent No.3, who happens to be complainant and on whose complaint FIR in
question came to be registered has contended that FIR in question was lodged by him due to some
misunderstanding and in a fit of frustration as he suspected that his brother had been abducted by
the petitioners. It is contended that it revealed during investigation that persons alleged to be
abducted by accused persons were in the police custody of Police Post, Sidhra Jammu, and after
getting correct information, he sworn an affidavit before CJM, Jammu regarding the aforesaid facts.
Respondent No.3 has no objections, if the FIR in question, is quashed.
6. Mr. Rupak Ratta, learned counsel for the petitioners has produced certified copies of the affidavits
sworn by the alleged abductees/victims, Krishan Kumar and Jeevan Kumar before learned CJM,
Jammu, whereby they have affirmed that they were apprehended by Police of Police Post, Sidhra
and since their mobile phones were switched off, during questioning in FIR No. 375/2020, FIR in
question was sceptically lodged by the complainant and their statements were recorded in the
subject FIR under pressure.
7. Having heard rival contentions of the parties, I have given my thoughtful consideration to the
facts as also the circumstances attending the present case.
8. At the outset, it is pertinent to mention that FIR in question came to be lodged and the Police
agency was set into motion on the basis of the complaint lodged by respondent No.3 namely Ashok
Kumar. Although, according to the official respondents, some of the accused persons are yet to be
arrested and weapon of offence is to be recovered and investigation of the case has not yet
concluded, however, fact remains that the person, on the basis of whose written complaint the
subject FIR came to be registered has contended that he lodged the FIR due to some
misunderstanding and in a fit of frustration. The alleged abductees have also affirmed that FIR in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154745559/ 2
Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
question was lodged by the complainant sceptically. From the conspectus of the case, it appears that
the complainant party and accused have arrived at some settlement outside the Court. In these
circumstances, there shall be no likelihood of the prosecution to succeed in prosecution.
9. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narinder Singh and Ors. V/s State of Punjab and Anr.; 2014 (6) SCC
466 has observed that if settlement is arrived at between the parties immediately after the alleged
commission of offence, particularly, when the matter is still under investigation, the High Courts in
exercise of their jurisdiction vested under Section 482 Cr.P.C. shall adopt liberal approach in
accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings/investigation, subject of course, to the
caveat that it would be having regard to the attending circumstances narrated in the judgment. The
High Courts may also exercise its discretionary jurisdiction, when challan is submitted but charge is
not been framed against accused, Apex Court has ruled. To sum up, Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid
down following principles to guide the High Courts in giving adequate treatment to the settlement
between the parties to enable it to exercise its jurisdiction in terms of Section 482 Cr.P.C:
"(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives.
(III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private
in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154745559/ 3
Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and
therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against the individual alone.
However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because there is a mention of Section
307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court
to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the
prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving the charge
under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of
injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be the
guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether
there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak. In the
former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas in the
later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the offence
based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be swayed by the
fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between them which may
improve their future relationship.
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of
the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed.
Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is
still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but
after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand,
where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter
is at the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under
Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case
finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is
committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial
court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the
parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a
convict found guilty of such a crime.
10. If the present case is approached in the background of aforesaid guidelines laid down by the
Apex Court, what comes to the fore is that parties to the case viz; the complainant and accused
persons appear to have buried the hatchet. The complainant/respondent No.3 in unequivocal terms
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154745559/ 4
Zaffer Iqbal S/O Late Nazir Ahmed vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Sho on 9 November, 2023
has contended that he lodged the FIR out of misunderstanding and in a fit of frustration, as his
brother had been abducted. The victims have also contended that complainant lodged the complaint
due to some misunderstanding. Even a perusal of the recitals of the FIR would show that
complainant apprehended that his brother and his associate were kidnapped by the accused
persons, petitioners herein. The investigation proceeded only on the apprehension of the
complainant-respondent No.3 The investigation of the present case, admittedly, is yet to conclude.
Since the complainant, on whose complaint the impugned FIR came to be lodged and the Police
agency was set into action, has turned around to contend that FIR in question was an outcome of
misunderstanding, therefore, there is a bleak chance of the prosecution to succeed in the
prosecution and prospects of conviction shall be even remote. In the circumstances, on prima facie
assessment of the circumstances and material placed on record, continuation of investigation in the
impugned FIR, shall not only be an exercise in futility but an abuse of the process of law.
11. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed above, the present petition is allowed
and the impugned FIR is quashed.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) JUDGE JAMMU:
09.11.2023 EVA Whether the Judgment is speaking? Yes Whether the Judgment is
reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154745559/ 5
