Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
RP No. 71/2023
SWP No. 778/2011
Reserved on :10.04.2023
Pronounced on : 25.04.2023
Zakir Hussain .... Petitioner/Appellant(s)
Through:- Mrs. Surinder Kour, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Manpreet Kour, Advocate
V/s
Anil Gaind & anr. .....Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. R. S. Jamwal, AAG
CORAM:HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
GIST
01. Petitioner through the medium of present petition is seeking review against the judgment dated
01.03.2023 passed by this Court in SWP No. 778/2011 titled Zakir Hussain vs. Union Territory of
J&K and ors., by virtue of which the writ petition filed by the petitioner has been dismissed by
holding that the petitioner has not come before the Court with clean hands and has suppressed the
material facts and the writ petition which was misconceived was held not maintainable and was
dismissed along with all connected applications for the reasons mentioned in the judgment. BRIEF
FACTS OF THE CASE
02. Petitioner seeks review of the judgment dated 01.03.2023 on the following grounds:-
i. That the judgment is against law and facts. So, the same is not sustainable.
ii. That the judgment is sought to be reviewed on the ground that the Hon'ble Court
has not appreciated that the respondents have invited applications for the post of
Supporting Staff/Gram Rozgar Sewak for Panchayat Qaderna-A and Qaderna-B. The
petitioner has applied in Qaderna-A and Ghulam Rasool Sheikh has also shown in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 1
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
Panchayat Qaderna-A. The petitioner in the writ petition in Para No. 05 has
categorically mentioned that the petitioner having 34.50 points out of total 80 points
and the petitioner is shown at S. No. 02 in the merit list and Ghulam Rasool Sheikh is
shown at S. No. 01 who has having 28.50 points. The petitioner has not mentioned
anything about the number obtained in the viva as that the respondents have
prepared merit list on the basis of academic merit so the petitioner has not misled the
court and nor made any wrong statement. Moreover, the merit list was prepared for
Panchayat Qaderna-A but the respondents have engaged one Sh. Ghulam Rasool
Sheikh in Panchayat Qaderna-B which is clear from the order no. DDCK/06 of 2010
dated 15-02-2010 where the address of Ghulam Rasool Sheikh is shown as
Qaderna-A and Panchayat against which posted as Gram Rozgar Sewak is Qaderna-B
this has not been appreciated by the Hon'ble Court. So the order is liable to be
reviewed.
iii. That the judgment is sought to be reviewed on the ground that the petitioner has
not concealed any material facts. The petitioner has not made Ghulam Rasool Sheikh
as a party respondent because the petitioner has no concern with Ghulam Rasool
Sheikh as he was engaged in Panchayat Qaderna-B though his merit is shown in
Qaderna-A and when said Ghulam Rasool Sheikh was engaged in Qaderna-B then the
petitioner automatically come in the merit for Panchayat Qadcrna-A and the
petitioner has participated in selection proccss for Panchayat Qaderna-A. The
petitioner has not raised any grievances against Ghulam Rasool Sheikh. The
petitioner has only mentioned the name of Ghulam Rasool Sheikh in the writ petition
on the ground that the petitioner has taken a ground that the petitioner has
participated in the selection process that is the reason the petitioner was engaged as
supporting staff/Gram Rozgar Sewak vide order dated 03-07-2010 after the
petitioner has served a legal notice on the respondents when the respondents have
issued engagement order of other candidates including Ghulam Rasool Sheikh for
Panchayat Qaderna-B and no engagement order was issued with respect to
Panchayat Qaderna- A and the Hon'ble Court has not appreciated the written
submission submitted by the petitioner. So the order is liable to be reviewed.
iv. That the judgment is sought to be reviewed on the ground that the petitioner has
challenged the general order dated 21.08.2010 issued by Assistant Commissioner
Development Kishtwar by which the Assistant Commissioner Development directed
the Block Development Officer to disengage the supporting staff/GRS engaged under
MGNREGA without proper selection. The petitioner has challenged the order dated.
21-08-2010 on the ground that the respondents without affording an opportunity of
being heard and without following the provisions of law and in violation of provisions
of Principle of Natural Justice, issued the general order while the petitioner has
participated in the selection process and the petitioner has based his claim that the
petitioner has participated in the selection process so, the merit obtained by the
petitioner has to be considered as the candidates who is at S. No. 01 is already
engaged in other Panchayat i.e. Qaderna-B. The petitioner has not concealed any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 2
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
material facts, had the petitioner concealed any material facts, then the petitioner
would not have mentioned the fact regarding the selection or about the merit
position. The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner only to challenge general
order dated 21-08-2010 issued by respondents on the ground that it is in violation of
principle of natural justice.
Regarding the appointment of Ghulam Rasool Sheikh in Qaderna- B, it is a new
evidence and there are sufficient reasons that the order is to be reviewed. So the
order is liable to be reviewed.
03. From the perusal of the grounds urged by the petitioner in the present review petition, it is
apparently clear that the petitioner is trying to project altogether a new case in the review petition by
urging new grounds which have not been taken in writ petition by taking a U-turn and twisting the
facts with a view to mislead this Court. The petitioner in ground-(ii) mentioned supra has tried to
project that the petitioner has secured 34.50 points out of total 80 points and the petitioner is
shown at S. No. 02 in the merit list, whereas, Ghulam Rasool Sheikh has been shown at S. No. 01,
who has secured 28.50 points. However, on the other hand, the petitioner has projected before the
writ Court that the petitioner along with other candidates had appeared in written as well as viva
voce and has obtained 34.50 points and was figuring at Sr. No. 2 in the merit list, when as per the
stand of the petitioner, he ought to have been placed at Sr. No. 1 because the candidate (Ghulam
Rasool Sheikh) figuring at Sr. No. 1 had obtained just 28.50 points. It was specific case of the
petitioner that the petitioner has been excluded despite having higher merit and feeling aggrieved of
the same, the petitioner even served legal notice upon the respondents calling upon that to recall the
order and appoint the petitioner in place of Ghulam Rasool Sheikh. For facility of reference, the
specific averment of the petitioner in the Legal Notice is reproduced as under:-
3. That my client appeared in the written as well as Viva test also where he did
excellent, replied all the questions asked by the experts. His performance was
appreciated by the experts.
4. That my client has been deprived from the selection, and a candidate having only
28.50 points in the merit list have been selected by providing undue favour to him.
5. That by appointing a low merit candidate the legal right of my client has been
infringed.
04. The writ Court while dealing with the writ petition and after perusing the record, has held that
the petitioner has concealed the material fact i.e., his interview score and has tried to mislead the
Court by bringing on record the merit list which does not indicate the marks obtained by him and
the selected candidate in the interview. When the original record was examined by the writ Court, it
has come to fore that the petitioner has secured 45.75 points, out of 100 points and Ghulam Rasool
Sheikh has secured 46 points out of 100 and was rightly selected being higher in merit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 3
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
05. Confronted with the aforesaid position, the petitioner with a mala fide intention tried to change
the complexion of the case before the writ Court by projecting that the petitioner has not challenged
the appointment of the selected candidate but a challenge has been thrown with regard to
disengagement of the petitioner. The stand which was earlier taken in the writ petition was changed
by the petitioner by taking u-turn when the actual marks and merit position was conveyed by the
respondents and the record was examined by the writ Court. This aspect of the matter has been
dealt in detail by the writ Court and the writ Court has recorded the finding by holding that "the
continuous change of the petitioner clearly proved beyond any shadow of doubt that the petitioner
has not come before this Court with clean hands and tried to mislead by suppressing material facts".
It was incumbent on the part of the petitioner to have come before the Court with clean hands by
projecting true facts.
06. After having failed before the writ Court, the petitioner by way of camouflage has filed the
present review petition on false and flimsy grounds by twisting the facts and urging similar grounds
which have already been dealt by the writ Court, wherein the writ petition filled by the petitioner
stood dismissed being misconceived by holding that the petitioner has not come to the Court with
clean hands and has suppressed the material facts. LEGAL ANALYSES
07. It is settled proposition of law that a review of an earlier order/judgment cannot be done unless
the Court is satisfied that the material error which is manifest on the face of order would result in
miscarriage of justice or undermine its soundness. It is also settled law that in exercise of review
jurisdiction, the Court cannot re-appreciate the evidence to arrive at different conclusion even if two
views are possible in a matter. Under the garb of filing the review petition, a party cannot be
permitted to repeat old and overruled arguments which have been dealt with by the writ Court for
reopening the conclusion arrived at in a judgment. The power of review is not to be confused with
the appellate power which enables the superior Courts to correct the error committed by a
subordinate Court. As long as the point sought to be raised in the review petition has already been
dealt with and answered, the parties are precluded to challenge the impugned judgment only
because an alternative view is possible.
08. After discussing a series of decisions on review jurisdiction in „Kamlesh Verma v. Mayawati and
Others(cid:128), the Court observed that review proceedings have to be strictly confined to the scope and
ambit of Order XLVI Rule 1 CPC. As long as the point sought to be raised in the review application
has already been dealt with and answered, parties are not entitled to challenge the impugned
judgment only because an alternative view is possible. The principles for exercising review
jurisdiction were succinctly summarized as under:
"20. Thus, in view of the above, the following grounds of review are maintainable as
stipulated by the statute:
20.1. When the review will be maintainable:
(i) Discovery of new and important matter or evidence which after the exercise of due
diligence was not within knowledge of the petitioner or could not be produced by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 4
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
him;
(ii) Mistake or error apparent on the „ace of the record:
(iii) Any other sufficient reason.
The words „any other sufficient reason" has been interpreted in Chajju Ram vs. Nek(cid:128), and approved
by this Court in Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos vs. Most Rev. Mar Poulose Athanasius & Ors. to
mean "a reason sufficient on grounds at least analogous to those specified in the rule(cid:128). The same
principles have been reiterated in Union of India v. Sandur Manganese & Iron Ores Ltd. & Ors.
20.2. When the review will not be maintainable: -
(i) A repetition of old and overruled argument is not enough to reopen concluded
adjudications.
(ii) Minor mistakes of inconsequential import.
(iii) Review proceedings cannot be equated with the original hearing of the case.
(iv) Review is not maintainable unless the material error manifest on the face of the
order undermines its soundness or results in miscarriage of justice.
(v) A review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is
re-heard and corrected but lies only for patent error.
(vi) The mere possibility of two views on the subject cannot be a ground for review.
(vii) The error apparent on the face of the record should not be an error which has to
be fished out and searched.
(viii) The appreciation of evidence on record is fully within the domain of the
appellate court, it cannot be permitted to be advanced in the review petition.
(ix) Review is not maintainable when the same relief sought at the time of arguing the
main matter had been negatived."
09. Reliance has been placed on a judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in case titled S.
Madhusudhan Reddy V. Narayana Reddy and Others 2022 reported as SCC OnLine SC 1034,
wherein it has been held as under :-
"It is also settled law that in exercise of review jurisdiction, the Court cannot
re-appreciate the evidence to arrive at a different conclusion even if two views are
possible in a matter. In Kerala State Electricity Board v Hitech Electrothermics &
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 5
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
Hydropower Ltd. and Ors., this Court observed as follows:
"10. ....In a review petition it is not open to this Court to re- appreciate the evidence and reach a
different conclusion, even if that is possible. Learned counsel for the Board at best sought to impress
us that the correspondence exchanged between the parties did not support the conclusion reached
by this Court. We are afraid such a submission cannot be permitted to be advanced in a review
petition. The appreciation of evidence on record is fully within the domain of the appellate court. If
on appreciation of the evidence produced, the court records a finding of fact and reaches a
conclusion, that conclusion cannot be assailed in a review petition unless it is shown that there is an
error apparent on the face of the record or for some reason akin thereto. It has not been contended
before us that there is any error apparent on the face of the record. To permit the review petitioner
to argue on a question of appreciation of evidence would amount to converting a review petition into
an appeal in disguise."
Under the garb of filing a review petition, a party cannot be permitted to repeat old and overruled
arguments for reopening the conclusions arrived at in a judgment. The power of review is not to be
confused with the appellate power which enables the Superior Court to correct errors committed by
a subordinate Court. This point has been elucidated in Jain Studios Ltd. V. Shin Satellite Public Co.
Ltd. where it was held thus:
"11. So far as the grievance of the applicant on merits is concerned, the learned counsel for the
opponent is right in submitting that virtually the applicant seeks the same relief which had been
sought at the time of arguing the main matter and had been negatived. Once such a prayer had been
refused, no review petition would lie which would convert rehearing of the original matter. It is
settled law that the power of review cannot be confused with appellate power which enables a
superior court to correct all errors committed by a subordinate court. It is not rehearing of an
original matter. A repetition of old and overruled argument is not enough to reopen concluded
adjudications. The power of review can be exercised with extreme care, caution and circumspection
and only in exceptional cases.
12. When a prayer to appoint an arbitrator by the applicant herein had been made at the time when
the arbitration petition was heard and was rejected, the same relief cannot be sought by an indirect
method by filing a review petition. Such petition, in my opinion, is in the nature of 'second innings'
which is impermissible and unwarranted and cannot be granted."
10. In Col. Avatar Singh Sekhon v. Union of India, reported as 1981 SCC (1) 168 the Hon'ble Apex
Court observed that a review of an earlier order cannot be done unless the court is satisfied that the
material error which is manifest on the face of the order, would result in miscarriage of justice or
undermine its soundness. The observations made are as under:
"12. A review is not a routine procedure. Here we resolved to hear Shri Kapil at length
to remove any feeling that the party has been hurt without being heard. But we
cannot review our earlier order unless satisfied that material error, manifest on the
face of the order, undermines its soundness or results in miscarriage of justice. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 6
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
Sow Chandra Kante v. Sheikh Habib, this Court observed:
„A review of a judgment is a serious step and reluctant resort to it is proper only
where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept in earlier by
judicial fallibility. ... The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier
order which has the normal feature of finality."
11. As can be seen from the above exposition of law, it has been consistently held by the Hon'ble
Apex Court in several judicial pronouncements that the Court's jurisdiction of review, is not the
same as that of an appeal. A judgment can be open to review if there is a mistake or an error
apparent on the face of the record, but an error that has been detected by a process of reasoning,
cannot be described as an error apparent on the face of record for the Court to exercise its power of
review. In the guise of exercising powers of review, the Court cannot substitute the view taken
earlier merely because there is a possibility of taking two views in a matter. A judgment may also be
open to review when any new or important matter of evidence has emerged after passing of the
judgment, subject to the condition that such evidence was not within the knowledge of the party
seeking review or could not be produced by it when the order was made despite undertaking an
exercise of due diligence. There is a clear distinction between an erroneous decision as against an
error apparent on the face of the record. An erroneous decision can be corrected by the Superior
Court, however, an error apparent on the face of the record can only be corrected by exercising
review jurisdiction. Yet another circumstance referred to in Order XLVII Rule 1 for reviewing a
judgment has been described as "for any other sufficient reason". The said phrase has been
explained to mean "a reason sufficient on grounds, at least analogous to those specified in the rule"
(Refer: Chajju Ram v. Neki Ram and Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos and Anr. v. Most Rev. Mar
Poulose Athanasius and Others).
12. Reliance has been placed on a judgment passed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in case titled Ratan
Lal Patel vs. Dr. Hari Singh Gour Vishwavidyalaya & anr. (Civil Appeal No. 2057 of 2022 decided on
22.03.2022), wherein it has been held as under :-
"4. Having considered the impugned order, it can be seen that the impugned order
allowing the review application is a cryptic, non-reasoned and non-speaking order.
Nothing has been mentioned and/or observed as to what was that error apparent on
the face of the record which called for interference. It cannot be disputed that the
review jurisdiction can be exercised only in a case where it is found that there is an
error apparent on the face of the record and not otherwise. Therefore, while
exercising the review jurisdiction, the Court has to first satisfy itself on any error
apparent on the face of the record which calls for exercise of the review jurisdiction.
Merely stating that there is an error apparent on the face of the record is not
sufficient. It must be demonstrated that in fact there was an error apparent on the
face of the record. There must be a speaking and reasoned order as to what was that
error apparent on the face of the record, which called for interference and therefore a
reasoned order is required to be passed. Unless such reasons are given and unless
what was that error apparent on the face of the record is stated and mentioned in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 7
Zakir Hussain vs Anil Gaind & Anr on 25 April, 2023
order, the higher forum would not be in a position to know what has weighed with
the Court while exercising the review jurisdiction and what was that error apparent
on the face of the record."
13. The dictionary meaning of the word "review" is" the act of looking, offer something again with a
view to correction or improvement". It cannot be denied that the review is the creation of a statute
and the power of review is not an inherent power. The review is also not an appeal in disguise.
Reliance has also been placed on a judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in Shri Ram Sahu (dead)
through Lrs. vs. Vinod Kumar Rawat & ors. (Civil Appeal No. 3601 of 2022 decided on 03.11.2020.
CONCLUSION
14. In light of the settled legal position crystalised above, no good ground has been made out to
exercise the power of review in the present case with respect to order/judgment of this Court dated
01.03.2023 in SWP No. 778/2011 as the petitioner by no stretch of imagination under the garb of
filing review petition can be permitted to repeat old and overruled arguments which have been dealt
with in detail by the writ Court for reopening the conclusion arrived at in judgment impugned.
15. I hold that the present review petition is abuse of process of the Court and accordingly, the
review petition filed by the petitioner against the judgment/order dated 01.03.2023 is held to be not
maintainable and is, accordingly, dismissed for the reasons stated hereinabove.
(Wasim Sadiq Nargal) Judge JAMMU 25.04.2023 RAM MURTI Whether the judgment is
reportable ? : Yes Whether the judgment is speaking ? : Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100694439/ 8
