Zeeshan And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January, 2025
Zeeshan And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31
January, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14687
Court No. - 82
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 8387 of 2024
Applicant :- Zeeshan And Another
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Deepanshu Shrivastava,Sunil Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Nalin Kumar Srivastava,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicants, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the material
available on record. Notice was sent to the opposite party no. 2-informant of this case but no one is
present on behalf of opposite party no. 2.
2. This application for anticipatory bail has been filed by applicants -Zeeshan and Shoaib in
connection with Case Crime No. 402 of 2022, under Sections 452, 323, 354, 354Kha, 504, 506 IPC
and Section 7/8 and 11/12 POCSO Act, Police Station Gagalhedi, District Saharanpur.
3. It is alleged that the present applicants alongwith other co-accused came to the house of the
victim and tried to outrage her modesty. However, in her statement recorded under Section 164
Cr.P.C., the minor victim has assigned a specific role to outrage her modesty to the co-accused
Shahbaz and it has been stated by her that present applicants Shoeb and Zeeshan had only assaulted
her parents, who were present over there. No further allegation has been made against the present
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129949970/ 1
Zeeshan And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January, 2025
applicants. In the medical report of the victim, simple injuries have been found.
4. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the applicants that the applicants are innocent and they
have apprehension of their arrest in the above-mentioned case, whereas there is no credible
evidence against them. They have been falsely implicated into this matter. Allegations levelled
against the applicants are false. After the investigation, charge-sheet was filed in the matter. It is
further submitted that the applicants have been cooperative during the course of investigation. It is
further submitted that earlier, interim protection was granted to the applicants in this case vide
orders dated 25.08.2023 and 16.08.2023 respectively and the said liberty was not misused by the
applicants. The applicants have no criminal history to their credit. No process under Sections 82
and 83 CrPC has been issued against the appellants and the appellants have not been declared
absconder. It is further submitted that no custodial interrogation is required in this matter. In case
the appellants are granted anticipatory bail, they will not misuse the liberty of bail and would obey
all conditions of bail.
5. Learned A.G.A. opposed the anticipatory bail application.
6. In Sushila Aggarwal and others vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and another, (2020) 5 SCC 1, the Hon'ble
Apex Court has settled the controversy finally by holding the anticipatory bail need not be of limited
duration invariably. In appropriate case, it can continue upto conclusion of trial.
It has been further held therein that anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and
behavior of the accused, continue after filing of the charge sheet till end of trial.
It has been further held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that while considering an application for grant of
anticipatory bail, the court has to consider the nature of the offence, the role of the person, the
likelihood of his influencing the course of investigation, or tampering with evidence including
intimidating witnesses, likelihood of fleeing justice, such as leaving the country, etc. It has further
been held that Courts ought to be generally guided by considerations such as the nature and gravity
of the offences, the role attributed to the applicant, and the facts of the case, while considering
whether to grant anticipatory bail, or refuse it. Whether to grant or not is a matter of discretion.
7. Hence, considering the settled principles of law regarding anticipatory bail, submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties, nature of accusation, role of applicants and all attending facts and
circumstances of the case, without expressing any opinion of the merits of the case, in my view, it is
a fit case for anticipatory bail to the applicants till end of the trial in the matter.
8. The anticipatory bail application is allowed.
9. In the event of arrest of the applicants in the aforesaid case crime, she shall be released on
anticipatory bail till end of the trial on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Court concerned with the following conditions :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129949970/ 2
Zeeshan And Another vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January, 2025
(i) The applicants shall make themselves available before the court concerned on the
date fixed in the matter;
(ii) The applicants shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him /
her from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) The applicants shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if they have passport, the same shall be deposited by them before the S.S.P./S.P.
Concerned.
10. In case of default of any of the conditions, same may be a ground for cancellation of protection
granted to the applicants.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 Rmk.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129949970/ 3
